The case originated in an application (no. 38185/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Polish nationals, Mr Wiesław Pietrzak and Mrs Halina Pietrzak (“the applicants”), on 30 September 2002.
The applicants, who had been granted legal aid, were represented by Mr J. Weinberger, a lawyer practising in . The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicants alleged that their right to the peaceful enjoyment of their property had been breached since the land which they owned had been designated for expropriation at some undetermined future date. Under domestic legislation they were not entitled during the relevant period to any compensation for the interference with their ownership rights resulting from the future expropriation.
On 4 May 2006 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The first applicant, Mr Wiesław Pietrzak (“the first applicant”), was born in 1943. The second applicant, Mrs Halina Pietrzak (“the second applicant”), was born in 1951. They are married and live in .
The first applicant owns a plot of land and a house situated on it located in the suburbs of . The major part of his property is classified as agricultural land. There are some other houses in the area, but a significant part of it is used for allotments.
It appears that the first applicant’s father acquired the property in question in 1972. At that time, the property was classified as agricultural land and lay outside the perimeters of . Subsequently, with the enlargement of the city, the property became located in the vicinity of a residential and allotments area.
In 1973 and 1977 the first applicant’s father was twice refused planning permission on the ground that the plot had not been designated for construction of a house.
In April 1975 a local development plan for the area was adopted. The first applicant’s plot was designated for the construction of a road.
On an unspecified later date the first applicant acquired the property at issue.
On 28 May 1988 the Gdańsk Municipal Council adopted a local development plan which stipulated that a road was to be constructed on the first applicant’s plot.
On 24 December 1987 and 15 November 1991 the  informed the first applicant that his property was designated in the relevant local development plan for the building of a new road. Accordingly, the property could not be used for the purposes of constructing a new house or planting an orchard.
On 12 February 1992 the first applicant requested the Mayor of Gdańsk to acquire his property as it had been designated for the building of a road. On 22 June 1992 the Mayor transmitted that request to the Head of the Gdańsk District Office (Kierownik Urzędu Rejonowego) which was competent to decide on it. It appears that the request was never examined.
On an unspecified date in 1992 the first applicant petitioned the Ombudsman. On 14 July 1992 the Ombudsman informed him that, following a number of similar complaints concerning the legal status of so-called “frozen properties” (i.e. properties which were designated in a local development plan for public use at an undetermined future date), he had requested the Minister of Local Planning and Construction to adopt a general solution to the problem. In particular, the Ombudsman called for a provision in the local planning bill which would impose an obligation on the local authorities to acquire “frozen properties” or offer an alternative plot to the owners concerned.
On 29 June 1993 the Gdańsk Municipal Council adopted a general local development plan. The plan maintained the provision that a road was to be constructed on the applicant’s plot. Prior to the adoption of the new plan, the Minister of Agriculture and the Gdańsk Governor had authorised the change of use of agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes.
On 20 August 1993 the applicant inquired with the  about the conditions for construction of a temporary building (zabudowa tymczasowa) on his property. On 6 October 1993 he was informed about the relevant conditions for properties designated in local development plans for future public use. He was also informed that he could continue using the property for agricultural purposes or, alternatively, he could construct a temporary storehouse. The municipality further explained that the planned road would not be constructed in the foreseeable future. The applicant was invited to submit concrete proposals for consideration by the municipality and informed that any temporary buildings would have to be removed at his own expense when the planned road was constructed. It appears that the first applicant did not submit any proposals to the municipality.
On 1 January 1995 the Law of 7 July 1994 on Local Planning (“the 1994 Act”) entered into force.
On 11 February 2000 the first applicant’s lawyer sent a letter to the Mayor of Gdańsk, inquiring about his unanswered request of 1992 for the acquisition of the property.
On 30 March 2000 the first applicant was informed that due to the dissolution of the district offices it was not possible to establish the reasons as to why the Gdańsk District Office had not taken any decision on his request. He was further informed that the local development plan of 28 May 1988, which had specified that a new road would pass through the first applicant’s property, was still in force. Furthermore, the municipality’s investment plan for the years 2000-2003 did not foresee the construction of the road in question. Accordingly, the first applicant could use his land as previously. In addition, the first applicant was informed that according to the 1994 Act the municipality could not acquire his property since the relevant local development plan had been adopted prior to 1995 and that his use of the property had not become unfeasible. Consequently, his request could not be granted.
The applicants appealed against that decision to the Gdańsk Local Government Board of Appeal. On 14 September 2000 the Board of Appeal ruled that the appeal was inadmissible in law. It observed that in accordance with the Code of Administrative Procedure an appeal could be lodged only against an administrative decision. However, the Board of Appeal noted that the provisions of the 1994 Act (section 36) excluded the possibility of adopting an administrative decision in respect of the applicants’ request for the acquisition of their property by the municipality. Thus, the letter of the Mayor of Gdańsk of 30 March 2000 could not be considered as an administrative decision.
The applicants appealed against that decision to the , relying, inter alia, on Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 8 May 2002 the  dismissed their appeal.
On 25 February 2003 the  informed the first applicant that according to the local development plan which would remain valid until 31 December 2003 his property had been designated for a future thoroughfare.
On 5 August 2003 the  informed the first applicant that the old local development plan designating his property for the construction of a road would remain valid until the end of 2003. In addition, he was informed that the municipal investment plan for the years 2004-2008 did not foresee the construction of the road in question. He was also informed that a new local development plan was being drafted and that he was entitled to lodge his objections in that respect.
On 11 July 2003 the Law of 27 March 2003 on Local Planning (“the 2003 Act”) entered into force on 11 July 2003. It repealed the 1994 Act.
On 31 December 2003 the old local development plan expired.
On 31 May 2005 the first applicant requested the municipality to provide him with information as to the future development of his land.
On 8 June 2005 he was informed that pursuant to the 2003 Act until the adoption of the new local development plan the manner of development of a particular property was to be determined by means of planning permission. However, such permission could only be granted if a number of conditions specified in section 61 of the 2003 Act were met, including that the property at issue did not have to be reclassified from agricultural to non-agricultural land. In connection with the last requirement, the first applicant submitted that he was prevented from developing his property until such time as the new local development plan had been adopted.
It appears that as of December 2005 the  had not yet adopted a new local development plan in respect of the first applicant’s land. According to the preliminary draft plan, the applicants’ property will be designated in the major part for housing purposes and in the remaining part for housing and services purposes. The property will adjoin the planned road, but the road will not pass through the applicants’ property.
As of 11 September 2006 the applicant had not yet applied for planning permission.
Other relevant legislative provisions are extensively set out in the Court’s judgment of 14 November 2006 in the case of Skibińscy v. Poland (no. 52589/99, §§ 28 – 53, 14 November 2006).
Judgment of the  (case no. K 6/95)