The case originated in eight applications against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by five Romanian nationals, two Romanian companies and a Romanian Calvinist parish on the various dates indicated in the appended table. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
When Mr Horea Mircea Timar, the applicant in application no. 26856/06, died on 20 April 2013, his heirs, Mrs Gabriela Timar (wife) and Ms Mihaela Timar (daughter), expressed the wish to pursue the proceedings on his behalf. For practical reasons, Mr Horea Mircea Timar will continue to be referred to in this judgment as “the applicant”, although Mrs Gabriela Timar and Ms Mihaela Timar are now to be regarded as such (see Dalban v. Romania [GC], no. 28114/95, § 1, ECHR 1999VI).
The list of applicants and the relevant details of the applications are set out in the appended table.
The applicants lost their court cases, which had been examined in civil proceedings held in their absence. The notices of the court proceedings had been served on them solely by means of posting them on a gate or fence (hereinafter “by public notice” – citarea prin afişare). They all argued in their subsequent appeals, whether appeals on points of law (when the notices were served during the first-instance proceedings or the appeal hearings) or appeals seeking the quashing of the final decision (contestaţie în anulare) (when the notices were served during the proceedings at the court of last instance), that they had not been aware of the date of the court proceedings as they had never received the relevant summonses from the courts. Their complaints to that effect were dismissed by the courts on the grounds that service by public notice was provided for by law. Consequently, their appeals were dismissed without examination of the merits of the cases.
The relevant domestic law in force at the time on the service of judicial documents by means of public notice is summed up in the Court’s judgment in the case of S.C. Raisa M. Shipping S.R.L. v. Romania (no. 37576/05, § 18, 8 January 2013).