The case originated in an application (no. 3524/14) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”), on 30 December 2013, by two Bulgarian nationals, Ms Niya Ivanova Sarbyanova-Pashaliyska and Ms Maria Ivanova Pashaliyska, who are mother and daughter and who were born in 1960 and 1999 respectively, and live in Sofia.
The applicants were represented by Mr S. Terziyski, a lawyer practising in Sofia. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms R. Nikolova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the investigation into the murder of their relative was ineffective as it lasted too long and that they did not have an effective domestic remedy in that connection.
On 24 September 2015 the above-mentioned complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants are the wife and daughter of Mr Ivan Mirchev Pashaliysky, who was killed on 2 June 2000 in an office situated in a hotel in Sofia. He died as a result of suffering severe trauma to his brain, chest, torso and limbs, which led to irreversible damage to several of his vital organs. The trauma was caused by a number of kicks and punches and blows inflicted with different objects.
On the day of the incident a private security guard was called to the office premises where Mr Pashaliysky was later found dead in order to investigate a brawl reportedly happening there. The security guard knocked on the office entrance door and an individual, S.V., opened it. The security guard caught a brief glimpse of Mr Pashaliysky lying helpless on the floor with blood on his face. S.V. was holding a long oval-shaped object. Having been told by S.V. that there was no problem, the security guard left.
It would appear that earlier that day, using the telephone of the office in question, S.V. had called Ch.M., a friend and business partner of Mr Pashaliysky, threatening to kill them both if Ch.M. failed to deliver an undisclosed sum of money to S.V. without delay.
The incident was reported to the police by an investigator, who had been tipped off earlier the same day. The police arrested S.V. that night. Traces of the crime having been discovered on S.V.’s hands and clothes, an investigator charged him on 3 June 2000 with murder. On 5 June 2000 a prosecutor indicted S.V. for the murder of Ivan Mirchev Pashaliysky, which had been committed three days earlier.
A prosecutor from the Sofia city public prosecutor’s office found on 20 April 2001 that there were reasons for amending the indictment by applying a law providing for a heavier penalty. She also found that not all available evidence had been collected. In particular, no expert DNA analysis had been carried out on the material found under the victim’s nails; several key witnesses had not been questioned about the reasons for their presence in the office in which the victim had been killed on the day in question and about the reason for the return to the office of one of them during the evening of the same day; no confrontation had been held between two of those witnesses, despite several discrepancies between their respective statements; and no information had been collected about the state in which the police officers had found the accused at the time of his arrest. On 20 April 2001 the prosecutor returned the case to the investigating authorities for further investigative measures, giving specific instructions aimed at the remedying of the deficiencies in the investigation.
The case was returned on three other occasions (on 17 July 2001, 18 July 2003 and on 2 October 2003) for further investigative steps, which the prosecutor listed specifically.
The case file was sent to the Sofia City Court on an unspecified date in November 2003. Both applicants were named as private prosecutors and the second applicant, at her request, also as a civil party seeking nonpecuniary damages.
At the start of the trial the defendant’s lawyer claimed that the indictment was defective because it did not contain a clear description of the offence with which the defendant had been charged; the lawyer sought, without success, the return of the case for further investigation. A number of hearings took place during the trial. The proceedings before the Sofia City Court ended on 11 June 2007, when the court sentenced S.V. to fifteen years’ imprisonment and ordered him to pay damages to the second applicant.
Both S.V. and the applicants lodged appeals with the Sofia Court of Appeal. S.V. submitted in particular that the sentence had been based entirely on guesswork as to who the perpetrator had been. Most importantly, S.V. claimed that the indictment had been entirely silent about the manner in which he was considered to have killed the victim, there being no description of the circumstances in which the victim was killed. Referring to interpretative decision no. 2 of 2002 of the Supreme Court of Cassation (see paragraph 21 below), he claimed that these procedural flaws were fundamental and that the court should have returned the case to the investigation stage.
On 18 July 2008 the Sofia Court of Appeal accepted that the indictment had not contained a description of how the accused had killed the victim and that this had been a fundamental procedural defect which had prevented the defendant from effectively exercising his rights. The court then quashed the first-instance court sentence and returned the case to the pre-trial stage so that the procedural flaw in question could be redressed.
On 16 August 2008 the prosecution indicted S.V. anew for the murder of Mr. Pashaliysky and the first-instance court, the Sofia City Court, opened fresh proceedings against him. The first two scheduled hearings were postponed because the defendant’s lawyer failed to appear. On 11 February 2009 the court recognised the second applicant as a civil party seeking non-pecuniary damages but refused to name both applicants as private prosecutors. After an appeal by the applicants that refusal was quashed on 13 March 2009 by the Sofia Court of Appeal. The witnesses were then heard again in the course of the trial so that the applicants could exercise their rights as private prosecutors.
Sixteen hearings took place thereafter, at which the applicants made numerous requests for evidence to be gathered and witnesses to be heard. Subsequently, the presiding judge was elected President of the Supreme Administrative Court as a result of which the trial stage was started anew. A new presiding judge was appointed, yet no further hearing was scheduled for about a year. The applicants complained about the delay to the Inspectorate of the Supreme Judicial Council, asking that disciplinary sanctions be imposed on the new presiding judge. The Inspectorate replied on 21 February 2012. It acknowledged that the criminal proceedings in the case had lasted eleven years and recognised that this was incompatible with the requirement of a reasonable length of proceedings. It nonetheless held that the judge in question could not be sanctioned, given that the duration of the other cases that she had heard had not exceeded an acceptable length.
On an unspecified later date the new presiding judge was sent back to the court from which she had been transferred and the case had to begin anew once again.
On 9 December 2013 the proceedings before the first-instance court ended. The Sofia City Court found S.V. guilty of murder and sentenced him to twelve years’ imprisonment. The first-instance court also ruled that S.V. had to pay some 50,000 euros (EUR) in damages to the second applicant as a civil party. After an appeal by S.V. the Sofia Court of Appeal carried out a thorough analysis of the witness statements given at first instance, of the record of the examination of the murder scene conducted on the day after the killing, of the search and seizure measures, and of the conclusions of the numerous expert reports, the autopsy, etc. Following this, on 22 December 2014 the appellate court upheld the guilty verdict and sentence, but lowered the amount in damages to be paid to the second applicant to around EUR 8,000. Following a cassation appeal by S.V. the Supreme Court of Cassation upheld the appellate court’s judgment in its entirety in a final judgment of 2 November 2015.
Article 115 of the 1968 Criminal Code (hereinafter “the 1968 Code”) provides that murder is punishable by ten to twenty years’ imprisonment.
Under Article 124 § 1 of the 1968 Code, where death occurs as a result of wilfully inflicted grievous bodily harm, the punishment is three to twelve years’ imprisonment. Those offences are liable to public prosecution.
.  Under Article 235 § 2 of the 1974 Code of Criminal Procedure (the 1974 Code) and Article 246 § 2 of the new Criminal Procedural Code (the 2006 Code), an act of indictment has to specify, among other things, the crime of which the indicted individual is accused, as well as the place, time and manner of its commission. In a 2002 interpretative decision (тълкувателно решение № 2 от 7.10.2002 г. на ВКС по т. н. д. № 2/ 2002 г., ОСНК) the Supreme Court of Cassation held that failure to specify in an indictment the exact manner in which a murder was committed constituted grounds for returning the case to an earlier procedural stage only if it concerned an element of the corpus delicti of the offence.
.  Article 257 of the 1974 Code provided that a case must be heard by the same bench from the beginning until the end of the trial. In the event that a member of a bench had to discontinue his or her participation, the respective trial had to start anew. This provision was replicated in Article 258 of the 2006 Code.
.  A victim’s heirs could take part in the criminal proceedings against a perpetrator as a civil party (граждански ищец) or as a private prosecutor (частен обвинител). Once they had been named as either a civil party or a private prosecutor they had the right to access the documents in the case file and to receive copies of those, as well as to present evidence and to ask that specific investigative measures be carried out or to object to measures which they considered to impinge on their rights (Articles 52 and 60 of the 1974 Code and Articles 76 and 84 of the 2006 Code).
.  Article 253 of the 2006 Code specified who the parties to the court proceedings are, namely (1)  the prosecutor; (2)  the defendant and the defence counsel; (3)  the private complainant and private prosecutor; (4)  the civil claimant and civil respondent.
Two compensatory remedies exist in Bulgarian law in respect of excessive length of judicial proceedings: an administrative one, governed by sections 60a et seq. of the Judiciary Act 2007, and a judicial one, governed by section 2b of the State and Municipalities Responsibility for Damage Act 1988 (the SMRDA). The administrative remedy under the 2007 Act covers civil, administrative and criminal proceedings, including pre-trial proceedings (section 60a(2)). It is open to persons who are aggrieved by the length of proceedings which have come to an end. The judicial remedy under the SMRDA appears to cover all sorts of judicial proceedings (section 2b). It is open to persons who are aggrieved by the length of proceedings which are still pending (section 2b(3)), as well as to persons who are aggrieved by the length of proceedings which have come to an end but who have not obtained adequate redress through the administrative remedy under the 2007 Act (section 8(2)). In its decision in Valcheva and Abrashev v. Bulgaria ((dec.), nos. 6194/11 and 34887/11, § 98, 18 June 2013) the Court found that, taken together, an application for compensation under sections 60a et seq. of the Judiciary Act 2007 and a claim for damages under section 2b of the SMRDA could be regarded as effective domestic remedies in respect of allegedly unreasonable length of proceedings before the civil, criminal and administrative courts in Bulgaria.
.  Sections 60a et seq. of the Judiciary Act 2007, read as follows:
“60a.  (1)  This chapter applies to applications by individuals and legal persons against decisions, actions or omissions of judicial authorities which infringe their right to have their cases examined and decided within a reasonable time.
(2)  Applications under subsection 1 shall be lodged by individuals and legal persons who are:
parties to finished civil, administrative or criminal proceedings;
accused, victims or wronged legal persons in discontinued pre-trial proceedings;
(3)  This chapter sets out the manner of determining and paying compensation in line with the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights not amounting to more than 10,000 levs.
(4)  Applications under subsection 1 shall be lodged within six months after the conclusion of the proceedings at issue with a final decision, though the Inspectorate attached to the Supreme Judicial Council to the Minister of Justice.
(5)  A special register shall be created for the applications, and it shall be published on the internet site of the Inspectorate attached to the Supreme Judicial Council.
(6)  No fees shall be due for the examination of applications under this chapter.
...”
“60b.  (1)  The application must be written in Bulgarian and set out:
for Bulgarian nationals – their names as featuring in the identification documents; uniform citizen number and address; telephone, fax and electronic address, if any;
for foreigners – their names as featuring in the identification documents; uniform foreigner number and address; telephone, fax and electronic address, if any;
the commercial firm of the trader or the name of the legal person, written in Bulgarian; the seat and the latest registered address and electronic address;
the decision, action or omission alleged to amount to a breach by the respective authority;
the authority to which the application is addressed;
the request for relief;
the applicant’s signature.
(2)  Applicants shall submit a declaration that they have not sought or obtained compensation in respect of the same breach in other proceedings.”
“60c.  (1)  Applications under section 60a(1) shall be examined by the Inspectorate attached to the Supreme Judicial Council, which shall set up a special unit for this purpose.
(2)  The experts staffing the unit shall be lawyers who have at least five years of professional experience. Their remuneration shall be equal to that of a district court judge.
(3)  The chief inspector shall allocate incoming applications to panels consisting of one inspector and two experts, randomly selected, and one of the experts shall be appointed as rapporteur.
(4)  If the application does not meet the requirements of section 60b(1) or (2), the applicant shall be given notice to rectify the deficiencies within seven days of receiving the notice.
(5)  If the applicant does not rectify the deficiencies, the application and the supporting documents shall be returned.
(1)  The results of the examination shall be noted down in a record of findings.
(2)  That record shall be signed by the members of the panel and shall contain information about:
the time and place where and when it has been drawn up;
the applicant;
the panel which has examined the application;
the case in respect of which it is being drawn up;
the overall duration of the proceedings; the period of delay attributable to the competent authority; the period of delay attributable to actions or omissions of the complainant or his legal or procedural representative;
(3)  The record of findings shall also set out the view of the panel as to whether the time-limit under section 60a(4) has been met.
The record of findings under section 60d shall be drawn up within four months of receipt of the application or the rectification of its deficiencies, as the case may be. The record, along with the application and all supporting documents, shall be sent immediately to the Minister of Justice.
(1)  Based on the findings of the panel, the Minister of Justice or a person authorised by him or her shall reject the application as unfounded if
the length of the proceedings has not exceeded a reasonable time;
the delay is due to actions or omissions of the applicant or his legal or procedural representative.
(2)  If the right of the applicant to have his or her case examined and decided within a reasonable time has been breached, the Minister of Justice or a person authorised by him or her shall fix the amount of compensation in line with the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights and shall propose the conclusion of a settlement with the applicant.
The underlying circumstances shall be examined and the application shall be determined within six months of the application’s receipt.”
“60h.  Compensation shall be paid on the basis of the concluded settlement.
The funds required for the payment of sums under concluded settlements shall be covered by the republican budget.
(1)  Compensation due under this chapter shall be paid out of the budget of the Ministry of Justice.
(2)  Each quarter the Minister of Finance shall make available to the budget of the Ministry of Justice funds matching the compensations actually paid under subsection 1 during that quarter through a modification of the budgetary arrangements with the central State budget.
Persons who have received compensation under this chapter may not seek compensation in respect of the same matter by way of civil proceedings.”
.  Section 2b of the SMRDA, which is entitled “Liability of the judicial authorities for breaches of the right to have one’s case examined and decided within a reasonable time” reads as follows:
“1.  The State shall be liable for damage caused to individuals or legal persons by breaches of the right to have one’s case examined and decided within a reasonable time, in accordance with Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
Claims under subsection 1 shall be examined in the manner provided by the Code of Civil Procedure [2007], and the court shall take into account the overall duration and the subject matter of the proceedings, their factual and legal complexity, the conduct of the parties and their procedural or legal representatives, the conduct of the other participants in the proceedings and of the competent authorities, as well as other facts which have a bearing on the proper determination of the dispute.
The bringing of a claim for damages in respect of pending proceedings shall not preclude the bringing of a fresh claim after the proceedings have come to end.”
Section 8(2) provides that individuals or legal persons may bring claims under section 2b(1) in respect of proceedings which have ended only if they have already exhausted the administrative procedure under Chapter 3a of the 2007 Act but that procedure has not resulted in a settlement.
.  In a final judgment (решение № 55 от 23.02.2016 г. на ОС Хасково по гр. д. № 21/2016) the Haskovo Regional Court upheld the lower court’s judgment awarding damages – for excessive length of criminal proceedings against an unknown perpetrator – to the applicant who had voluntarily surrendered his vehicle to the investigating authorities in the context of an investigation. The court held that not only the accused or the victim of the crime were entitled to claim such damages, but also any other person who claimed s/he has suffered damage as a result of excessive length. In another decision of 2015 (решение № 210 от 15.06.2015 г. по гр. д. № 3053/2014 г. на ВКС), the Supreme Court of Cassation also found that the person whose items of property have been seized in the context of criminal proceedings is also entitled to claim damages under section 2b of the SMRDA for excessive length of proceedings.