The case originated in an application (no. 27888/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Tudor-Comert (“the applicant company”), on 28 June 2004.
The applicant company was represented by Mr V. Nagacevschi, a lawyer practising in Chişinău and a member of the non-governmental organisation Lawyers for Human Rights. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V. Grosu.
The applicant company alleged, in particular, that the refusal of the domestic courts to examine its appeal due to its inability to pay court fees had breached its right of access to court, guaranteed by Article 6 of the Convention.
The application was allocated to the Fourth Section of the Court. On 21 November 2006 the President of that Section decided to communicate the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it was decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant is a company registered in Chişinău.
On 20 December 1994 two companies (Tehoptimed and Tudor & K.) concluded a contract according to which the latter rented a warehouse from the former.
In June 1996 the applicant company was registered. On 19 February 1997 the original contract for the use of the warehouse was amended to the effect that all the rights and obligations of Tudor & K. passed to the applicant company. The applicant company stored merchandise (food and clothes) in the warehouse.
On 11 June 1997 the police of the Ciocana Commissariat of Chişinău sealed the warehouse rented by the applicant company. On 30 June 1997 the applicant company complained to the Ciocana Commissar about a violation of its right to property and asked for the reasons for the police action. In a reply dated 2 July 1997 the applicant company was informed that the police had acted on the basis of the order of an investigator of the Chişinău Prosecutor’s Office.
On 30 October 1997 the applicant company requested the Chişinău Prosecutor’s Office to revoke the order. In a letter of 19 November 1997 the Chişinău Prosecutor’s Office stated that its actions had been lawful. The applicant company made several other complaints to the Ciocana Police Commissariat and the Chişinău Prosecutor’s Office and received similar answers. In its complaints, the applicant company claimed that the merchandise taken from the rented warehouse had not been listed in the minutes as required by law and that its total value had been 11,750,000 Moldovan lei (MDL), (approximately 1,059,340 United States Dollars (USD)).
The applicant company initiated court proceedings against the Chişinău Prosecutor’s Office, the Ciocana Police Commissariat and Tehoptimed, requesting the restitution of the MDL 11,750,000.
On 31 March 1998 the  found that the sequestration of the applicant company’s property “in the amount of MDL 11,750,000” from its rented warehouse had been unlawful. It ordered the defendants to return the property taken from the applicant company. No appeal was lodged and the judgment became final 15 days later.
On 3 September 1998 the applicant company requested an expert report to be prepared in order to establish the current value of the property which had been kept in the sealed warehouse since July 1997. On 4 September 1998 the applicant company obtained access to that property. A list of items found in the warehouse was drawn up.
On 14 September 1998 an expert of the Central Laboratory of Scientific Research of the Ministry of Justice concluded that the warehouse had not been heated or ventilated and was infested with moths and rodents. The food and clothes stored in the warehouse had been severely damaged and their monetary value was MDL 74,158 (approximately USD 6,685).
On 29 October 1998 the Râşcani District Court returned the enforcement warrant to the applicant company and notified it that the total value of the merchandise found in the warehouse was MDL 74,158 and that there was no other property to be returned.
The applicant company requested the  to change the manner of enforcing the warrant by ordering payment of the original value of its property.
At the request of the Prosecutor General’s Office, on 19 December 2001 the Supreme Court of Justice quashed the judgment of 31 March 1998 and ordered a re-hearing of the case.
On 23 December 2002 the  left the applicant company’s action unexamined because it had failed to appear and had not submitted the originals of the documents confirming its claims.
On 14 January 2003 the same court returned the applicant company’s appeal (contestaţia in anulare) because of its failure to pay court fees. On 19 March 2003 the Economic Court of the  ordered a re-hearing of the case, finding that the length of the proceedings had already been excessive and that a decision on the substance of the case was required.
On 11 November 2003 the  rejected the applicant company’s claims. It found that on 23 December 1997 the prosecution had informed the applicant company about the discontinuation of the proceedings and that all the restrictions on the use of its property had been lifted. Accordingly, the applicant company could have used its property from that date, which meant that there was no outstanding issue to be decided by the court.
In its appeal the applicant company stated that the investigator’s order to seize its property had been taken in violation of the law and that the seizure itself had been carried out without drawing up a list of all the items seized, again contrary to the law. The applicant company also noted that the unlawful actions of the prosecution and the police had violated its property rights and that not all the items taken from it had been returned. This resulted in its inability to fulfil its contractual obligations towards third parties.
On 15 January 2004 the Appeals Chamber of the  left the appeal unexamined because of the applicant company’s failure to pay court fees MDL 352,500, (EUR 21,021 at the time). The court gave the applicant company until 12 February 2004 to pay the court fees.
The applicant company requested the postponement of the payment of court fees until after the examination of its case. It relied on its difficult financial situation, annexing bank certificates proving that there had been virtually no money in its accounts since 2002. It also claimed that in 1997, when it lodged its complaint, no court fees were payable. It finally invoked its right to access to justice.
In response to the applicant company’s request, the court postponed the time-limit for payment of the court fee until 15 March 2004.
On 15 March 2004 the Appellate Chamber of the  rejected the applicant company’s request to postpone the payment of the court fees pending the examination of the case. The court refused to examine the applicant company’s appeal because of its failure to pay the court fees despite two extensions of the time-limit for payment.
In its appeal in cassation the applicant company relied on its difficult financial situation, which, it claimed, had resulted from the unlawful actions of the police and prosecution and had blocked its economic activity. It asked for the postponement of the payment of court fees until after its appeal had been examined.
On 6 May 2004 the Supreme Court of Justice rejected as unfounded the applicant company’s appeal. The court found that the applicant company’s submissions that the lower courts had not taken into consideration its difficult financial situation was unsubstantiated. It found that the courts had the power but not an obligation to postpone the payment of court fees in accordance with Article 86 of the CCP. It also found that no waiver of court fees was possible for legal persons. Since the applicant company had failed to pay the court fees, its appeal was to be rejected.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, in force at the relevant time, read as follows:
“Article 84
Court fees shall be due for actions lodged by natural and legal persons ..., for appeals and appeals in cassation...:
(1) For court actions of a pecuniary nature ... – 3% of the value of the action or of the amount sought...;
(11) For appeals – 75% of the court fees due when lodging the action ...;
(12) For appeals in cassation – 50% of the court fees due when lodging the action ...;
Article 85
...
(4) The judge (the court) may exempt partly or entirely a natural person from paying court fees, taking into account the person’s financial situation.”
“Article 86
(1) The judge or the court has the power to postpone the payment of court fees or to allow its payment in instalments by one or both parties to the proceedings, taking into account their financial state. If the plaintiff does not pay the court fee within the time-limit set, the court will strike the case off its list.”
“Article 437
...
(2) Proof of payment of court fees shall be annexed to the cassation appeal; Articles 85(4) and 86 do not apply.”