The case originated in an application (no. 68924/12) against the Republic of Poland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Adam Słomka (“the applicant”), on 20 September 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr Z. Cichoń, a lawyer practising in Cracow. The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms J. Chrzanowska, and subsequently by Mr J. Sobczak, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the proceedings leading to the imposition of a custodial penalty on him had been unfair; that the penalty had been entirely executed before his interlocutory appeal against it had been examined by the appellate court; and that the punishment he had received for expressing his views in a political debate had been too severe.
On 24 August 2015 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1964 and lives in Katowice.
The applicant is a former activist of an anti-communist opposition group, who was interned in 1982.
He observed the trial against three high-ranking members of the communist-era Military Council of National Salvation who had ordered the imposition of martial law in Poland in December 1981.
The trial in question, which lasted from 2007 until 2015, attracted a lot of public attention in Poland.
On 12 January 2012 the main defendant, General C.K. was convicted and sentenced to four years’ imprisonment. This penalty was reduced by half under the Amnesty Act and its execution was suspended for five years in view of the defendant’s old age and poor health. Another defendant was acquitted and another had her case discontinued. On 15 June 2015 the appellate court upheld the first-instance judgment.
The applicant was in the courtroom when on 12 January 2012 the Warsaw Regional Court (Sąd Okręgowy) was to deliver its judgment in the case described above.
At 1.30 p.m., after the judges had arrived in the courtroom, the applicant jumped behind the judge’s table and shouted: “This is a mockery of justice!” (Tutaj trwa kpina z wymiaru sprawiedliwości).
The judges left the courtroom.
Some other members of the audience shouted “Disgrace!” and “Court before the court!” (Hańba and Sąd pod sąd). They were all holding up photos of victims of the communist regime.
The applicant was forcibly removed from the courtroom.
Shortly afterwards, he returned and continued shouting out similar statements joint by other members of the audience. In view of the audience’s refusal to leave the courtroom, the judge who was presiding over the trial decided to announce the judgment from a different room.
At 3 p.m. the trial was resumed in a new room, with the public comprising only journalists. Here, in the applicant’s absence, the Warsaw Regional Court imposed on him a disciplinary custodial penalty of fourteen days for contempt of court (“for the breach of the solemn nature, serenity and the course of court proceedings, to the degree making the announcement of the judgment impossible”).
On 12 January 2012 a written decision, in the form of an extract from the court minutes as described in the preceding paragraph, was issued to that effect.
The applicant submitted that he had not been served with that decision or informed of it.
On the day of the trial in question, that is 12 January 2012, a warrant was issued ordering the applicant’s placement in a penal facility with a view to his serving the penalty. On 13 January 2012 a warrant to this effect was sent to Katowice police station together with a copy of the court’s decision imposing the disciplinary punishment.
On 19 January 2012 the applicant was served with a warrant and then arrested so that he could be committed to Warsaw Remand Centre to serve the penalty in a closed regime.
On 22 January 2012 the applicant lodged an interlocutory appeal against the decision imposing the custodial penalty. He argued that his one-minute statement had not disturbed the court to such an extent as to make it impossible to announce the judgment. He also submitted that if the presiding judge had told him to return to his seat, he would have complied. Since only a copy of the first page of the applicant’s appeal has been submitted to the Court, it is unclear whether the applicant had also raised the argument of the lack of impartiality of the judges who had punished him for contempt of court.
On 30 January 2012 this appeal was registered with the Registry of the Warsaw Court of Appeal (Sąd Apelacyjny).
On 31 January 2012 the applicant’s appeal was transferred to the Warsaw Regional Court for comment.
On 1 February 2012 the appeal together with the Regional Court’s comments was received by the Warsaw Court of Appeal. The appellate hearing was scheduled for 23 February 2012.
On 2 February 2012 – the fourteenth day of the applicant’s detention – the Prison Board of the Warsaw Remand Centre decided that the applicant should be detained under a semi-open regime (with the possibility to leave his cell during the day).
Following that decision, the applicant was transferred for several hours to a remand centre with a semi-open regime.
He was released later that day.
On an unspecified date, the appellate hearing was rescheduled because of the judge’s illness for 22 March 2012.
On 22 March 2012 the Warsaw Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s interlocutory appeal, finding that the applicant’s disrespectful behaviour had interfered with the solemn nature of court proceedings and with the court’s dignity, and had disrupted the proceedings. His action had provoked the audience to shout similar slogans. It had been premeditated as the applicant had known that the announcement of the judgment had been scheduled for live media broadcast. The court also considered that the applicant’s behaviour could not be explained by an emotional disagreement with the court’s ruling because at the time of the incident the applicant had been unaware of the outcome of the trial. The applicant had wished to disturb the order of the proceedings irrespective of their result. In the domestic court’s view, imposing a more lenient penalty would have sanctioned unaccountability and would have lacked a deterrent effect.
Contempt of court is regulated by the Organisation of Courts Act (Prawo o ustroju sądów powszechnych) (as amended) of 27 July 2001.
Under section 48(1) of this Act, as applicable at the material time and today, the president of the trial Chamber has the authority to reprimand any person who is interfering with the solemn nature, serenity or the course of court proceedings. Only if such an admonishment turns out to be unsuccessful, is the president free to decide to have such a person removed from the courtroom. Paragraph 3 of the same section provides that the court has the authority to remove members of the public from the courtroom for poor comportment.
Section 49(1) of the Act sets out sanctions for breaches of the solemn nature, serenity or the course of court proceedings. At the material time, the court thus had the power to impose a fine of up to 10,000 Polish zlotys (PLN – approximately 2,500 euros (EUR)) or a custodial penalty of up to fourteen days.
On 1 October 2008 the Cracow Court of Appeal (decision in case no. II AKz 485/08) held that punishment for conduct which interfered with the solemn nature of the court within the meaning of the above-mentioned section 49 was correct in the event of conduct which had insulted the court. If the conduct in question did not reach that threshold, the correct response was to first reprimand the person and to impose the penalty only after the alternative responses had been exhausted to no avail. Making reference to Article 31 of the Polish Constitution, the court observed that the punishment, as the reaction of a judge to the behaviour of a person subjected to judicial assessment, should be moderately used and considered necessary in the democratic society for its security and public order, freedom and right of others or for the protection of other public interests. In the circumstances of that particular case, in which a fine was imposed on the applicant, who had been subject to a court decision to enforce his previously conditionally stayed sentence, the court considered that his ironic statement made in a loud voice: “That’s the kind of law we have” (takie mamy prawo), constituted an unacceptable comment about the Polish legal order. The appellate court concluded that the correct response of the court in that case would have been to admonish the applicant and to call him to order.
Pursuant to section 50(1) of the Act a decision on a penalty for contempt of court is immediately enforceable. An interlocutory appeal against such a decision can be lodged with a superior court. Appellate proceedings are governed by the procedural provisions applicable to the proceedings in the course of which the penalty for contempt of court has been imposed (that is to say in criminal proceedings, Article 459 et al. of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Kodeks Postępowania Karnego)). If an interlocutory appeal has been lodged, the court which issued the decision that is the subject of the appeal is free to stay the enforcement of the penalty for contempt of court.
The enforcement of decisions issued in the course of criminal proceedings is regulated by Article 9 of the Code of Execution of Criminal Sentences (Kodeks Karny Wykonawczy). Under paragraph 4 of this provision, lodging of an interlocutory appeal in the course of enforcement proceedings does not have an automatic effect of stopping the execution of the decision which is subject of the appeal. In particularly justified circumstances, the court can order, including of its own motion, a stay of execution of the penalty until the moment when the decision imposing it becomes final.
The imposition of a penalty for contempt of court does not absolve the person of criminal responsibility for the same action (section 50(2) of the Act) if the action in question also falls within the scope of a criminal offence. In practice, the court (itself, or the court’s president or the president of the court section) is, at the material time, free and, in fact, should, notify a prosecutor or the police of such an instance of contempt of court (see Komentarz do ustawy – Prawo o ustroju sądów powszechnych (“Legal commentaries on the Legal Structure of Courts Act”) by J. Gudowski, 2009 and by J. Kremer, 2013 with further references).