The case originated in an application (no. 45422/13) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Mr I.E. (“the applicant”), on 21 June 2013. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by Mr T. Suveică, Mr A. Postică and Mr V. Vieru, lawyers practising in Chișinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Apostol.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been unlawfully detained without any valid reasons and that his complaint of ill-treatment by co-detainees had not been the subject of an effective investigation.
On 20 May 2014 the Government were given notice of the complaint under Articles 3 and 5 §§ 1 and 3 of the Convention, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1995 and is detained in Chișinău.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 13 August 2012 the applicant, who was aged seventeen at the time of the events, was arrested on suspicion of having murdered P. on 12 August 2012. The prosecutor’s decision referred to the applicant’s alleged participation in murdering – together with another accused – P., after which the perpetrators had taken objects from the victim and set his car on fire in order to hide the evidence of the crime. Also on 13 August 2012 an investigating judge ordered his detention pending trial for thirty days. His detention was subsequently extended several times, and eventually expired on 9 December 2012. The courts noted, inter alia, that (i) during the investigation the applicant had acknowledged that he had committed the crime under the influence of alcohol and with the participation of another accused; (ii) he had no stable job, income or living place; and (iii) he could be easily influenced and thus persuaded to interfere with the course of the investigation.
On 6 December 2012 the prosecutor in charge of the case initiated two other criminal investigations against the applicant in regard to, respectively, aggravated robbery and the destruction of the property of the above-mentioned person (P.) during the events of 12 August 2012. On 18 December 2012 the prosecutor decided to join those two investigations with the one started on 13 August 2012 “because the offences [had been] committed by the same persons”.
On 9 December 2012 the applicant’s detention pending trial expired and he was released at 15.30. At 16.20 he was again arrested as part of the second criminal investigation (that is to say on suspicion of robbery and the destruction of P.’s property). On 10 December 2012 the prosecutor in charge of the case asked the investigating judge to order the applicant’s detention pending trial for thirty days. He noted, inter alia, that the applicant was “accused in another criminal case ..., but on 9 December 2012 he was released from detention owing to the expiry of the four-month time-limit. In such circumstances, we consider it reasonable that [the applicant’s] being at large represents a clear and high level of danger to society and that he could commit new offences”. On the same day an investigating judge ordered the applicant’s detention pending trial for thirty days. The judge noted that the expiry of the four-month time-limit provided by law did not affect the applicant’s situation, since detention was now being sought in connection with another criminal case against him.
The applicant appealed, the applicant’s lawyer noting, inter alia, that under Article 186 § 4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP” – see paragraph 31 below) a minor could not be held in detention pending trial for longer than four months.
On 27 December 2012 the Chișinău Court of Appeal upheld the decision of 10 December 2012. It did not respond to the lawyer’s argument concerning the maximum length of detention of minors under Article 186 § 4 of the CCP.
On 9 October 2012 the governor of prison no. 13, where the applicant was being detained in cell no. 144, noticed an excoriation wound under the applicant’s right eyebrow and that he was limping. When asked by prison staff about the origin of those injuries, the applicant responded that he had slipped in the cell while cleaning up damage caused by a burst water pipe. On the same day the applicant was taken to a medical specialist, who noted the injuries that he had found in the report that he subsequently drafted – in particular, an excoriation wound under his right eyebrow and a haematoma on the right frontal side of his head. On the same day the applicant was transferred to cell no. 143, which housed underage detainees.
On 16 October 2012 the applicant was again seen by a medical specialist. The expert found injuries on his left shoulder, left elbow, lips, left cheek, and left hip. It was recommended that the applicant undergo an X-ray examination of the left arm.
On 17 October 2012 the governor of prison no. 13 and the prison psychologist interviewed the applicant, who stated that either at the end of September or the beginning of October 2012 (he could not remember the precise date) he had been severely beaten and anally raped by his five cellmates, including one S.
On 19 October 2012 the applicant lodged an official complaint against his cellmates in respect of his alleged beating and rape.
During a preliminary verification of the complaint, the prosecutor in charge of the case heard the applicant, various prison officials and all five co-detainees. Between 19 and 26 October 2012 the applicant was examined by a medical expert (a proctologist), who found no injuries on his body and no indication that he had been anally penetrated. The expert did not respond to an express question, based on the applicant’s account, whether there was evidence that he had been shaved around his anus before the alleged abuse.
On 16 November 2012 the prosecutor decided not to initiate a criminal investigation into the applicant’s complaint, citing a lack of any evidence to support his claim of ill-treatment and rape.
On 7 March 2013 the applicant’s lawyer lodged a complaint; on 22 March 2013 a higher-ranking prosecutor annulled the decision of 16 November 2012. Subsequently, the applicant’s five former cellmates were all indicted on charges of beating and rape.
In a new examination on 11 June 2013 medical experts found on the applicant’s body signs of past injuries on his left shoulder and hip. The injuries noted in the report of 9 October 2012 had been caused several hours prior to the drafting of that report. Most of the injuries mentioned in the report dated 16 October 2012 (see paragraph 13 above) were insufficiently described in that report and thus could not be properly analysed in order to determine the time at which or the manner in which they had been inflicted.
When he was interviewed by the prosecutor in charge of the case on 12 June 2013, the prison guard, G.T., stated that he had seen the applicant limping at the beginning of October 2012 and that initially the applicant had said that he had slipped while cleaning his cell. However, at the guard’s insistence, the applicant had eventually told him that he had been beaten, but had not wanted to talk about that.
When he was interviewed by the prosecutor on 16 July 2014, the prison doctor who had examined the applicant on 9 and 16 October 2012 confirmed what she had noted in the medical reports, stating that the injuries noted in the report of 16 October 2012 had appeared during the period between 9 and 16 October 2012. On neither of the two dates on which the reports had been drafted had the applicant complained of having been raped. Only on 16 October 2012 had he complained of having been beaten by cellmates. The doctor added that from the first time she had seen him in prison no. 13 she had suspected that the applicant suffered from “slightly retarded mental development” (retard mintal); she had recommended that he be seen by a psychologist. The applicant had subsequently been found to be “slightly mentally retarded”, which had not, however, impeded his understanding of what was happening to him.
When he was interviewed by the prosecutor, the medical expert who had examined the applicant some time between 16 and 19 October 2012 (see paragraph 16 above) declared that he had not found any signs of anal penetration on the applicant. He added that if such penetration had taken place more than a week prior to the examination, signs thereof may not have been visible owing to healing of the body tissues. Moreover, if the injuries had been small, they would not have been visible.
One detainee in cell no. 143, to which the applicant had been transferred on 16 October 2012, confirmed that the applicant had complained to him of having been beaten and raped by his cellmates in cell no. 144. He also stated that the applicant had asked one of his cellmates (S.C.) for several items (a television, a PlayStation, etc.), threatening to complain of having been raped if S.C. did not comply. Another detainee in cell no. 143 made similar statements, adding that he had seen a letter sent by the applicant to S.C. in which the applicant had written “If you want me to forgive you and withdraw my complaint, give me [a list of items]”.
As can be seen from the case-file, at the time of the events in question his former cellmates in cell no. 144 had all been convicted or were awaiting the outcome of their appeals:
-  S.C. had been convicted on 11 November 2011 of raping a ten-year-old girl in June 2011 (that judgment was upheld by the Chișinău Court of Appeal on 21 March 2012, was apparently not appealed against, and thus became final on 22 May 2012); at the time of the events in question S.C. was being detained pending trial in respect of another case concerning several instances of theft and robbery;
-  A.S. had been convicted on 11 June 2012 of aggravated rape;
-  I.R. had been convicted on 31 January 2012 of aggravated murder;
-  N.C. had been convicted on 19 September 2011 of sexual violence;
-  I.H. had been convicted on 17 February, 8 September and 27 December 2011 and 30 March 2012 on different counts of aggravated theft.
On 25 June 2015 the applicant was subjected to a polygraph test. He was asked whether he had been raped by four specific persons (his former cellmates in cell no. 144), to which he replied in the affirmative. He replied negatively when asked whether the fifth cellmate had also raped him. The results of the test indicated that he had probably lied when asserting that the fifth cellmate (I.R.) had not raped him. He later explained that I.R. had implored him to deny his participation in the ill-treatment since he risked another harsh prison term.
On 17 July 2015 the investigation was completed and the case was sent to the trial court.
According to the last information received from the Government, by May 2017 no judgment had been adopted in that case. Subsequently the parties did not inform the Court of any new circumstance relevant to the application (as required by Rule 47 (7) of the Rules of Court).
Under Article 185 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”), detention pending trial (arestarea preventivă) consists of detaining a suspect or an accused or indicted person in a state of arrest in the places and in the conditions provided by law.
Under Article 186 § 4 of the CCP, the detention pending trial of minors accused of committing an offence can be extended for up to a maximum of four months. Under Article 6 of the CCP, a minor is a person under the age of 18.
The European Prison Rules (Recommendation Rec(2006)2 of the Committee of Ministers to member States, adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 11 January 2006 at the 952nd meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies), in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“...
1  Children under the age of 18 years should not be detained in a prison for adults, but in an establishment specially designed for the purpose.
...
8  In deciding to accommodate prisoners in particular prisons or in particular sections of a prison due account shall be taken of the need to detain:
untried prisoners separately from sentenced prisoners;
...”
The United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the “Nelson Mandela Rules”), adopted by the resolution of the General Assembly of 17 December 2015 (A/RES/70/175), in so far as relevant, read as follows:
“Separation of categories
Rule 11
The different categories of prisoners shall be kept in separate institutions or parts of institutions taking account of their sex, age, criminal record, the legal reason for their detention and the necessities of their treatment. Thus,
...
(b)  Untried prisoners shall be kept separate from convicted prisoners;
...”
The relevant part of the Convention on the rights of the child (adopted and opened for signature, ratification and accession by General Assembly resolution 44/25 of 20 November 1989), reads as follows:
“Article 37
States Parties shall ensure that:
...
(c)  Every child deprived of liberty shall be treated with humanity and respect for the inherent dignity of the human person, and in a manner which takes into account the needs of persons of his or her age. In particular, every child deprived of liberty shall be separated from adults unless it is considered in the child’s best interest not to do so and shall have the right to maintain contact with his or her family through correspondence and visits, save in exceptional circumstances;
...”
The relevant part of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice ("The Beijing Rules") adopted by General Assembly resolution 40/33 of 29 November 1985, reads as follows:
“13.4  Juveniles under detention pending trial shall be kept separate from adults and shall be detained in a separate institution or in a separate part of an institution also holding adults.”
The relevant part of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, adopted and opened for signature, ratification and accession by General Assembly resolution 2200A (XXI) of 16 December 1966, reads as follows:
“Article 10
...
2.
...
(b)  Accused juvenile persons shall be separated from adults and brought as speedily as possible for adjudication.
...”