The case originated in an application (no. 22840/07) against the Republic of Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Australian national, Mr Lee Sydney Harrison McKee (“the applicant”), on 22 May 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Tomszer, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice.
The applicant alleged that, in the civil proceedings lodged against the Hungarian authorities for compensation, the courts ordered him to pay excessive court fees.
On 30 April 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1948 and lives in Surfers Paradise, Australia.
In 2003 the applicant, who was represented by a Hungarian lawyer throughout the proceedings, initiated civil proceedings against a public prosecutor assigned to the Hungarian Budapest Regional Public Prosecutor’s Office, the Budapest Regional Public Prosecutor’s Office itself, and the Office of the Attorney General, alleging a violation of his personality rights. Given the subject matter of the dispute, the applicant was exempt from having to advance the court fees, by virtue of section 64 of Act no. XCIII of 1990 on Stamp Duties, as in force at the relevant time.
In particular, the applicant complained that a letter sent in the course of criminal proceedings conducted against him by the public prosecutor to the Pest Central District Court, the trial court in his case, had contained false information about him and thus infringed his right to honour, dignity and reputation.
The applicant subsequently modified his claim, seeking non-pecuniary damages in respect of a violation of his personality rights in the amount of 390,000,000 Hungarian forints (HUF) (approximately 1,314,000 euros (EUR)). It appears that the amount claimed was an expression of the applicant’s personal estimation of the value of his reputation, rather than a sum deduced from relevant domestic jurisprudence; however, in the ensuing procedure the applicant maintained this claim.
The Budapest Regional Court delivered a judgment on 22 September 2005. It discontinued the proceedings against the Budapest Regional Public Prosecutor’s Office, since it had no procedural standing. As to the remainder of the claims, it held that the applicant’s right to reputation had been violated by the public prosecutor’s statements and ordered the public prosecutor to present her apologies to the applicant. However, it dismissed the applicant’s claim for compensation, stating that it was excessive and in any event he could not prove that he had suffered any actual damage. The court further applied section 39 of Act no. XCIII of 1990 on Stamp Duties and ordered the applicant to pay HUF 879,000 (approximately EUR 2,900) in court fees. Under this rule, at the material time, the amount of stamp duty in civil cases was 6% of the claim but should attain a minimum of HUF 15,000 (approximately EUR 50) and should not exceed a maximum of HUF 900,000 (approximately EUR 3,000). In a subsequent supplementary decision on court costs, the court explained that the law required the payment of court fees proportionately to the dismissed part of the claim, and observed that the applicant’s claim was far beyond the amounts normally awarded in similar cases.
Both the applicant and the respondents appealed to the Budapest Court of Appeal, which dismissed the appeal on 3 October 2006. As regards the costs, the court upheld the position taken by the Budapest Regional Court, that is, that the applicant should pay court fees calculated as a percentage of the dismissed part of his claims. It further ordered the applicant to pay HUF 900,000 (approximately EUR 3,000) in appellate fees.
Act no. III of 1952 on the Code of Civil Procedure provides as follows:
“(1) Court costs – apart from the exceptions specified under the law – shall mean all reasonable expenses that emerged in connection with the parties’ expedient and bona fide litigation before or outside the court (costs of preliminary inquiries and correspondence, procedural fees, witness fees, expert fees, the fees of guardians ad litem and interpreters, the cost of remote hearings and inspections, etc.).”
“The court shall decide on the bearing of court costs in its judgment or in another decision terminating the proceedings.”
“(1) Where each party has won some claims and lost others, in determining the court costs the court shall take into consideration the proportion of the successful and unsuccessful claims as well as the sums advanced by the parties. If the difference between the respective proportions and the sums advanced by the parties is insignificant, the court shall order that each party should bear his own costs.
(2) In actions for damages or for other claims, the quantification of which is subject to judicial discretion, the opposing party may be obliged to pay court costs in proportion to the amount awarded against him even if the awarded amount is lower than the one claimed, provided that the claimed amount cannot be regarded as manifestly excessive.”
“(1) Natural person parties (including interveners) unable to pay the costs of litigation due to their income or financial position shall, upon request, be eligible for full or partial exemption from payment of costs or fees. Exemption from payment of costs or fees shall mean the following:
a) exemption from payment of court fees;
b) exemption from advancing and, unless this Act provides otherwise, paying the costs and fees arising in the proceedings (witness fees, expert fees, the fees of guardians ad litem and interpreters, public defender’s fees, cost of remote hearings and inspections, etc.);
c) exemption from providing a security deposit for court costs;
d) request for representation by a legal aid lawyer, where it is allowed under the law.”
“(1) In lawsuits specified in a separate law the party (intervener) shall be eligible for exemption from advancing court costs and expenses irrespective of his income or financial situation and the criteria set forth in subsections (1)-(3) of section 85 (subject matter exemption from advancing court costs and expenses).
(2) Where subject matter exemption from advancing court costs and expenses is granted:
a) the costs and expenses specified in section 84 subsection (1) b) shall be advanced by the state, except for those to be advanced by the party despite having been granted subject matter exemption from advancing court costs and expenses;
b) a party shall be eligible for exemption from advancing court fees.”
Act no. XCIII of 1990 on Stamp Duties provides as follows:
“(1) In civil contentious and non-contentious proceedings the duty base shall, unless otherwise provided by law, be the value of the subject matter of the proceedings at the time of their launching or, in remedy proceedings, the value of the claim or part of the claim under dispute. ...”
(1) For the duty base specified in sections 39-41, the amount of the duty shall, unless otherwise provided by this Act, be as follows:
a) in contentious proceedings 6 % but not less than HUF 7,000 and not more than HUF 900,000; ...”
(1) For the duty base determined in line with sections 39-41 the amount of the duty shall, in case of appeal against a judgment, be 8% but not less than HUF 7,000 and not more than HUF 900,000. ...”
(1) For the duty base determined in line with sections 39-41 the amount of the duty shall, in case of review against a judgment, be 10% but not less than HUF 10,000 and not more than HUF 2,500,000.”