The case originated in an application (no. 13764/15) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Leonid Sergeyevich Martynyuk (“the applicant”), on 2 March 2015.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Popkov, a lawyer practising in Sochi. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had not been given a fair hearing and that the immediate execution of the sentence of administrative detention had violated his right of appeal.
On 15 March 2018 notice of those complaints was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1978 and lives in New York.
Around 10 p.m. on 23 August 2014 the applicant, a political activist and a video blogger, was arrested on suspicion of minor hooliganism, which was an offence under Article 20.1 of the Code of Administrative Offences (CAO).
Around 11 p.m. Officer B. compiled an administrative-offence record under Article 20.1 of the CAO. It appears that police officer O. compiled a written report to his superior in relation to the offence imputed to the applicant; eyewitnesses Ko. and Kol. also made written statements.
At 1.35 p.m. on 24 August 2014 the applicant was presented to a judge of the Oktyabrskiy District Court of Krasnodar. The judge held a hearing and heard argument from the applicant and a lawyer acting on his behalf. The applicant pleaded not guilty. The judge also heard evidence in favour of the applicant from Ms Z., the applicant’s companion, who was present in the courtroom. Officer B. was also present at the trial. The defence sought an adjournment, asking the judge to assist the defence in obtaining a copy of the street security-camera footage, which arguably might have been exculpating or have clarified pertinent factual elements relating to the charge. The trial judgment reads as follows:
“The defendant’s guilt is confirmed by the following material: reports from police officers, statements from the eyewitnesses, the record of administrative arrest and the record of administrative offence.”
On the same day the District Court sentenced the applicant to ten days’ detention. The trial court stated, in a summary manner, that his guilt was confirmed by the available evidence, specifically the administrativeoffence record, pre-trial written statements from police officers and eyewitnesses, and the administrative-arrest record.
The applicant started to serve the sentence on the same day. He instructed his lawyer to lodge an appeal against the trial judgment with the Krasnodar Regional Court. The lawyer did so on 1 September 2014. The lawyer also requested the Regional Court to summon Officers B. and O. and witnesses Ko. and Kol., and to order production of the security-camera footage.
The applicant was released from detention on an unspecified date.
On 3 September 2014 the Regional Court held a hearing and reexamined the case, noting that it was open to a court of appeal to go beyond the grounds of appeal and to re-examine the charge. The applicant and his lawyer were absent from the appeal hearing. The appeal court assessed the written pleadings and endorsed the trial court’s judgment in a summary manner, adding that the applicant’s guilt was also confirmed by “other evidentiary material in the file”.
Article 32.8 of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”) reads as follows:
“1.  A judgment imposing a sentence of administrative detention is executed immediately after its delivery ...
The period of administrative arrest is counted toward the period of administrative detention. ...
A judge may suspend for up to seven days or discontinue the execution of administrative detention, in cases of exceptional circumstances such as a grave illness or grave state of health, death of a close relative or close person, a public emergency situation that caused significant pecuniary damage to the detainee or his or her family; on the basis of a medical report confirming that the detainee has an illness, trauma or handicap that are not compatible with detention ...”
For a summary of other relevant provisions of Russian law, see Novikova and Others v. Russia, nos. 25501/07 and 4 others, §§ 75-79, 26 April 2016; Butkevich v. Russia, no. 5865/07, §§ 37-48, 13 February 2018; and Tsvetkova and Others v. Russia, nos. 54381/08 and 5 others, §§ 78-79, 10 April 2018.