The case originated in an application (no. 9912/15) against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Iranian national, Mr O.M. (“the applicant”), on 13 February 2015. The Vice-President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by Ms B. Pohárnok, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged that his detention had been unjustified, a situation not remedied by adequate judicial supervision. He relied on Article 5 §§ 1 (b) and (f) and 4 of the Convention.
On 16 June 2015 the complaint under Article 5 § 1 was communicated to the Government.
The parties submitted written observations on the admissibility and merits. In addition, third-party comments were received from the AIRE Centre (Advice on Individual Rights in Europe), the European Council on Refugees and Exiles (ECRE), the ILGA-EUROPE (the European Region of the International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association), and the International Commission of Jurists (ICJ), which have been given leave to intervene jointly in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 §§ 3 and 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was born in 1982 and currently lives in Budapest.
The applicant crossed the Hungarian border from Serbia clandestinely in the evening of 24 June 2014. Apprehended by a border guard patrol, he was taken into custody, since he was unable to show documentary evidence of his identity or right to stay in the country.
The applicant then claimed asylum.
At the hearing held on 25 June 2014 by the Immigration Office, the applicant declared that he had fled from his country of origin, Iran, because of his homosexuality. He stated that he had been forced to leave Iran and, with the help of a human trafficker, he had entered Hungary without documents, because he had had no other way of doing so. At the hearing, he again applied for recognition as a refugee.
In view of his request, on 25 June 2014 the Csongrád County Police Department suspended the alien administration procedure. On the same day the Office of Immigration and Nationality commenced asylum proceedings. At the ensuing hearing the applicant said that he had intended to go to the United Kingdom, but since Hungary seemed to be a safe country he had requested asylum there. He stated again that he had had to leave Iran because he was homosexual and that criminal proceedings had been instituted against him for this reason, attracting very severe penalties.
After the hearing, the asylum authority, a department of the Office of Immigration and Nationality, ordered that the applicant be detained (menekültügyi őrizet), with effect from 7 p.m. on 25 June 2014, in Debrecen, relying on section 31/A (1) a) and c) of Act no. LXXX of 2007 on Asylum (the “Asylum Act”). In its decision the asylum authority observed that the applicant’s identity and nationality had not been clarified. It held that there were grounds for the presumption that if left at large, he would delay or frustrate the asylum proceedings and would present a risk of absconding, given that he had arrived unlawfully in Hungary and had no connections in the country or resources to subsist on. According to section 31/A (6) of the Asylum Act, the maximum length of asylum detention when ordered by the asylum authority is 72 hours. On the basis of section 31/C (3) of the Asylum Act and section 36/C (1) of the relevant Government Decree (see in paragraph 22 below), the applicant could have submitted an objection to the ordering of his asylum detention.
On 26 June 2014 the asylum authority applied to the Debrecen District Court for an extension of the asylum detention for a maximum of 60 days. The asylum authority pointed out in its application that Iranian asylum seekers tended to frustrate the procedure and leave for unknown places. To justify its application, it referred to the fact that the applicant’s stay in Hungary was unlawful, that he had no connection to the country, and that he lacked any resources to subsist on.
On 27 June 2014 the court appointed a legal representative for the applicant; on the same date – that is, before the expiry of the 72-hour period referred to in paragraph 10 above – it held a hearing. The hearing lasted from 9.40 to 9.45 a.m. In its ensuing decision the court dismissed the applicant’s application to be released and extended the asylum detention by a maximum of 60 days. It noted that the applicant’s identity was unclear, that he had arrived in Hungary unlawfully, and that he had no connections in the country or any means to subsist on. Without referring to other individual circumstances or the applicant’s sexual orientation, the court held that less stringent measures – such as an obligation to check in regularly with the authorities, to stay at a designated place of residence, or to pay asylum bail (menekültügyi óvadék) – were not suitable in the case to secure the applicant’s availability to the authorities.
On 8 and 11 July 2014 the applicant applied to the asylum authority to be released from detention or transferred to an open facility. In its reply, the asylum authority informed the applicant that an asylum hearing would be held in a few days: he would have the opportunity to prove his citizenship there. Because of this consideration, the asylum authority did not forward these requests to any other authority.
At the asylum hearing held on 18 July 2014 the applicant made the same statements as before. Referring to his sexual orientation, he explained that it was difficult for him to cope with the asylum detention for fear of harassment. At the hearing he provided the asylum authority with relevant and up-to-date information relating to his country of origin.
On 25 July 2014 the asylum authority stated that the applicant’s asylum request was neither inadmissible nor manifestly ill-founded and thus it ordered the examination of the case on the merits.
On 11 August 2014 the asylum authority again sought extension of the asylum detention by another maximum of 60 days, relying on section 31/A (1) a) and c) of the Asylum Act. In its application, the asylum authority did not give any detailed explanation as to why no other, less stringent measures could be applied in the case.
In her submission of 12 August 2014 to the asylum authority, the applicant’s legal-aid lawyer requested the termination of the asylum detention and the designation of a place of residence for the applicant with measures securing his availability during the proceedings. In her submission of the same day to the Debrecen District Court, the lawyer asked the court to hear the applicant and not to extend the asylum detention.
On 13 August 2014 the court appointed another legal representative for the applicant. On 19 August 2014 the court heard the applicant and dismissed the application for extension of the asylum detention. Relying on section 31/A (1) a) of the Asylum Act, the District Court stated that the delay caused by the acts of the authority for which the asylum seeker could not be held responsible did not provide grounds for the extension of the detention. Referring to section 31/A (1) c), the court further stated that the asylum authority had not given any specific reasoning for the view it had taken, namely that the applicant would abscond and frustrate the asylum proceedings.
On 22 August 2014 the asylum authority terminated the asylum detention and ordered a designated place of residence for the applicant in Debrecen with measures securing his availability during the proceedings.
On 31 October 2014 the applicant was recognised as a refugee. His asylum detention lasted from 25 June 2014 to 22 August 2014.
Act no. LXXX of 2007 on Asylum (“the Asylum Act”) provides as follows:
“(1) A person seeking recognition shall be entitled to:
a) stay in the territory of Hungary according to the conditions set out in the present Act ...
(2) A person seeking recognition shall be obliged to:
a) cooperate with the asylum authority, in particular to reveal the circumstances of his/her flight, to communicate his/her personal particulars and to facilitate the clarification of his/her identity, to hand over his/her documents;
b) issue a declaration with respect to his/her property and income;
c) stay as a habitual residence at the place of accommodation designated by the asylum authority for him/her according to the present Act and observe the rules of conduct governing residence at the designated place of accommodation;
d) subject him/herself to health tests, medical treatment prescribed as mandatory by law or required by the health authority and to subject him/herself to the replacement of any missing vaccinations prescribed as mandatory by law and/or required by the health authority in the case of the danger of disease.
(3) If the person seeking recognition is not in the possession of documents proving his identity, he must do his best to prove his identity, in particular to get in touch with his family, relatives, legal representative and – unless he is being persecuted by them – the authorities of his country of origin.”
“(1) In order to ensure compliance with the provisions set forth in sections 33 and 49(5), and having regard to the restrictions under section 31/B, the asylum authority may take into asylum detention a person seeking recognition whose right of residence is only based on the submission of an application for recognition if:
(2) Asylum detention may only be ordered on the basis of individual deliberation, and only if its purpose cannot be achieved through measures securing availability.
(3) Before ordering asylum detention, the asylum authority shall consider whether the purpose determined in sub-section (1) can be achieved through measures securing availability ...
(6) Asylum detention can be ordered for a maximum of 72 hours. The asylum authority may seek an extension of the asylum detention beyond 72 hours from the competent district court within 24 hours of the detention order being issued. The court may extend the detention by 60 days at most, and this may be extended at the asylum authority’s request for another 60 days on two occasions, but the total detention period may not exceed six months. Any application for extension must be received by the court eight working days before the due date of the extension. The asylum authority shall give reasons for its application.”
“(3) A person seeking recognition may lodge an objection to the asylum detention order ...
(4) The objection shall be examined by the competent district court within eight days.”
“The asylum procedure is aimed at determining whether, on the basis of the present Act, the foreigner seeking recognition satisfies the criteria for recognition as a refugee, or a beneficiary of subsidiary or temporary protection.”
Government Decree no. 301/2007. (XI. 9.) on the Implementation of Act no. LXXX of 2007 on Asylum (the “Government Decree”) provides as follows:
“(1) A person seeking recognition may lodge an objection, orally or in writing, to ... his detention ...”
Guidelines of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (“UNHCR”) (the “Guidelines”) provide as follows:
“Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender or intersex asylum-seekers
Measures may need to be taken to ensure that any placement in detention of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender or intersex asylum-seekers avoids exposing them to risk of violence, ill-treatment or physical, mental or sexual abuse; that they have access to appropriate medical care and counselling, where applicable; and that detention personnel and all other officials in the public and private sector who are engaged in detention facilities are trained and qualified, regarding international human rights standards and principles of equality and non-discrimination, including in relation to sexual orientation or gender identity. Where their security cannot be assured in detention, release or referral to alternatives to detention would need to be considered. In this regard, solitary confinement is not an appropriate way to manage or ensure the protection of such individuals.”
The 2011 Annual Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights entitled “Discriminatory laws and practices and acts of violence against individuals based on their sexual orientation and gender identity” contains the following passage:
“39. Even in countries that recognize these grounds for asylum, practices and procedures often fall short of international standards. Review of applications is sometimes arbitrary and inconsistent. Officials may have little knowledge about or sensitivity towards conditions facing LGBT people. Refugees are sometimes subjected to violence and discrimination while in detention facilities and, when resettled, may be housed within communities where they experience additional sexuality and gender-related risks. Refoulement of asylum-seekers fleeing such persecution places them at risk of violence, discrimination and criminalization. In some cases, they are returned with instructions to “be discreet”, an approach criticized by UNHCR.”