The case concerns two independent sets of civil proceedings for defamation brought by the then Governor of the Tula Region following the publication of an article in a local newspaper and of statements quoted by other news outlets expressing the view that the Governor had deserved the highest mark for corruption. The applicant, a journalist and a member of the regional legislature, was a defendant in each set of proceedings; the applicant company, the publisher of the newspaper, was involved in one of them. The first-instance court held the first set of defamation proceedings in camera, at the Governor’s request. The domestic courts made sizeable awards in respect of non-pecuniary damage, referring in their reasoning to the Governor’s social standing. In addition, criminal proceedings for libel were brought against the applicant in connection with the statements that had been found defamatory in the second set of civil proceedings.
The applicant – a journalist and a member of the Tula Regional Duma (the regional legislature) at the material time – was born in 1965 and lives in Tula. The applicant company, an editorial and publishing house based in Tula, was a limited liability company. Its only shareholders were the applicant (with 49% of the shares) and Mr Vladimir Borisovich Leonov (with 51% of the shares). The applicant company edited and published a local newspaper, Za Sechnyy Rubezh (“the newspaper”). The applicants were represented by Ms G. Arapova, a lawyer practising in Voronezh.
The Government were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 12 May 2009 the newspaper ran an editorial article entitled “What mark would the Governor deserve for corruption?” (“the article”), that had been written by the applicant. The thrust of the article was that Mr D., the then Governor of the Tula Region, had been involved in and condoned corrupt practices. The article contained several rhetorical questions and statements expressing its author’s disapproval of what he perceived as the heightened levels of corruption in the Tula Region, for example:
(i)  “However, only a blind person would not notice the remarkable achievements of the acting Administration [of the Tula Region] in fostering corruption”;
(ii)  “It is hardly believable that the today’s saturnalia of corruption [in the Tula Region] could have taken place if it were headed by a person as transparent as a crystal”;
(iii)  “How did it happen that journalists who a few years ago followed every misstep by the authorities now only speak of the Governor as a dead man, in accordance with the ‘either good or nothing’ maxim? Why the thick veil of silence has fallen onto media outlets of Tula? What does the Governor pay them in for loyalty – in envelopes filled with foreign currency, in baked goods with cabbage, or in sunlit smiles?”
On 5 June 2009 Mr D. brought civil proceedings for defamation against the applicants before the Privokzalnyy District Court of Tula (“the District Court”), requesting a retraction of fourteen of the statements that had appeared in the article and claiming 10,000,000 Russian roubles (RUB) in compensation for nonpecuniary damage.
On 13 July 2009 the District Court decided, at Mr D.’s request, to hear the case in camera in order to protect the claimant’s reputation, reasoning that the public discussion of certain secret aspects pertaining to his private life and business reputation that might be uncovered in the course of the court hearings would be detrimental to “the correct examination of the claim”.
The applicant argued before the District Court that the article had dealt with a matter of public interest and had invited readers to reflect on the situation described; it had not contained statements of fact (сведения).
On 25 August 2009 the District Court allowed Mr D.’s claim in part. It referred, in particular, to the Governor’s status as a high-ranking public official, ordered a retraction of the fourteen impugned statements, and held the applicant and the applicant company jointly and severally liable to pay Mr D. RUB 1,000,000 (22,150 euros (EUR)) in respect of nonpecuniary damage. It also ruled that the applicants were to pay RUB 1,000 (EUR 22) in court fees. The District Court did not analyse whether any of the impugned statements, including those that had taken the form of rhetorical questions, had amounted to a value judgment. Instead it labelled them statements of fact and, to demonstrate their untruthfulness, listed (over five pages) various (i) legal measures adopted in the Tula Region aimed at combatting corruption and (ii) social programmes targeting those in need. The District Court found that the defendants had not submitted any evidence that the impugned statements were true. It summarily refused to consider the material (which included bookkeeping records, contracts, orders issued by the Governor, and newspaper articles) submitted by the defendants as evidence that there had been a sufficient factual basis to the impugned statements, for the sole reason that “the content of these documents did not allow the court to establish the facts proving the truthfulness of the tarnishing statements”. It dismissed the defendants’ argument that they had not been allowed to submit evidence because it had been seen as “an attempt to protract the examination of the case on the merits”. The District Court reasoned, in particular, as follows:
“Accordingly, the court finds that the statements disseminated in the article have not been supported by objective information and are de facto untruthful, defamatory, and tarnish the honour and dignity of Mr D., discredit him as the Governor of the Tula Region in the eyes of the public and tarnish his business reputation as the highest official of the Tula Region and the head of the permanently functioning highest executive authority of the Tula Region, its Administration, which has as one of its statutory powers ... the undertaking of measures to implement, ensure, and protect the rights and freedoms of a person and a citizen, protecting property and public order, counteracting terrorism and extremism, [and] combating crime.
Moreover, the functioning of the [Tula] Region [and] its interactions with other constituent entities of the Russian Federation directly depends on, in particular, the business reputation and [moral] authority (авторитет) of its governor.”
The applicants appealed. Mr Timakov argued, in particular, that, as a member of the Tula Regional Duma and thus a politician, he had expressed in the article his opinion on corruption and his subjective appraisal of Mr D.’s professional activities and performance of his official duties – that is to say he had made a value judgment. He pointed out that the District Court had refused to order a language expert to undertake an examination of the impugned article in order to distinguish value judgments from statements of fact, and had failed to apply Resolution No. 3 of the Plenary Supreme Court of Russia. He also complained of the excessive level of the award made to the claimant. The applicant company submitted that the impugned statements had merely constituted value judgments on the part of Mr Timakov.
On 4 February 2010 the Tula Regional Court (“the Regional Court”) heard the applicants’ appeal in a public hearing. It upheld the firstinstance judgment for the reason that the impugned statements had “been presented in an affirmative form” and that they had “overstepped the limits of permissible and acceptable criticism in respect of a political and public figure”. As regards RUB 1,000,000 awarded to Mr D., the Regional Court noted that “the relevant findings of [the District Court] [had been] justified in detail in the [first-instance] judgment; the [Regional Court] [saw] no reasons for their reassessment, and thus the argument of [the applicants] regarding the excessive amount of the award to the claimant in respect of non-pecuniary damage [was] ill-founded”. It changed the modalities of payment of the award, ordering that the applicant and the applicant company each pay the claimant RUB 500,000 (EUR 12,000) in damages (rather than their being held “jointly and severally liable” – see paragraph 9 above). It also diminished the amount to be paid in court fees, ordering each applicant to pay RUB 100 (EUR 2.40).
Two requests lodged by the applicants for supervisory review were unsuccessful.
On 4 March 2010 the bailiffs’ service of the Tula Region (“the bailiffs’ service”) commenced enforcement proceedings.
According to the Government’s observations regarding the admissibility and merits of the application of 23 May 2018, the judgment of 25 August 2009 (upheld on appeal on 4 February 2010) remained unenforced in its entirety, and the enforcement proceedings were terminated on account of the impossibility of their being executed. According to their comments dated 17 September 2018 on the applicants’ claim for just satisfaction, between July and September 2010 the bailiffs’ service recovered a total of RUB 37,120 from Mr Timakov from the execution of the judgment of 25 August 2009 (which had been upheld on appeal on 4 February 2010).
According to the applicant, the bailiffs’ service set up monthly withdrawals from his bank account in order for the RUB 500,100 awarded by the judgment of 25 August 2009 to be recovered. The documents contained in the case-file material available to the Court indicate that a total of RUB 37,120 (in three instalments) was withdrawn in favour of Mr D. by way of execution of the judgment of 25 August 2009.
In view of the sizeable award to be paid by the applicant company, and given its lack of funds, its only shareholders (the applicant and Mr Leonov) decided to dissolve the applicant company. On 24 March 2014 the applicant company was deleted from the Register of Legal Entities and ceased to exist.
By a letter of 9 July 2018 the applicant and Mr Leonov informed the Court of their intention to continue the proceedings initiated before the Court by the applicant company.
On 29 April 2009 the applicant received a phone call from Ms P., a journalist, who asked him for his opinion, as a member of the Tula Regional Duma, of the Governor and of corruption in the Tula Region. The applicant considered the conversation to be private, as Ms P. had not warned him that it would be recorded. During the conversation the applicant said that Mr D. deserved a “five” (the highest mark in the Russian education system) for corruption.
On the same date Ms P. posted on a local news website, Tulskiye Novosti, a short item quoting the applicant as follows:
“[Mr] D. is a good public official – he deserves a mark of “four” [out of five]. Yet he deserves a “five” [out of five] as a corrupt official (коррупционер). During his first two years in office I thought that appointing a governor was much better than electing one. But later, when [Mr] D. had gained a foothold in the office, [and] had built a network of connections ... the situation changed. And what we have today is levels of corruption ... not seen even in the era of [the previous holder of the office of governor].”
According to the applicant, he remained unaware of the fact that his words had been reproduced on the website, as Ms P. had not informed him that they were about to be published and had not offered him the chance to review the text prior to its publication.
The applicant’s words concerning the highest mark in corruption were reproduced in an article, which was entitled “A layabout or a workaholic?” and published in the 6-13 May 2009 issue of the Tula regional edition of the Moskovskiy Komsomolets newspaper.
On 12 May 2009 Mr D. brought civil defamation proceedings against the applicant, the Tulskiye Novosti news website, and the editorial board of the regional edition of Moskovskiy Komsomolets, seeking RUB 10,000,000 in compensation for non-pecuniary damage.
The applicant argued before the District Court that he had not been given an opportunity to review the interview prior to its publication. He also unsuccessfully sought the postponement of a court hearing owing to his engagements as a member of the Tula Regional Duma.
On 22 September 2009 the District Court held a hearing in the applicant’s absence. It held the impugned statement to be a statement of fact that was unsupported by evidence, granted Mr D.’s claim in part, ordered a retraction to be published in the local edition of Moskovskiy Komsomolets, and awarded Mr D. RUB 1,000,000 (EUR 25,000) in compensation for nonpecuniary damage, to be paid by the applicant. The District Court reasoned, in particular, as follows:
“Thus the court has reached the conclusion that the statements disseminated on the [news website] have not been supported by objective information and are de facto untruthful, defamatory, and tarnish the honour and dignity of Mr D., amount de facto to accusing Mr D. of involvement in crimes and other unlawful acts, discredit him as the Governor of the Tula Region in the public’s view and tarnish his business reputation as the highest official of the Tula Region and the head of the permanently functioning highest executive authority of the Tula Region (its Administration), which has as one of its statutory powers ... the undertaking of measures to implement, ensure, and protect the rights and freedoms of a person and a citizen, to protect property and public order, to counteract terrorism and extremism, [and] to combat crime.
Moreover, the functioning of the [Tula] Region [and] its interactions with other constituent entities of the Russian Federation directly depends on, in particular, the business reputation and [moral] authority (авторитет) of its Governor.”
The applicant only received a copy of the judgment of 22 September 2009 on 22 December 2009. He lodged a statement of appeal, asking for it to be accepted outside the relevant statutory time-limit.
On 18 March 2010 the Regional Court upheld on appeal the District Court’s judgment in its entirety, apart from modifying the amount awarded under the head of court fees.
Requests lodged by the applicant for supervisory review were unsuccessful.
On 14 December 2009 the bailiffs’ service instituted enforcement proceedings.
On 20 May 2010, owing to the applicant’s lack of sufficient funds to pay the award in full, the bailiffs’ service decided to levy execution on the applicant’s household items, including a cupboard, a sofa, a television set, a coffee machine, and a microwave oven, as well as the piano used by the applicant’s minor daughter.
On 21 May 2010 the bailiffs’ service decided – on the grounds that the applicant had not paid Mr D. RUB 1,000,000 voluntarily and for no good reason – to impose on the applicant a 7% enforcement fee. The decision stipulates that the sum of RUB 70,000 was to be recovered from Mr Timakov. However, the applicants and the Government in their observations before the Court submitted that the amount recovered as an enforcement fee was RUB 7,000.
The bailiffs’ service set up monthly withdrawals from the applicant’s bank account, in execution of the judgment of 22 September 2009. The documents contained in the case-file material available to the Court confirm that RUB 61,708.55 was withdrawn in favour of Mr D. and RUB 200 was withdrawn to cover the court fees.
On 8 December 2010 the bailiffs’ service seized from the applicant’s flat some of the items listed in the decision of 20 May 2010, as well as a set of brandy glasses and a decanter, a frying machine, and a stationary exercise bike. The price of the items seized was estimated at RUB 14,900.
The total amount recovered from the applicant through the enforcement of the judgment of 22 September 2009 was RUB 76,808.55.
In parallel with bringing his civil defamation proceedings, on 13 May 2009 Mr D. lodged a request for the institution of criminal proceedings for libel against the applicant in connection with the article entitled “A layabout or a workaholic?” (see paragraph 21 above).
The local branch of the Investigative Committee of the Prosecutor General’s Office (“the investigative authority”) carried out a preinvestigation inquiry, in the course of which the applicant explained that, as a member of the Tula Regional Duma, he had frequently denounced instances of corruption in the region and that he had criticised a corruptionconducive climate for which, in his opinion, Mr D. had been responsible.
On 15 June 2009 the investigative authority declined to open a criminal investigation against the applicant on account of the absence of the occurrence of a crime. That decision was later set aside by a hierarchical superior. The investigative authority subsequently refused two requests lodged by Mr D. for the opening of a criminal investigation. The hierarchical superior quashed each of them, instead demanding an additional inquiry. On 20 August 2009 following an additional inquiry the investigative authority refused for the fourth time to initiate criminal proceedings.
On 22 January 2010 Mr D. reported the crime of libel to the local police.
On 1 February 2010 an investigator of the Town Department of the Interior of Tula opened criminal proceedings under Article 129 § 2 of the Russian Criminal Code (“Libel”), as in force at the material time. Possible sanctions were as follows: a fine of up to RUB 125,000 or in the amount of a convict’s salary for the period of up to a year; 180 to 240 hours of forced labour; twelve to twenty-four months of community service; or three to six months’ detention (ареcт).
On 21 June 2010 the applicant was indicted.
On 24 June 2010 a measure of restraint in the form of an obligation not to leave his place of residence was imposed on the applicant. He challenged it, unsuccessfully.
On 29 November 2010 the justice of the peace of the 57th court circuit of the Zarechenskiy District of Tula found the applicant guilty of libel disseminated in the media (Article 129 § 2 of the Criminal Code, as in force at the material time). However, the justice of the peace relieved the applicant of his punishment (освобождение от наказания) in view of the fact that “his deeds were no longer dangerous to society”.
On 30 June 2011 a public prosecutor decided to drop all charges against the applicant and lodged an application for the criminal proceedings against him to be terminated. On the same date the Zarechenskiy District Court of Tula quashed the conviction of 29 November 2010 and terminated the criminal proceedings against the applicant for lack of the constituent elements of a crime. The ruling was upheld on appeal and became final on 31 August 2011.
In February 2011 Mr D. was questioned by the investigative authority with regard to a criminal investigation into bribery.
In July 2011 Mr D. was dismissed from the office of Governor of the Tula Region. In September 2011 he was officially charged with passive bribery and placed under house arrest.
On 22 July 2013 Mr D. was found guilty of accepting bribes and sentenced to nine years and six months’ imprisonment and given a fine of RUB 900,000. The firstinstance conviction was upheld on appeal and became final.
On 10 December 2013 the applicant lodged a request for the reopening, on account of newly discovered circumstances, of the civil proceedings that had ended with the judgment of 25 August 2009, as upheld on 4 February 2010 (see paragraph 11 above). He argued that his value judgments – declared untruthful by the District Court – had in fact been confirmed by Mr D.’s conviction for bribery. On 3 February 2014 the District Court dismissed the request, which, in its view, concerned the reassessment of evidence. The ruling was upheld on appeal on 5 June 2014.
For the relevant domestic framework and practice concerning civil defamation proceedings see Cheltsova v. Russia (no. 44294/06, §§ 32-34, 13 June 2017).
Article 10 §§ 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure 2002 provides that hearings in all civil courts must be public. A civil case may be heard in camera if it concerns State secrets or the confidentiality of adoption arrangements, or belongs to another category of cases defined by federal law. A hearing could be held in camera upon a request being lodged by a party to the proceedings in question seeking to protect a secret (commercial or otherwise) or her or his privacy, or to prevent the public discussion of certain circumstances where such discussion could cause damage to her or his legitimate interests.