The case originated in two applications (nos. 26581/17 and 31024/17) against the Republic of San Marino lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Italian nationals, Mr David Oddone and Mr Alessandro Pecci (“the applicants”), on 31 March 2017 and 11 April 2017, respectively.
The first applicant was represented by Mr S. Pagliai, a lawyer practising in Firenze, and the second applicant was represented by Mr F. Cocco, a lawyer practising in Rimini. The Government of San Marino (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Daniele and their CoAgent Ms M. Bovi.
The applicants complained, under Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (d) of the Convention, that they had been denied the possibility to cross-examine two coaccused “as witnesses” who had given incriminating statements against them.
On 23 January 2018 the Chamber to which the case was allocated decided to join the applications and to communicate the abovementioned complaint to the respondent Government.
The Italian Government did not make use of their right to intervene in the proceedings (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention).
In February 2019, the President of the Section gave leave, pursuant to Rule 38 § 1 of the Rules of Court, for further factual information and observations from the parties to be included in the case file for the consideration of the Court.
Mr Gilberto Felici, the judge elected in respect of San Marino, withdrew from sitting in the Chamber (Rule 28). The President accordingly appointed Ms K. Pardalos to sit as an ad hoc judge (Article 26 § 4 of the Convention and Rule 29).
The applicants were both born in 1979 and live in Rimini. At the time of the facts of the present case, the first applicant was a journalist and the second applicant a lawyer.
On an unspecified date the Civil Police (Polizia Civile) instituted an investigation concerning some suspicious car accidents which had taken place in San Marino. It had emerged from an information technology check that the first applicant and his parents had been involved in three car accidents in three and a half years, on 26 May 2008, 18 October 2009 and 28 September 2011. The first applicant was always the driver and one or both of the parents were with him. The first applicant was always driving a different car and the insurance companies involved were different each time. However, the kind of accident and the injuries caused to the persons involved was always the same. All three car accidents happened in the same town and two of them in the same street.
On 6 July 2012 the police questioned G. (the driver of the truck which was involved in the third accident) and on 12 July 2012, the police questioned L. (the driver of the other car which was involved in the second accident) as witnesses and therefore without the assistance of counsel. At the beginning of the respective questioning, both G. and L. tried to characterise the relevant facts as ordinary car accidents, providing some details of the accidents to the police. Later on, however, in the course of the same questioning, they retracted their statements and admitted that the first applicant had arranged the accidents and they had all together simulated them in order to claim compensation from their insurance companies.
In particular, G. told the police that he and the first applicant were friends and had simulated the car accident on 28 September 2011. He stated that the first applicant had planned the fraud and had decided to simulate the accident in San Marino, thinking that it would be simpler to obtain compensation there. G. admitted that he had accepted to take part in the criminal plan since he needed money to repay some debts. He stated that he knew that the first applicant’s parents (who on that day were travelling in the first applicant’s car) were also aware of the fraud, since the first applicant himself had told him so.
L. told the police that the second applicant (her boyfriend at the time, who had been travelling in her car on the day of the second accident) and the first applicant were old friends and that they had attended the same high school. In her opinion, the first applicant was “an arrogant guy, full of himself, a socalled knowitall”. She further stated that on an unspecified date the second applicant had informed her that he and the first applicant had planned to simulate a car accident and the former had asked her whether she wished to take part in the fraud. She said that at the beginning she had tried to refuse but after a while the second applicant had managed to convince her. Finally, she had consented to participate in the plan since she had needed money in order to repay some debts. She later added that she also needed it to pay for medical treatment in connection with the multiple sclerosis from which she suffered. She admitted that on 18 October 2009, while accompanied by the second applicant, she had intentionally “rearended” the first applicant’s car. She recalled that the first applicant had been accompanied by his mother and that after the accident he had pretended to be upset and had called the police in order to make the accident appear more credible. She told the police that in the afternoon or the day after, the second applicant had gone to the hospital and that almost one year later, the first applicant had given her approximately 5,000 euros (EUR). L. specified that she had deposited the sum of money in her current account.
On 13 July 2012 G. appeared voluntarily before the police. He added to his statement that a few days after the accident of 28 September 2011 the first applicant had given him EUR 2,000 in cash, as previously agreed.
By a report of 31 July 2012, signed by a police officer, P., the police informed the investigating judge (Commissario della Legge Inquirente) about the results of the police investigation and on an unspecified date the judge opened a criminal investigation (istruttoria) for fraud.
On 6 August 2012 the investigating judge classified the case file (i.e. it could not be disclosed). No reasons were provided.
By a letter of request of 22 August 2012 the investigating judge asked the Italian judicial authorities to supply the phone records (tabulati telefonici) showing the list of phone numbers called by the persons involved in the investigation, for the period of a month prior to each of the car accidents.
On 31 August 2012 the investigating judge questioned both G. and L., with the assistance of their counsel but without the presence of the other accused persons. The judge, in person, informed G. and L. of the charges against them. G. and L. confirmed their previous statements and added some other details. In particular, G. added that when he had been summoned for questioning by the police, he had sent an email to the first applicant asking him what was going on and that on that same day the first applicant had called him saying that it was a matter of little importance and that he could even not show up at the questioning, but that in any case he [G.] had to deny any connection with the first applicant and had to confirm that the accident had been real. L. added to her previous statement that approximately two weeks previously [midAugust], the second applicant had shown up at her work place in Italy. He had told her that he had been informed by the first applicant about the ongoing investigation in San Marino and asked her to withdraw her previous statements and to claim that the accidents had been real (confermare la dinamica del sinistro). L. stated that she had replied that changing her version of the facts would have made her nervous and she had therefore cut him short.
On 20 November 2012 C., S. and F., three persons involved in the first car accident, testified before the investigating judge that it had been a real accident and that they did not know the first and second applicants.
In consequence, on an unspecified date the charge in connection with the first car accident was dropped.
On 17 July 2013, in response to the abovementioned letter of request, the Italian judicial authorities sent the requested phone records (list of phone calls).
On 29 November 2013 the investigating judge declassified the case file.
By a decision of 2 December 2013 the judge informed the applicants, in writing, of the charges against them and summoned them to appear for questioning on 20 February 2014.
By a joint written submission of 20 February 2014, counsel for the first and second applicants requested that the investigation be reopened in order for their clients to crossexamine the witnesses already heard, including L. and G. As to the questioning scheduled for that day, counsel stated that the first and second applicants had availed themselves of their right to remain silent but that they were willing to be questioned once the above-mentioned investigative activities had been repeated.
In addition, counsel for the first applicant informed the judge that the police investigation had been directed by a police officer, J.B., who held a grudge against the first applicant and could not be considered impartial. In particular, at the time of the police investigation, criminal proceedings on the basis of a complaint by the first applicant for defamation had been ongoing in Italy against J.B. and three other named officers of the Civil Police, for acts allegedly committed to the detriment of the first applicant. Furthermore, the second applicant had been legal counsel for the first applicant in those proceedings.
By a decision of 26 February 2014 the investigating judge rejected the request to reopen the investigation. The judge, inter alia, specified that (i) G. and L. had made their statements incriminating the applicants not only to the police but also before her, and that only the statements before her had been used; (ii) as to the alleged animosity of J.B., the first applicant had not complained about any specific shortcomings in the investigation able to show that it had been carried out irregularly; (iii) accused persons (prevenuti) were not allowed to take part in the questioning of [other] coaccused (coimputati); (iv) it was not necessary to re-examine C., S. and F., since they had testified about the car accident of 26 May 2008, and that charge had been dropped; (v) the accused persons had been repeatedly summoned for questioning during the investigation but they [the applicants] had never shown up; (vi) the accused persons [the applicants] had just applied for a generic repetition of the whole investigation, without submitting any specific request; and (vii) the investigation had been sufficient in order to establish the relevant facts and behaviours.
On the same day the investigating judge issued an indictment against, inter alia, the applicants as well as G. and L. on a charge of fraud to the detriment of insurance companies, under Articles 73 and 204 § 3 (2) of the Criminal Code. In particular, the first applicant was charged in respect of the last two car accidents; L. and the second applicant were charged in respect of the accident which had taken place on 18 October 2009; and G. was charged in respect of the one that had taken place on 28 September 2011. The list of the prosecution witnesses to be heard at the trial included solely police officer P. On 28 February 2014 the indictment was notified to the Attorney General (Procuratore del Fisco), who would undertake the prosecution of the case, and to the first-instance judge (Commissario della Legge Decidente).
On an unspecified date, by a decree, the first-instance judge summoned, inter alia, the applicants as well as G. and L. (all in their capacity of accused persons) to the first hearing of the trial, on the basis of the abovementioned indictment. The investigation file was automatically admitted as evidence.
At the beginning of a hearing on 17 November 2014, the judge acknowledged the presence of the first applicant as well as G. and L., assisted by counsel. The second applicant was not present in person but was represented by counsel. Counsel made submissions on their preliminary issues (questioni preliminari). Counsel for the first applicant reiterated that the police investigation had been irregular, given that some named police officers (including the abovementioned J.B.) held a grudge against the first applicant. Moreover, the first and second applicants’ counsel insisted that there had been a violation of the applicants’ right of defence in so far as they had not been able to question L. and G. Further, among other things, the secrecy/classification regime had been applied by means of an unreasoned decision and had been prolonged beyond the maximum timelimit provided for by law. Thus, they requested that the investigation be reopened.
By an interim decision of 28 November 2014 the firstinstance judge considered that even if the alleged animosity between the first applicant and the named police officers (including J.B.) were true, all the reports made by the police in the course of their investigation had been signed by another officer, P., and not by any of the officers indicated by the first applicant. It was true that J.B. had taken part in G.’s questioning but he had done so in the presence of another named officer. In any case, G. had been heard also by the investigating judge, thus the applicant’s request was unfounded and a delaying tactic.
As to the argument that the decision to classify the case file had been unreasoned and that the secrecy/classification regime had lasted for a longer period than the maximum time-limit provided for by law, the judge stated that he could share the disappointment of the defence. Nevertheless, in any case, the law did not provide for any consequence arising from the violation of such rules by an investigating judge. Moreover, in practice, there had been no violation of the right of defence. The judge referred to the investigating judge’s decision of 26 February 2014 (see paragraph 25 above) and the judgment of the Judge of Criminal Appeals of 7 October 2014 in criminal proceedings no. 1456/09, which stated:
“The procedural system in force does not provide for any rules concerning the collection of evidence and its admission (utilizzabilità). Thus, the principle, which is typical of adversarial systems, according to which a judge can base his decision only on evidence which had been collected in adversarial proceedings is not established (rigorosamente affermato) to the extent that the judge is obliged to exclude evidence that does not meet the above-mentioned requirement.”
On the same day, the first applicant’s counsel requested that sixteen witnesses (including J.B.) be heard.
On 13 February 2015 Officer P. testified that it had been him who had instructed the officers (who had carried out the investigation) to question L. and G. but not the applicants, since the former were the only persons involved in the case who had not had repeated car accidents (recidiva amministrativa).
On 11 March 2015 S.P. (the other police officer who had questioned G. during the police investigation) testified that J.B. had also taken part (with her) in the questioning of G. and he had also put some questions to him, although he had not been on duty that day. S.P. added that it had been her who had convinced G. to confess.
At the same hearing Officer P.G. testified that he had tasked J.B. with the questioning of L., since he (P.G.) had had some urgent tasks to carry out on that day. However, while J.B. had been carrying out the questioning, P.G. had been present in a connecting room.
On the same day counsel reiterated their request to crossexamine J.B. The judge rejected their request, considering it irrelevant to the proceedings.
At a hearing of 6 May 2015 the first applicant released “spontaneous declarations” (dichiarazione spontanea) and stated that he had never defrauded anybody in his life and had never committed any offence. Counsel for the second applicant asked the judge to declare inadmissible any evidence collected in violation of the law and to reopen the investigation before the investigating judge. Furthermore, L. and G.’s counsel, on the basis that they had given a “useful and spontaneous confession”, which had not been withdrawn during the trial, requested that the judge apply a reduced penalty. In the light of the applicable reduced penalty, counsel requested that the offence be declared timebarred with regard to L.
By a judgment filed in the relevant registry on 19 August 2015, the firstinstance judge found all the accused persons guilty of the offences as charged. The judge sentenced the first applicant to two years and five months’ imprisonment and imposed a prohibition on holding public office and exercising political rights for one year and five months. The second applicant as well as L. and G. were sentenced to two years’ imprisonment and prohibited from holding public office and exercising political rights for one year.
The judge did not apply (to L. and G.) the domestic-law provision whereby, if an accused person had made a “useful and spontaneous confession”, this could serve as a mitigating circumstance (see relevant domestic law, paragraph 57 below), notwithstanding the fact that G. and L.’s confessions had had some usefulness (una qualche utilità) for the investigation. In the judge’s view, the application of such a provision to the position of L. and G. would have caused a substantial injustice to the detriment of the other accused persons. According to the judge, the reduced penalty deriving from the mitigating circumstance would have been determined not by a personal initiative on the part of L. and G., but by the decision of the police to summon for questioning only some of the accused persons (L. and G.), but not the applicants. Thus the persons who had not been summoned had been denied the same opportunity to deliver a useful confession.
As to the alleged violation of the applicants’ right of defence, the judge reiterated the considerations that he had set out in his decision of 28 November 2014 (see paragraph 29 above). In particular, he considered that the examination of L. and G. before the investigating judge had consisted of questioning (interrogatori), and that the applicants did not therefore have the right to be informed thereof. In the judge’s opinion, questioning could not be considered as an act aimed at “collecting and establishing evidence” (raccolta e formazione della prova), given that it was primarily aimed at protecting the accused’s right to defend himself (strumento di difesa e garanzia). An accused person did not have an obligation to make selfincriminatory statements or give supporting evidence (elementi di riscontro) against his or her interests.
The judge held that the finding of criminal responsibility on the part of the applicants had not derived solely from G. and L.’s statements. In the judge’s opinion such statements may have helped the investigation but had certainly not represented the only element. In particular, the police had already found the evident and conspicuous anomaly of two car accidents which had occurred in the same street and involved the same driver (the first applicant). Moreover, the phone records had shown that some of the accused persons had had contacts before one of the accidents.
The first and second applicants, as well as G. and L., appealed.
The first and second applicants complained that the investigating judge had not provided any reasons for her decision to classify the case file, thus contravening the relevant law. Moreover, the maximum duration of the classification regime had been exceeded, since the file had not been disclosed to the applicants for eighteen months. According to the first and second applicants, the secrecy of the investigation had breached their right of defence, in particular in the light of the fact that they had been unable to participate in the examination of witnesses before the investigating judge. In addition, they complained that the investigating judge had discriminated against them since, unlike L. and G., they had been unable to take part in the investigation and to have access to the case file, which had been classified. Moreover, at the trial the judge had rejected their request to crossexamine L. and G., which had been essential since their statements were the only evidence against the applicants. For all those reasons they requested that the investigation (in particular the part which had been carried out under the classification regime) be declared null and void and that the evidence collected at the investigation stage be excluded, in the light of a breach of Article 15 of the Constitution (Dichiarazione dei Diritti) and Article 6 of the Convention.
The first and second applicants also claimed that the acquisition of the records concerning their mobile phones had been illegitimate given that the European Court of Justice, by a judgment of 8 April 2014, had declared Directive No. 2006/24/EC on the retention of data, invalid. In their opinion, the acquisition of their personal data had also been in breach of Article 8 of the Convention. In particular, the second applicant emphasised that the data collected from the Italian authorities regarded phone calls between him and the first applicant in 2011, during a period in which the former had been legal counsel for the latter in the abovementioned criminal proceedings against J.B. and in other proceedings. Those phone calls were made two years after the car accident of which the second applicant had been charged (which dated back to 2009), and for this reason they were not relevant to his case.
Lastly, the first and second applicants reiterated their request that J.B. be heard for the reasons mentioned previously.
L., via counsel, requested the application of the provision of domestic law whereby a “useful and spontaneous confession” could serve as a mitigating circumstance and, consequently, in the light of the applicable reduced penalty, that the offence be declared timebarred. She specified that her statements before the police had been made exclusively for the purpose of obtaining a reduced sentence, an opportunity which had been proposed to her by the police.
On an unspecified date G. withdrew his appeal.
By a judgment of 10 October 2016, published on 12 October 2016, the Judge of Criminal Appeals upheld the first-instance judgment concerning all the applicants, but modified it in respect of L. The judge dismissed L.’s case given that it had become time-barred due to the application of the mitigating circumstance of a “useful and spontaneous confession”. The judge further declared G.’s appeal inadmissible given that after having submitted it, he had expressly withdrawn it.
The Judge of Criminal Appeals acknowledged that the fact that the investigating judge had not given any reasons justifying her decision to classify the case file had breached the relevant law, but explained that the law did not provide that such a violation leads to the nullity of the ensuing acts. In addition, the decision to declassify the investigation only for some of the accused persons and not for the applicants had to be considered fully legitimate, since reasons for a classification regime could exist for some of the accused persons and not for others. Moreover, the relevant law expressly afforded the investigating judge the power to classify only some specific acts of the proceedings (partial classification).
As to the fact that neither the applicants nor their defence had taken part in the questioning of L. and G. during the investigation and that the latter had not been crossexamined at the trial, the appeal judge considered that (i) the investigating judge had legitimately questioned L. and G. without the presence of the applicants, since for the latter the investigation had been classified at that time; and (ii) the statements of G. and L. before the investigating judge by which they had accused the applicants had been correctly admitted as evidence and used in the judgment, given that the Code of Criminal Procedure did not contain any rule on the admissibility of the evidence to be used. In the domestic system the admissibility of evidence depended solely on the free opinion (libero convincimento) of the judge as to its reliability. In order to assess the reliability of evidence, a judge had solely to take into account the ways in which the evidence in question had been acquired (modalità di formazione della prova); however, he was not obliged to disregard it, irrespective of how it had been obtained.
As to the admissibility as evidence of the phone records sent by the Italian judicial authorities, the appeal judge considered that the judgment cited by the applicants, even though of great interest, did not have any influence on the rules of admissibility of evidence in San Marino, since the domestic system did not provide for any restrictions or regulations on the point. A direct application of that judgment in the domestic system of each State – in the sense of prohibiting the acquisition of data concerning phone calls – was neither evident (concesso) nor obligatory. Thus, the plea was manifestly ill-founded.
Examining the case on the merits, the judge considered that it was not true that the only evidence against the applicants had been the incriminating statements of L. and G. On the contrary, those statements had just confirmed a series of unequivocal elements which had been listed in the indictment and which would have been sufficient on their own to consider the commission of the fraud plausible on a logical level. The phone calls between the first applicant and G. on the days prior to the car accident of 28 September 2011 had not only confirmed, beyond reasonable doubt, G.’s statement incriminating the first applicant, but had also shown that the car accident that had occurred two years earlier (on 18 October 2009) between the first and second applicants had not been a matter of pure chance. This was so, a fortiori in light of the fact that an alternative explanation (which not even the first applicant had attempted to provide) would have been completely implausible. It was not credible that the first applicant had been involved in two car accidents with people with whom he was already acquainted, involving his relatives and causing the same injuries, and in the same street in San Marino. Moreover, the numerous phone calls between the first and second applicants had confirmed the existence of a well-established relationship, albeit also a professional one, between the two accused. Therefore, the incriminating statements of G. and L. had not represented unexpected and decisive revelations but had just confirmed that the first applicant could not be considered so unlucky as to have had two such peculiar car accidents.
In the judge’s view, even accepting the existence of animosity between the first applicant and the police officer, J.B., that factor did not undermine the credibility of the accusing witnesses, G. and L. In particular, it was not credible that J.B. had made up the facts of the offence, since the car accidents (with all their above-mentioned particularities) had really happened and the insurance companies had actually paid compensation. Nor was it credible that L. and G., who did not hold any personal resentment against the first applicant, would have confessed to an offence for the sole purpose of backing officer J.B. in his alleged “revenge”.
As to the position of the second applicant (who had been involved in the accident of 18 October 2009 while travelling in the car which had caused it), irrespective of the extent of his material contribution to the fictitious accident, he had acted as an intermediary between L. and the first applicant. He had dragged L. into the criminal plan to avoid directly taking part in it, given his friendship with the first applicant and his parents. Despite those strong indications, the second applicant had not even bothered to attend trial to offer a different version of the facts.
In accepting L.’s “useful and spontaneous confession” as a mitigating circumstance, the judge considered that L.’s change of mind (ripensamento) and her decision to confess had been determined by the favourable consequences which had been proposed to her – namely, the possibility to obtain a reduced sentence – and not by the objective existence of evidentiary elements against her. Moreover, her contribution had been precise and detailed, and the fact that she had not participated in the trial had not affected the admissibility of her earlier statements made before the investigating judge.
In 2018, pending proceedings before this Court, the first applicant instituted revision proceedings before the Judge of Extraordinary Remedies in Criminal Matters asking the court to review the judgment of the Judge of Criminal Appeals of 10 October 2016, published on 12 October 2016. He raised, two main substantive issues, firstly concerning the competence of the Judge of Extraordinary Remedies in Criminal Matters under Article 13 in connection with his complaints of an unfair trial and secondly the existence of new evidence, in his view decisive for the outcome of his criminal case.
By a judgment of 8 January 2019 the Judge of Extraordinary Remedies in Criminal Matters rejected his request. Relying on judgment No. 6 of the constitutional jurisdiction (namely, il Collegio Garante della Costituzionalita` delle Norme) of 1 August 2007 the judge considered that it had the competence to examine Convention complaints. It also noted that the first applicant had already brought proceedings before the ECtHR who had communicated the case to the respondent Government. However, even assuming the case was not inadmissible on the basis of the principle that the applicant having chosen one remedy he cannot have recourse to another (electa una via non datur recursus ad alteram), further considerations applied. The judge held that to enable consideration of such a request based on the extraordinary competence of the Judge of Extraordinary Remedies in Criminal Matters despite revision proceedings having originally been limited to the exhaustive list of grounds arising from Article 200 of the Code, such request would nevertheless have to comply with the same six months’ rule applicable before the ECtHR. It followed that the applicant’s Convention complaints were inadmissible as being out of time, them having been lodged more than six months after the appeal judgment in the proceedings complained of. He considered the remaining complaints inadmissible as manifestly ill-founded.
Article 90 § 2 and Article 204 of the Criminal Code read, in so far as relevant, as follows:
Article 90 (mitigating and aggravating circumstances)
“(2) The judge may apply a penalty reduced by one degree (la pena di grado inferiore) ... if a useful and spontaneous confession has been given (quando la confessione sia stata spontaneamente ed utilmente resa).”
Article 204 (fraud)
“Whosoever secures an unfair profit for themselves or for others, by misleading another through deception or misrepresentation, shall be punished by imprisonment of the second degree as well as by a daily fine or prohibition of the second degree ...
The above-mentioned penalty is increased by one degree:
...
if the offence was committed in order to obtain compensation from an insurance company ...”
In a judgment of 9 September 2010 (in criminal proceedings no. 350/2007) the Judge of Criminal Appeals stated that the usefulness of a confession had to be assessed in the light of its evidentiary value (capacità probatoria) as to the constitutive elements of the offence. The usefulness of the confession had to be substantial, in the sense that through the confession the judge had to be able to obtain evidence of a fact that otherwise would have been impossible or difficult to prove.
Article 200 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, concerning revision proceedings, in so far as relevant reads as follows:
“A revision of a judgment finding guilt or acquittal, with the application of security measures or confiscation, ... which have become res judicata, is permissible:
(a) If new evidence comes to light which alone or in conjunction with the evidence already adduced, show that the applicant must be acquitted...;
(b) If the finding is based on a falsehood or other crime;
(c) If the facts established for the purposes of that finding are not reconcilable with the facts established in another criminal judgment which is final.
(d) If the European Court of Human Rights has found that the criminal proceedings had been in violation of the Convention, and the ensuing serious negative consequences can only be remedied by means of the revision of the judgment.
... [concerning who may lodge such a request]”
According to Article 202 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, a revision request has to be submitted within one year from the relevant facts leading to the reasons mentioned in the respective sub-articles of Article 220.
Law No. 93 of 17 June 2008 concerning criminal procedure rules and the confidentiality of criminal investigations reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
Section 3 (Right to defence)
“(1) Except in the cases set out in section 5 below, the investigating judge carries out all the investigative activity in general, including that related to the collection of evidence, particularly its acquisition (formazione), while safeguarding the rights of the accused, the prerogatives of the Attorney General and the rights of private parties as protected by criminal law.
(2) The accused, assisted by a legal representative, and the Attorney General have the right to present their own defence, submissions and applications. They may also examine and make copies of all the acts in the proceedings, including the report of the crime. The investigating judge must ensure that the parties can participate or be represented at each stage of the investigation.
(5) The judicial police are tasked with searching for elements useful to the investigation, on their own motion, in compliance with the guarantees provided by law, unless a judge has given different and specific orders (salvo diverse e specifiche indicazioni impartite dal giudice). In any case, the offence notice and all the elements useful to the ongoing investigation must be communicated to a judge within the shortest possible time.”
Section 5 (Investigation and investigative acts under temporary classification or as an urgent matter)
“(1) Where there are specific reasons of an exceptional nature which lead to a consideration that the investigation as a whole can only be carried out successfully if classified, the investigating judge may, by means of a reasoned decision, order classification on a temporary basis, thus derogating from the provisions of sections 3 and 4.
(2) The same procedure applies when only some of the acts should be subject to temporary classification, or when the necessity for such an order emerges subsequently.
(3) The application of temporary classification to an investigation and investigative acts ... may last only as long as is strictly necessary for the performance of the relevant acts; it may not in any event exceed six months from the registration of the report of the crime and may be extended only once, for a maximum period of another three months, if there exist serious reasons for so doing.
...”
In a decision of 3 February 2014, in criminal proceedings no. 751/RNR/2013, following revocation of the secrecy/classification regime, the investigating judge, relying on Section 3 (2) of Law No. 93 of 17 June 2008, assigned a term of ten days to the only defendant in the case in order to be able to request a repetition of the witnesses’ (victims’) testimony in the presence of the accused’s lawyers and the Attorney General.