The case concerns the alleged violation of the applicant’s right of access to a court because of the national courts’ omission to render a decision in the applicant’s case against one of the opposing parties to the proceedings.
The applicant was born in 1959 and lives in İzmir. He was represented by Mr G. Yolyapan, a lawyer practising in İzmir.
The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, and as they appear from the documents submitted by them, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant brought compensation proceedings in two separate cases against a construction company, P. İnşaat ve Gıda Sanayi Tic. Ltd. Şti. (hereafter “the Company”), and the Company’s representative, U.P., before the İzmir Consumer Court (hereafter “the Consumer Court”). In his petition, the applicant submitted that he had purchased a house from the Company and U.P. but that they had failed to complete the construction work in accordance with the terms of the contract. The applicant further stated that U.P. was jointly and severally liable with the company since he was one of the signatories to the contract in the capacity of entrepreneur of the construction project.
On 31 March 2010 the Consumer Court joined the two cases, considering that there were de facto and de jure links between them.
On 30 June 2011, the Consumer Court ruled in favour of the applicant and ordered the Company to pay him compensation. However, the Consumer Court did not deliver any ruling in respect of U.P.
On 2 August 2011 the Company appealed against the Consumer Court’s judgment. The Company’s appeal was served on the applicant on 8 August 2011.
On 5 September 2011 the applicant filed a cross-appeal (katılma yolu ile temyiz) in which he maintained that the Consumer Court’s judgment had to be overruled as it had not delivered a ruling concerning U.P. He argued in that connection that he had signed the contract with U.P., who should also have been held liable for compensation.
On 22 December 2011 the Court of Cassation upheld the judgment at first instance.
On 19 March 2012 the applicant petitioned for rectification of the Court of Cassation’s decision, arguing once more that the first-instance court had omitted to render a decision in respect of U.P.
On 20 June 2012 the Court of Cassation dismissed the applicant’s request for rectification.
It appears from the documents of the case file that the applicant did not receive the amount of compensation awarded by the national courts because, at the material time, the company had been placed in liquidation.
In their observations, the Government informed the Court of the following. On 11 May 2018 the İzmir Chief Public Prosecutor requested a copy of the case file from the Consumer Court in order to transfer it to the Ministry of Justice so that the Government could present their observations to the Court in the context of the application lodged by the applicant.
Upon the above-mentioned request of the İzmir Chief Public Prosecutor, the Consumer Court decided to re-examine the case on its own initiative. The Consumer Court first disjoined the case brought against U.P. and then notified the parties of the date of the hearing.
On 28 June 2018 the Consumer Court dismissed the applicant’s case against U.P. for incompatibility ratione personae. In its reasoned judgment, the Consumer Court stressed that it had erroneously omitted to render a judgment in respect of U.P. Referring mainly to the case-law of the Court of Cassation, it further noted that it was possible to re-examine a case concerning a party in respect of which no judgment had been pronounced (see paragraph 20 below).
On 3 July 2018 the applicant filed an appeal against this judgment. The proceedings are still pending before the Court of Cassation.
Article 388 § 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Law no. 1086), which was in force at the material time, provided that in the concluding section of their judgments the civil courts had to indicate clearly for each claim the liabilities imposed on and the rights granted to the parties, in a manner that did not give rise to any suspicion or doubt. Article 297 § 2 of the new Code of Civil Procedure (“Law no. 6100”) which entered into force on 1 October 2011 contains a similar provision to the one in Law no. 1086.
By virtue of the provisions of Articles 426/G and 426/H of Law no. 1086, it was possible for a party to cross-appeal against a decision by means of a petition in reply filed within fifteen days of the date on which the opposing party’s petition for appeal was communicated to him or her.
Article 175 of Law no. 1086 provided that the operation of the courts was suspended between 1 August and 5 September.
Article 177 of Law no. 1086 stipulated that an additional period of seven days had to be added at the end of the recess period, without the need for a judicial decision, if a time-limit prescribed in Law no. 1086 coincided with the recess period.
The Government submitted that in the event of no ruling being pronounced in respect of one of the parties to the proceedings, the first instance courts could re-examine the case and render a decision as regards the party in respect of which no ruling had been made. The Government submitted examples from the case-law of the Court of Cassation in which it was emphasised that a case cannot be deemed to have become final if a court omits to render a decision concerning a claim or in respect of a party to proceedings (see, in particular, the decision of the Civil Chamber of the Court of Cassation of 29 April 2010, 2010/3736 E., 2010/7646 K).