The case originated in an application (no. 60041/13) against the Hellenic Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) on 20 September 2013 by thirty-three Greek nationals, an Albanian national and an Indian national, whose names appear in the annexed list. They were represented by Mr K. Tsitselikis and Mr A. Spathis, lawyers practising in Thessaloniki.
The Greek Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent’s delegates, Mr. I. Bakopoulos and Ms V. Stroumpouli, Senior Adviser and Legal Representative respectively to the Legal Council of State. The Albanian Government did not make use of their right to intervene (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention).
The applicants alleged that they had been detained in inhuman and degrading conditions and that they had not had effective domestic remedies at their disposal in that connection.
On 28 October 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicants and the Government each filed observations on the admissibility and merits, in accordance with Article 54 § 2 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants were or are still detained in Korydallos prison in Athens.
Among them, applicant no. 1 was released on 20 February 2009, applicants no. 2 and 4 were released on 1 July 2013, applicant no. 5 was released on 21 June 2013, applicant no. 12 was released on 4 November 2013, applicant no. 13 was released on 22 August 2013, applicant no. 25 was released on 30 October 2013, applicant no. 26 was released on 24 May 2013, applicant no. 27 was released on 17 July 2013, applicant no. 30 was released on 5 July 2013, applicant no. 32 was released on 2 October 2013, applicant no. 33 was released on 4 October 2013, applicant no. 34 was released on 10 May 2013 and applicant no. 35 was transferred to Larissa Prison on 20 June 2013.
The applicants alleged that the prison had held 2,400 prisoners while it had been designed to accommodate 700. The applicants had been detained in wings A, B, D and E in various cells which all had measured 9 sq. m, including the sanitary facilities, and accommodated four or five prisoners; the living space for each prisoner had therefore been approximately 2 sq. m or even less. Cells designed for one person had had two beds and two or three worn-out mattresses on the floor.
The toilet facilities had been partially separated from the rest of the cells. Access to natural light and ventilation had been inadequate. In addition, there had been insufficient heating and hot water. Cells had been dirty and overrun with cockroaches and other pests and no attempt had been made to exterminate them. Healthy prisoners had been held together with sick prisoners, resulting in their exposure to contagious diseases. There had been no adequate medical care, in particular as regards psychological and physical health.
The inmates had been confined to their cells for sixteen to seventeen hours per day, as recreational or educational activities had not been provided. More specifically, inmates had been required to stay in their cells as follows: from 6.30 p.m. (on average) to 8.30 a.m. and from 11.30 a.m. to 2.45 p.m. every day. They had had to take their meals, which were of poor quality and nutritional value, inside their cells.
Moreover, the prison had been understaffed and had not been able to secure the prisoners’ safety.
On 21 June 2013 the applicants along with other prisoners lodged a complaint with the prison authorities, protesting about their conditions of detention, but did not receive any reply.
The Government asserted that irrespective of the number of prisoners in each cell, which in any case had not been constant, prisoners had had access to a large yard daily from 8 a.m. to 12 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to thirty minutes before sunset. The prison had had a central heating system and hot water had been available on a daily basis in the morning and in the afternoon. Prisoners additionally had been able to use electric heating devices. Every cell had been furnished with a washbasin, a toilet, wooden shelves, a table and chairs.
All the cells had had a window ensuring sufficient light and ventilation. The cells had been regularly disinfected and had been cleaned twice a day by cleaning crews consisting of detainees. All the applicants except applicants no. 4, no. 17, no. 26 and no. 28 had been engaged in this activity.
As regards prisoners’ meals, the Government submitted the menu of two random weeks to demonstrate that they had been comprised of a variety of food. Meals had been served in the cells and prisoners had eaten at in-cell tables.
Prisoners had been able to play sport and each prisoner had had a personal television set with a headset. In addition, they had had the opportunity to take up one of the 640 jobs available, to take part in educational courses or to attend the “second chance” school. The renovated room of the reading club and the events hall of the “second chance” school had been available as recreational areas.
All the detainees had had access to the prison’s infirmary which had been open twenty-four hours per day and there had been twenty doctors of different specialities, including two psychiatrists who had offered consultations to the prisoners. In cases of emergency, inmates had been transferred to the Korydallos Prison Hospital or to an external hospital.
The relevant domestic law and practice is described in the Court’s judgment in the case of Kanakis v. Greece (no. 2) (no. 40146/11, §§ 62-68, 12 December 2013).
.  Following its visit to Greece in January 2011, the CPT published its report dated 10 January 2012 (CPT/Inf (2012) 1). It stated:
Korydallos Men’s Prison was holding 2,345 inmates for an official capacity of 700. The CPT has been highlighting the necessity for the authorities to take action to drastically reduce the occupancy levels in the prison since 1993. Despite repeated recommendations by the CPT for the numbers held in each single-occupancy cell (9.5m²) to be reduced to no more than two prisoners, the authorities have taken no action to date. At the time of the 2011 visit, the delegation observed once again that the cells continued to accommodate three, four or even five inmates.
.  The CPT visited Greece again in April 2013 and in its report dated 16 October 2014 (CPT/Inf (2014) 26) stated:
Korydallos Men’s Prison has been described in previous visit reports. At the time of the 2013 visit, it was accommodating more than 2,300 prisoners for an official capacity of 840. During the 2013 visit, just like during previous visits, the delegation observed that cells originally designed for single-occupancy and measuring 9.5 m² were routinely used for three or even four inmates. The delegation found cells in which prisoners had to sleep on mattresses placed on the floor in the toilet areas, due to lack of available space. These are merely examples of a generally bad situation that persists across the entire facility.
Cell A-3 in wing E measures 36 m² and was equipped with 16 beds. However, at the time of the visit it was accommodating 27 inmates, both remand and convicted prisoners, leaving less than 1.5 m² per person. Nine of the prisoners were sleeping on the concrete floor on extremely filthy and torn mattresses, two of them in the toilet area. The cell was infested with cockroaches and bed bugs and there was hardly any space left within which to move. Cell B-3 in wing E contained 14 beds and held 19 prisoners, with five prisoners sleeping on mattresses on the floor. There was no artificial light available at all during the night, and prisoners had to step on their cellmates in order to access the toilet, which was filthy. Further, the delegation noted that the garbage containers in the corridor outside the cell were full of food waste, which had not been emptied for some time and emitted a foul smell.
...
At Korydallos Men’s Prison, the situation as regards health-care resources had deteriorated significantly since the 2011 visit. The four general practitioner (GP) posts had been abolished, with the result that not a single full-time doctor worked in the establishment. Instead, a rotation system of visiting doctors from local clinics had been put in place shortly before the delegation’s visit, with various general practitioners each attending one morning a week for three hours, giving a total GP presence of a mere 15 hours per week. Such a limited presence of qualified doctors is totally insufficient to provide adequate health-care to more than 2,300 prisoners. However, at the time of the visit, not even these 15 hours of presence were guaranteed; the delegation observed that the scheduled visiting doctors sometimes failed to show up without giving any prior notification. Further, every two months, a new batch of doctors from another hospital in Athens was scheduled to assume the task of visiting GP at Korydallos Men’s Prison. Such a system inevitably leads to a lack of continuity, thereby hindering the ability to provide quality medical care. In the CPT’s view, it is essential for such a large prison, which in addition serves as the point of entry to the penitentiary system for many prisoners, to have the equivalent of at least four full-time general practitioners.
...
The situation remained particularly acute at Korydallos Men’s Prison, where a wing of some 400 inmates was usually staffed by only one or two prison officers during the day. At night there were a mere eight officers on duty, who were in charge of the entire prison with a population of more than 2,300 inmates.