The case originated in an application (no. 22539/04) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Ms Lyudmila Aleksandrovna Lyakhovetskaya (“the applicant”), on 9 June 2004.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Y. Zaytsev.
On 5 December 2005 the Court decided to communicate the complaint under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention concerning the nonenforcement of the judgment in the applicant's favour to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1946 and lives in .
In February 1999 the applicant resigned from her position of the deputy district prosecutor at the Odessa Regional Prosecutors' Office (“the Prosecutors' Office,” Прокуратура Одеської області).
On 5 May 1999 the Odessa Medical Expert Commission (“the Expert Commission,” Медико-соціальна експертиза Одеської обласної лікарні) recognised the applicant as falling within the third category of invalidity (третя група інвалідності) resulting from occupational disease (diabetes).
In August 1999 the applicant instituted administrative proceedings in the Zhovtnevy District Court of Odessa (“the Zhovtnevy Court,” Жовтневий районний суд м. Одеси) seeking to oblige the Odessa Regional Prosecutor to fill out an insurance form enabling her to obtain a lump sum in professional disability compensation from the State Insurance Company “Oranta” (Національна Акціонерна Страхова Компанія “Оранта”).
On 6 December 1999 the  ordered the Prosecutor to fill out the form. This judgment was not appealed against and became final on 16 December 1999.
On 14 January 2000 the Prosecutors' Office withheld the case-file from the  to decide, in accordance with the powers vested in it by law at the material time, whether to lodge a protest against the judgment of 6 December 1999 in supervisory review proceedings.
On 6 October 2000, following the applicant's complaint about an unjustified lengthy withholding of the case-file, the Prosecutors' Office returned it to the .
On 23 October 2000 the  issued a writ of execution and the Zhovtnevy District Bailiffs' Service of Odessa (“the Bailiffs,” Відділ Державної виконавчої служби Жовтневого районного управління юстиції м. Одеси) initiated enforcement proceedings in respect of the above judgment.
On 8 August 2001 the Bailiffs adjourned the enforcement proceedings on the ground that the Prosecutors' Office had lodged a cassation appeal against the judgment of 6 December 1999 with the Supreme Court, in accordance with the transitional provisions of the new law of 21 June 2001, amending the Code of Civil Procedure.
On 20 September 2001 the Supreme Court rejected the Prosecutors' Office's request for leave to appeal in cassation.
On 8 February 2002 the Prosecutors' Office instituted civil proceedings in the Suvorovsky District Court of Odessa (“the ,” Суворовський районний суд м. Одеси) against the applicant and the Expert Commission, alleging that the applicant's diabetes was not an occupational disease. On 8 April 2005 the  rejected the claims of the Prosecutors' Office. This judgment was not appealed against and became final in May 2005.
In the meantime, on 14 January 2004 the Bailiffs informed the applicant that the writ of execution in respect of the judgment of 6 December 1999 had been lost and advised her to request a duplicate from the . In 2005 the building of the Prosecutors' Office was set on fire and the documents concerning further course of the enforcement proceedings were lost again.
On 18 February 2006 the Bailiffs resumed the enforcement proceedings and on 9 March 2006 the Odessa Regional Prosecutor filled out the applicant's insurance form. On 13 March 2006 the enforcement proceedings were terminated as completed.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution read as follows:
“... Judicial decisions are adopted by the courts in the name of Ukraine and are mandatory for execution throughout the entire .”
The relevant provisions of the Law read as follows:
Article 50
“...Life and health of the employees of the Prosecutors' Office are subject to mandatory State insurance at the expense of the respective local budgets in the amount of a ten-year allowance payable [to the employee] in his last position.”
Paragraphs 1 and 3 of the regulation provide that employees of the Prosecutors' Office be insured with the National Insurance Company “Oranta.” Paragraph 7(b) provides that employees, disabled in connection with performance of their professional duties, be entitled to an occupational disability compensation. Paragraph 13(b) establishes that, in order to obtain such compensation, the insured must submit a disability certificate by an authorised medical expert commission and a special insurance form indicating the amount of their monthly allowance payable in their last position. The insurance form must be officially filled out by a designated official of the Prosecutors' Office.
Under Article 2 of the Law, the enforcement of judgments is entrusted to the Bailiffs' Service.
At the material time, Chapter 42 of the Code of Civil Procedure allowed a final and binding judgment to be reviewed under the supervisory review procedure. The supervisory review procedure was repealed in June 2001.
The relevant provisions of the Law read as follows:
Chapter II. Transitional Provisions
“1. This Law shall enter into force as from 29 June 2001.
......
Decisions that have been adopted and have entered into force before 29 June 2001 can be appealed against within three months in accordance with the procedure for consideration of cassation appeals (to the Supreme Court of Ukraine).”