The case originated in an application (no. 72758/01) against the Federal Republic of Germany lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a German national, Mr A.L. (“the applicant”), on 28 May 2001. The President of the Chamber acceded to the applicant's request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The German Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr K. Stoltenberg, Ministerialdirigent.
On 25 September 2003 the Court decided to communicate the application. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1964 and lives in . He used to run a car rental business.
On 3 November 1994 the Limburg Prosecuting Office informed him that it had begun criminal investigations against him and three other persons on the suspicion of insurance fraud. They were suspected of having obtained reimbursement for non-existent car rental costs and of having requested payment for non-refundable kilometres.
On 4 November 1994, following the Wetzlar District Court's arrest warrant, the applicant was arrested on the suspicion that he would attempt to hinder the investigation proceedings (Verdunklungsgefahr).
On 29 November 1994 the District Court suspended the execution of the arrest warrant on the condition that the applicant cease to have contact with his co-suspects and any of the witnesses involved.
On 10 February 1997 the applicant and his co-suspects were indicted for fraud.
On 10 March 1997 the District Court revoked the arrest warrant.
On 12 January 2000 the Limburg Regional Court provisionally discontinued proceedings with the applicant's consent pursuant to Section 153a § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see relevant domestic law below) on the condition that the applicant pay a sum of 3,500 DEM to the Association to Aid Criminal Offenders (Verein für Straffälligenhilfe).
On 21 March 2000, after the applicant had fulfilled this condition, the Regional Court, sitting as a chamber of three judges, permanently discontinued proceedings against the applicant but refused to grant him compensation for the time spent in detention on remand, finding that such compensation would not be equitable (entspricht nicht der Billigkeit), in particular as the applicant had waived any right to compensation.
The applicant appealed against this decision, arguing that he had never waived his right to compensation and that compensation would be equitable, as the criminal proceedings had caused him to lose his source of income and had prevented him from finishing his law studies.
By letter to the applicant's counsel of 18 May 2000, the presiding judge of the competent chamber of the  confirmed that if the proceedings had been pursued, the  would have opened proceedings against the applicant with regard to parts of the indictment. The applicant would then have been convicted with predominant probability (“Insoweit war auch mit bei weitem überwiegender Wahrscheinlichkeit mit Verurteilung zu rechnen”). In one of the cases of fraud, this predominant probability was based on the submissions of another accused and of a former suspect. In another case, a conviction for fraud was to be expected following the submission of various car rental receipts (“...war schon im Hinblick auf die Einreichung der diversen Mietwagenrechnungen mit einer Verurteilung wegen Betrugs zu rechnen”).
On 22 September 2000 the Frankfurt/Main Court of Appeal rejected the applicant's appeal. It noted that granting compensation for prosecution measures lay within the discretion of the competent courts or prosecuting offices. The relevant Section 3 of the Act on Compensation for Prosecution Measures (Gesetz über die Entschädigung für Strafverfolgungs- massnahmen, see relevant domestic law below) was to be seen as an exception to the rule - according to this provision, compensation should be granted in special cases where the execution of provisional prosecution measures was considered to be grossly disproportionate (“grob unverhältnismässig”). This did not apply to the case against the applicant.
The Court of Appeal noted that the measures of prosecution instituted against the applicant were originally based on a strong suspicion (dringender Verdacht). If the proceedings had continued, the  would have opened proceedings against the applicant regarding
On 14 December 2000 the  refused
The presumption of innocence prohibits imposing sanctions with a punitive or de facto punitive effect on an accused whose guilt has not been established in the relevant criminal proceedings. However, in a decision on the discontinuance of proceedings, legal consequences of a non-punitive character may be linked to a remaining suspicion, but it must become sufficiently clear from its reasoning that this does not occur out of the intention to establish or allocate guilt, but out of the intention to describe and assess the state of suspicion (Verdachtslage). This distinction had to be sufficiently expressed in the decision's reasons. In this respect, the context of all the given reasons had to be taken into account.
In the light of the above principles, the  found that the impugned decisions were compatible with the German Basic Law. It noted that the Court of Appeal had refused to grant the applicant compensation under Section 3 of the Act on Compensation for Prosecution Measures on the ground that if the proceedings against the applicant had been pursued, the  would have opened court proceedings against the applicant based on parts of the indictment. This evaluation of the remaining suspicion with regard to the question of the opening
According to Section 153a of the Code of Criminal Procedure, criminal proceedings involving a less serious criminal offence (Vergehen) may be discontinued subject to certain conditions and instructions (Auflagen und Weisungen).
If the proceedings are still in the investigation phase, the Public Prosecutor's Office may, with the consent of the competent court and the accused, provisionally refrain from issuing an indictment relating to an offence and may at the same time order the accused (1) to take measures providing reparation, (2) to pay a sum of money to a charitable association or the Treasury, (3) to take other measures or (4) to make maintenance payments of a particular amount, if such conditions and instructions can remove the public interest in prosecution and if this is not in conflict with the seriousness of the crime (“...wenn diese geeignet sind, das öffentliche Interesse an der Strafverfolgung zu beseitigen, und die Schwere der Schuld nicht entgegensteht”) (Section 153a § 1).
If the accused has already been indicted, the court may, with
Compensation for various prosecution measures is covered by
In cases where an accused is acquitted or where the proceedings against him are discontinued or where a court refuses to open the proceedings against him, he is entitled to compensation for damages suffered due to time spent in detention on remand or due to other prosecution measures (Section 2).
If the discontinuation of the proceedings is subject to the discretion of the prosecutor's office or the competent court, compensation on an equitable basis according to the circumstances of the case may be granted where Section 2 applies (Section 3).
According to the case-law of the , cases where the proceedings have been discontinued according to Section 153a