The case originated in an application (no. 45394/06) against the Republic of Serbia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Serbian national, Mr Branimir Krstić (“the applicant”), on 1 November 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr T. Tošić, a lawyer practising in Pirot. The Serbian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr S. Carić.
The applicant alleged a violation of Article 6 § 1 and Article 13 of the Convention, and of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention, on account of the authorities’ prolonged failure to enforce a final and enforceable administrative decision ordering the payment of a supplementary pension to the applicant.
On 30 June 2011 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1939 and currently lives in Pirot.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 14 September 1990 the applicant was granted an old-age pension as from 1 September 1990 by the Pirot branch (Filijala Pirot) of the Serbian Pensions and Disability Insurance Fund (Republički fond za penzijsko i invalidsko osiguranje zaposlenih – hereinafter “the Fund”).
Following a successful claim for unpaid wages against his former employer, on 8 December 1993 the applicant asked the Fund to amend its decision of 14 September 1990. In particular, he asked the Fund to apply a more favourable period for the calculation of his base pension and to increase his pension on account of the additional income that he had earned in the period before retirement (during 1989-90) which had not initially been taken into account (da se utvrdi nov penzioni osnov i izvrši obračun razlike u plaćanju).
Following a remittal, on 16 May 1994 the Fund issued an amended decision (hereinafter “the 1994 decision”): (i) establishing a new increased pension (14,015.66 old dinars (YUD)); (ii) establishing an increased "base pension" (penzijski osnov) to be applied from 1 September 1990, applying an adjustment rate of 45.30% as from 1 January 1991 and another adjustment of 28.13% as from 1 April 1994; (iii) determining that a supplementary pension should be paid on the basis of the difference between the pension received for the prior period starting on 1 September 1990 and the new pension granted retroactively by this decision; and (iv)  noting that the calculations for the pension were attached to the decision and formed an integral part of it. In addition, the reasoning in the 1994 decision contained an exact figure to be used as the base pension and determined that the applicant’s pension should be 85% of that amount.
The decision of 16 May 1994 became final on 22 July 1994.
On 31 December 2003 the applicant lodged a motion with the Pirot Municipal Court (“the Municipal Court”) for the enforcement of the part of the 1994 decision concerning the outstanding supplementary pension, and also sought payment of statutory interest from 25 January 1994 on the amounts due. The applicant supplied, together with his request for enforcement, an expert’s calculation determining the exact amount due.
On 20 January 2005 the Municipal Court issued the enforcement order as requested.
On 3 February 2006 the Municipal Court quashed that enforcement order following the Fund’s objection (prigovor) that there was no proof that the 1994 decision was enforceable.
On 16 February 2006 the Municipal Court requested that the Fund provide it with a reissued copy of the 1994 decision containing an enforceability clause (klauzula izvršnosti) within three days. On 22 February 2006 both the Fund and the applicant supplied the court with reissued copies of the 1994 decision containing an enforceability clause.
On 15 March 2006 the Municipal Court rejected the applicant’s fresh enforcement request. The Municipal Court firstly noted that the 1994 decision had established the applicant’s entitlement to a pension, his base pension and the date on which the applicant had acquired his right to a pension. The court found, however, that the decision in question was not “liable to enforcement” as it had not set the exact, total amount to be paid, which rather had been subject to recalculations depending on statistical data. It concluded that the outstanding debt should be therefore established only in special administrative proceedings conducted by the Fund’s accounting department - apparently the so-called “likvidatura”.
On 23 March 2006 the applicant lodged an objection against the decision of 15 March 2006, claiming that the enforcement request had contained all the figures and information necessary to calculate the amount due, also supplying an expert opinion to that effect.
On 26 June 2006 the Municipal Court upheld the decision of 15 March 2006. The competent panel, in particular, (i) noted, without making reference to the applicable domestic law, that the applicant should have asked for the mandatory enforcement of the 1994 decision in the administrative proceedings (prinudno izvršenje u administrativno-upravnom postupku (sic.)); and (ii) summarised the Supreme Court’s reasoning in the preceding civil proceedings concerning the application of the principle of monetary nominalism and revaluation of the claim (see paragraph 24 below).
In the meantime, as the Fund had failed to pay the supplementary pension to the applicant, on 25 January 1996 he filed a civil claim with the Municipal Court for the determination and payment of the outstanding supplementary pension as from 1 September 1990, and also sought statutory default interest and damages to compensate him for the effects of inflation (naknada inflatorne štete) and maladministration on the part of the Fund.
During the proceedings, on 26 May 1997, a court-appointed financial expert determined the nominal amount of the supplementary pension for the period between 1 September 1990 and 24 January 1994. The expert utilised a method of revalorisation of the pecuniary claims (metod valorizacije novčanih potraživanja).
On 8 April 2001 the court obtained an additional expert report on the statutory default interest accrued as from 17 May 1994 to that date.
Following two remittals, on 12 June 2001 the Municipal Court, noting the pension payment slips issued between 1990 and 1994, as well as the exact amounts of the new pension and the base pension as determined by the 1994 decision, awarded the applicant the outstanding difference in the pension actually paid and the applicant’s pension entitlement, plus statutory interest accrued, as well as costs.
On 4 December 2002 the Pirot District Court upheld the judgment of 12 June 2001. It clarified, as regards the Fund’s appeal, that the impugned dispute could not be the subject of administrative proceedings, as the applicant had not challenged the lawfulness of the 1994 decision, but rather had sought the payment of the pension debt and damages.
Following a remittal in the enforcement proceedings, on 6 March 2003 the Municipal Court ordered the enforcement of the judgment of 12 June 2001. On 24 July 2003 the awarded amount, including the accrued statutory interest, was transferred from the debtor’s account to that of the applicant.
Acting upon the Fund’s subsequent appeal on points of law, on 19 June 2003 the Supreme Court overturned the lower courts’ judgments. It stated that (i) in accordance with the law of obligations (the principle of monetary nominalism), the applicant was not entitled to damages to compensate him for the effects of inflation or any damages whatsoever in disputes of a public-law nature (such as the one in question); (ii) pension rights could only be established or enforced through administrative proceedings (“administrativno-upravni postupak”); (iii) even assuming that the Fund’s debt was to be considered as a statutory obligation, the applicant could not be awarded statutory interest in the civil proceedings (being a condition for a revaluation of the nominal claim), as the administrative enforcement of the 1994 decision had not been sought; (iv) the applicant could arguably seek such an award in enforcement proceedings; and (v) each party should cover its own costs and expenses. Lastly, the Supreme Court appears not to have addressed the nominal debt in its judgment.
On 7 August 2003 the Fund filed a motion for recovery of the entire sum paid to the applicant on 24 July 2003 (see paragraph 23 above) in view of the decision of the Supreme Court of 19 June 2003.
On 19 September 2003 the Municipal Court issued an enforcement order whereby half of the applicant’s pension was to be transferred to the Fund’s account each month until the sum had been repaid in full. It would appear that for the purpose of securing the debt the Municipal Court blocked the applicant’s access to his entire pension for a certain period of time.
By 30 August 2010 the applicant had repaid the total amount that he was required to pay in accordance with the above order.
The Pirot Branch of the Fund informed the Government that it was undisputed that it had failed to pay the difference between its past payment and the applicant’s pension entitlement for the period between 1 September 1990 and 31 December 1993. In that regard, the Fund explained that it had been unable to calculate and pay its debts that arose during the period of high inflation in Serbia to all beneficiaries of the pension insurance system, including the applicant, due to limitations in its computer software (iz tehničkih i programskih razloga).
The pension system in Serbia is a “pay as you go” system. The Fund is a State administrative body which is tasked with awarding and administering pensions and disability insurance payments. It is a legal entity authorised to levy compulsory social insurance contributions, in accordance with the rights and obligations determined by applicable law and its internal regulations. All pension and disability insurance contributions are transferred to the Fund’s accounts, together with the funds paid by the central government of the respondent State. The State guarantees the Fund’s obligations.
In the period between 1984 and 1994, the domestic currency heavily depreciated on several occasions, resulting in its redenomination on a number of occasions. In 1993 the annual inflation rate was calculated at more than 1.5 billion per cent, while the average daily rate of inflation was nearly 100 per cent. In October 1993 the Government created a new currency unit. One new dinar was worth one million of the "old" dinars. On 24 January 1994 the government introduced the "super" dinar, equal to 10 million new dinars.
The Act came into force on 19 July 1997 and thereby repealed the General Administrative Proceedings Act 1956 (Official Gazette of the Federal National Republic of Yugoslavia, no. 52/56; Official Gazette of the Socialistic Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, nos. 10/65, 18/65, 4/77, 11/78, 32/78, 9/86 and 47/86; and OG FRY, no. 24/94). Article 290 of the 1997 Act establishes that it is applicable to all proceedings brought before the date it came into force which have not been concluded.
Articles 257 § 3 and 258 provide that an administrative decision whose enforcement is impossible (rešenje čije izvršenje nije moguće) shall be declared null and void, in whole or in part, either by the relevant authority itself or at the request of a party or a state/public prosecutor.
Articles 261-278 set out the procedure to be followed concerning the enforcement of final administrative decisions.
Article 261 § 2 provides that an administrative decision shall be executed once it becomes enforceable (kada postane izvršna). Article 261 § 3(1) provides that a first-instance administrative decision shall become enforceable upon expiry of the period in which an appeal against it may be filed, if no appeal has been filed. Pursuant to Article 261 § 5, the statutory fifteen-day voluntary enforcement period, used by default if the decision does not set out any other enforcement period, starts running from the date on which the decision becomes enforceable.
The manner of enforcement depends on the type of obligations covered (pecuniary or non-pecuniary) in the relevant administrative decision.
Article 266 § 1 provides that the enforcement of non-pecuniary obligations is to be carried out by administrative bodies. In the event of administrative enforcement, the applicable procedure is set out in Articles 261-272. Article 267 § 1 states that such enforcement is to be conducted by the administrative authority which had ruled at first instance, unless otherwise provided by law. Article 268 § 1 provides, inter alia, that the authority in charge of the enforcement of an administrative decision shall, on its own motion or at the request of a party, issue an enforcement order (zaključak o dozvoli izvršenja).
On the other hand, Article 266 § 2 states that the enforcement of monetary obligations rendered by an administrative decision is to be carried out by the courts. Pursuant to Article 273 § 1, if an administrative decision is to be executed by judicial enforcement, the authority which adopted that decision should provide a copy of the decision containing an enforceability clause (potvrda izvršnosti) (see Article 268 § 3) and transfer it to the court competent to execute it. An administrative decision containing an enforceability clause should, under Article 273 § 1, be considered as an enforcement instrument (osnov za sudsko izvršenje). Judicial enforcement is thus carried out through the application of the provisions of the applicable enforcement act and the provisions of other acts pertinent to judicial enforcement.
Article 1 provided that the Act was applicable to mandatory enforcement of a decision rendered in the course of administrative proceedings, if it had established a monetary obligation.
Article 4 prescribed that the court handling the enforcement proceedings was obliged to proceed urgently with the enforcement of a decision securing an established obligation. According to Article 10 § 1, the competent court should decide on an enforcement request within three days from the date the request had been filed, while an appellate court should decide on an objection (prigovor) within fifteen days of the date it had been filed.
According to Article 16 § 2(2), an administrative decision establishing a monetary obligation fell to be considered as an enforcement instrument (izvršna isprava).
Article 18 §§ 1 and 2 stated that a decision adopted in administrative proceedings would become enforceable when it had become final and after the period for voluntary compliance with the obligation had expired.
Pursuant to Article 20 § 1, a decision is liable for enforcement (podobna za izvršenje) if it identifies the debtor and creditor, the subject matter, the type of obligation to be enforced, the amount due (obim) and the deadline for enforcement. Should the period for voluntary compliance have been omitted, it should be determined by the enforcement request.
According to Article 37, when administrative enforcement was to be carried out by a civil court which had not adopted the decision whose enforcement was requested, a copy of the decision containing an enforceability clause should be supplied by the body which had adjudicated at first instance together with a request for enforcement.
Article 39 § 4 provided that a decision to reject an enforcement request in full or in part should be fully reasoned (obrazloženo).
The Enforcement Proceedings Act 2004 (published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia – “OG RS” - no. 125/04)
The Supreme Court of Serbia adopted the Practice Direction, in response to the suspensions of pension payments in Kosovo, in order to set out the general principles as regards the restrictions/suspensions of pension rights, and to give guidance as to which domestic authorities, judicial or administrative, are invested with jurisdiction in different types of pension-related matters.
The Practice Direction states that administrative proceedings (upravni postupak) before the Fund and, if need be, judicial review proceedings (upravni spor) would be the appropriate avenue to challenge the legality of the Fund’s decisions establishing one’s pension rights or the amount of pension to be paid, or those restricting and terminating one’s pension rights.
It further explains that the enforcement of final decisions of the Fund shall be carried out by the civil courts in the course of enforcement proceedings, which are to be governed by the provisions of the Enforcement Proceedings Act.
Lastly, the Practice Direction also notes that the civil courts are, in this regard, competent to adjudicate cases involving claims of maladministration (nezakonit i nepravilan rad) on the part of the Fund.
The claimant had initiated an administrative dispute concerning the Fund first-instance and appellate bodies’ failure to issue a decision upon his request for payment of outstanding pension as established by a 1999 decision of the Fund. The Administrative Court rejected his claim brought before it. Specifically, the Administrative Court declared that the two Fund’s bodies lacked jurisdiction ratione materiae to consider the claimant’s request. Relying on Article 266 § 2 of the General Administrative Act, the Administrative Court directed the claimant to file an enforcement request with the competent civil court, rather than have recourse to the administrative dispute procedure.
In the interpretation of the legislation concerning enforcement matters, the Serbian courts have frequently outlined the circumstances in which a decision is liable to enforcement, as it is not considered sufficient for a claimant to simply have an enforceable decision in his or her favour (High Commercial Court, Pž. 2720/82 and 3763/83).
The courts have found enforcement requests to be well founded even if the obligation of the debtor has not been precisely determined (Kragujevac District Court, Gž. 293/95). In addition, the precise details of the obligation do not necessarily have to be contained in the operative provisions of the decision, the courts handling enforcement matters being obliged to enforce a debt if the reasoning in the decision gives sufficient details to determine the total obligation of the debtor. Should that be the case, the courts are to instruct the creditor to supplement his enforcement request in accordance with such reasoning (Supreme Court, Gž. 108/86, in the context of the surface and boundaries of a plot of land). A decision in criminal proceedings which awards undetermined costs to a party, but leaves it to the accounting department of a State authority to determine the relevant amount, is also considered as a decision liable to enforcement (Supreme Court, decision no. 2319/02 of 4 September 2002).
The Organisation of the Courts Act 2001 (Zakon o uređenju sudova; published in OG RS nos. 63/01, 42/02, 27/03, 29/04, 101/05 and 46/06)
Article 1 provides that statutory interest shall be paid as from the date of maturity of a recognised monetary claim until the date of its settlement. Article 2 states that such interest shall be calculated on the basis of the official consumer price index plus another 0.5% monthly.
Article 394 provides for the principle of monetary nominalism. According to this principle, when an obligation concerns a sum of money, the debtor is bound to pay the number of monetary units in which the obligation is expressed (that is, its nominal value), unless the law provides otherwise.