The case concerns a complaint, made under Article 5 § 5 of the Convention, about the applicant’s inability to obtain compensation for his unlawful detention in an isolation cell for fourteen days while he was serving his prison term.
The applicant was born in 1966 and lives in Pernik. The applicant was represented by Mr I. Stoyanov, a lawyer practising in Blagoevgrad.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Dimova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In April 2008 the applicant started serving a three-year prison sentence under the “general prison regime”. He spent the period between 24 April 2008 and 25 February 2009 in an open-type prison hostel (затворническо общежитие от открит тип), where, in accordance with an order of the warden, he worked as a driver on an external working site and slept away from the hostel.
After 25 February 2009 he was no longer allowed to work outside the prison hostel, because of his frequent absences from his work post.
On an unspecified date in 2009 the director of the Chief Directorate for the Execution of Sentences was informed that the applicant had made threats towards the prison warden and had repeatedly prompted other inmates to write letters of complaint against the prison administration.
On 6 August 2009 the applicant was involved in a brawl with a fellow prisoner (see paragraph 13 below).
On 12 August 2009 the director of the Chief Directorate for the Execution of Sentences ordered the applicant’s isolation in a disciplinary isolation cell for a period of fourteen days. The reason indicated in the order was that it was punishment for his arrogant behaviour and the threats he had made towards fellow detainees and prison staff. The order further stated that it was aimed at ensuring the applicant’s own physical safety and general security in the prison establishment. The head also gave instructions that the applicant was to be moved to Bobov Dol Prison, in view of the psychological tension and incompatibility between him and other inmates.
The applicant was transferred to Bobov Dol Prison on 13 August 2009. He was detained in a disciplinary isolation cell between that date and 30 August 2009, save for the period between 17 and 19 August 2009 (exact hours not specified), when he was taken to Sofia Prison for investigative measures.
On 17 August 2009, acting through his lawyer, the applicant challenged in court the order placing him in isolation. In particular he complained that his isolation was detrimental to his health and well-being.
The Sofia District Court, finding that the order was an individual administrative act, declared the challenge admissible in respect of the punishment imposed and set aside the imposition of the punishment as unlawful in a final decision of 3 September 2009.
In doing so the court established that the incident that had taken place on 6 August 2009 had risked provoking unrest in the prison and compromising the safety of the establishment and its detainees. It then found that the order of 12 August 2009 had been issued in breach of both substantive and procedural legal provisions. In particular, the order had not contained a title and had not indicated before which authority it could be challenged and within what time frame.
In addition, the court held that the order had specified solely the sanction imposed on the applicant. However, there was no indication as to what type of offence he had committed that had justified the imposition of the punishment. That had deprived him of the opportunity to repent and accept the punishment, or to appeal against it if he considered it unjustified.
Finally, the order had listed the applicant’s writing letters of complaint against the prison administration as a breach of the regulations in place. That finding of a breach had been erroneous since prisoners had the right to complain and, moreover, the prompting of others to write letters of complaint was not unlawful either.
Thereafter, the applicant brought proceedings under section 1(1) of the State and Municipalities’ Responsibility for Damage Act (“the SMRDA”, see paragraph 24 below), seeking compensation in respect of his unlawful isolation. In particular, he claimed that as a result of his isolation he had experienced lasting and profound distress, severe psychological disturbance, and physical pain and suffering, as the isolation had worsened the symptoms related to his long-standing lower back pain.
His related claim was dismissed on the merits by administrative courts at two levels of jurisdiction.
The courts found that the applicant had demonstrated that he had been the subject of an unlawful act of the administration, within the meaning of section 1 of the SMRDA. However, he had been required to show that he had suffered for a significantly long period of time and sufficiently intensely for there to be any justification for awarding him compensation in respect of non-pecuniary damage. There was no documentary evidence to show that lasting stress and suffering, either during or after his isolation, had indeed occurred, contrary to the applicant’s claims. Consequently, the applicant had not demonstrated that he had suffered non-pecuniary damage as a result of his placement in the isolation cell. Likewise, there was no causal link between the unlawful administrative act in question and the applicant’s lower back pain.
The final decision on the applicant’s claim was taken by the Supreme Administrative Court on 13 June 2011, which upheld the lower court’s findings in their entirety.
Section 101(7) of the Execution of Punishments and Pre-Trial Detention Act 2009 (“the 2009 Act”) provides that isolating a prisoner in a punishment cell is one of the disciplinary punishments for breaches of order and discipline in prison. Under section 111 of the 2009 Act, the order for placing a prisoner in such a cell is subject to judicial review by an administrative court within three days of its being issued.
Section 103 of the 2009 Act provided at the time of the events that those isolated in a punishment cell had no right to receive visits or food parcels. Regulation 96 of the Regulations for the Implementation of the 2009 Act (“the Regulations”) provided that, in addition to the above restrictions, prisoners placed in isolation punishment cells had no right to use a telephone or to keep money for personal use. Furthermore, punishment cells had to be located in the high-security wing of a prison and be isolated from the rest of the premises. The individuals placed in such cells had to take their meals in the cell and had the right to a shower twice a week. They were allowed outside for their daily walk, separated from all other prisoners. They had the right to keep the following items in the punishment cell: bedding, a blanket to be used only at night-time, underwear, tshirts, a pair of trousers, a jumper or a cardigan, a hat, socks, shoes, slippers, a handkerchief, a face cloth, soap, toothpaste and a toothbrush, shaving soap and a brush, toilet paper, spectacles, a wedding ring, postal envelopes and stamps, sheets of paper and a pen, and some reading material.
Under regulation 52 of the Regulations, prisoners serving their sentence under the general prison regime are to be placed in establishments of a closed or open type. In the case of those serving their sentence in an open-type prison, the corridors of the wing in which their cell is located are locked at night. All prisoners serving their sentence under the general prison regime have the right to work in the service sector and those placed in an open-type establishment can work on sites outside the prison.
The regime for life prisoners (“special prison regime”) is governed by regulations 213 to 220 of the Regulations. Regulation 213 provides that life prisoners must be kept in purpose-built prisons or separate high-security units in other prisons. It also provides that life prisoners must be kept in permanently locked cells under strict supervision, and may only take part in communal activities with other prisoners of the same category. Regulation 214 provides that life prisoners have to be kept isolated from other prisoners, including during transfers, medical appointments, visits, open-air activities or other occasions when they leave their cells.
Section 1(1) of the SMRDA provides that the State is liable for damage suffered by individuals or legal persons as a result of unlawful decisions, acts or omissions by civil servants, committed in the course of or in connection with an administrative action. By Article 204 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Procedure 2006, a claim relating to damage allegedly caused by an unlawful decision can only be made if that decision has been duly set aside. Under Article 204 § 2 of the Code, the claim for damages may be brought jointly with an application for judicial review of the decision. Article 204 § 4 of the Code provides that if the application relates to an unlawful act or omission, its unlawfulness may be established, as a preliminary point, by the court hearing the claim for damages.
Section 4 of the SMRDA provides that the State’s liability extends to all pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage which is a direct and proximate result of the impugned decision, act or omission.
A selection of domestic judgments in which the Supreme Administrative Court has held that it is possible to seek damages under these provisions in relation to unlawful detention by the police can be found in the Court’s judgment in Dzhabarov and Others v. Bulgaria (nos. 6095/11 and 2 others, §§ 49-50, 31 March 2016).