The case originated in an application (no. 24490/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Andrey Aleksandrovich Isayev (“the applicant”), on 28 May 2003.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Kuvshinov. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 5 December 2008 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1978 and lives in .
On 28 September 1998 he was convicted of theft by a competent court and given a suspended sentence of two years' imprisonment with a three-year delay in the execution of the sentence.
On an unspecified date the authorities brought a different set of criminal charges against the applicant. The Court is in possession of a letter written by the prosecutor's office of the Vladimir Region and dated by 30 April 1999 which contains the following statement: “...your son A.A. Isayev was arrested on 15 January 1999 in accordance with Section 122 of the Code of the Criminal Procedure of the Russian Soviet Federal Socialist Republic, after which, taking into account the circumstances of the case including his engagement in criminal activities during the service of a previous sentence, he was placed in detention and charged”. According to the Government, the authorities did not arrest the applicant on 15 January 1999 as at the material time he was already in detention on account of a different criminal investigation against him, which ended in his conviction by the Oktyabrskiy District Court of Vladimir on 12 April 2000.
Between 7 and 9 June 2000 the applicant and his legal counsel studied the case file.
On 7 June 2000 and on 1 August 2001 the applicant requested that his case be examined by a jury.
On 2 July 2001 the criminal case against the applicant and his two codefendants was forwarded to the  (“the trial court”) for trial.
On 16 July 2001 the trial court set the examination of the case for 30 July 2001.
On 30 July 2001 the trial court, composed of judge Sh. and two lay judges (народные заседатели) K. and S. started the examination of the case. The applicant was represented by legal counsel. However, at the hearing he sought leave to be represented also by his mother and by Mr Kuvshinov. The trial court dismissed his request.
The applicant and his legal counsel appealed against the above decision to the Supreme Court of the  (“the appeal court”). On 15 October 2001 the appeal court held that it was not possible to examine the applicant's appeal against an interlocutory decision.
On 15 November 2001 the trial court, which was now composed of judge Sh. and lay judges G. and Ka., allowed Mr Kuvshinov to defend the applicant along with his legal counsel.
On the same date the trial court rejected the applicant's request to have his case heard by a jury on the ground that the jury trial had not been set up in the Vladimir Region.
On 4 December 2001 the trial court dismissed the applicant's objection to the composition of the trial court. Regarding the lay judges, the trial court held that they had been elected by the Vladimir Regional Council of People's Deputies (Владимирский областной совет народных депутатов) during its session of 411 April 1990 in accordance with law. According to the presidential decree of 25 January 2000 their terms of office had been extended until the court received a new list of lay judges confirmed by the regional legislature.
On 24 December 2001 the applicant received a similar answer from the President of the .
On 29 April 2002 the trial court found the applicant guilty of two premeditated murders, damage to private property and several other crimes and sentenced him to twenty years' imprisonment with confiscation of his possessions. The sentence started to run from 15 January 1999.
The applicant appealed against the conviction. In the additional grounds of appeal he complained, among other things, that the judgment had been adopted by a court which had not been established in accordance with law.
On 19 December 2002 the appeal court upheld the applicant's conviction for murders, modified the judgment in respect of the other charges and reduced his sentence to nineteen years' imprisonment with confiscation of the possessions. In particular, it found that the trial court had been established in accordance with law.
On 12 February 2002 the local newspaper Molva published an article in which it allegedly accused the applicant's representative, Mr Kuvshinov, of causing delays in the examination of the applicant's case. Defamation proceedings brought by Mr Kuvshinov against the newspaper ended in a friendly settlement on 16 April 2003. The parties did not appeal against the settlement, and it entered into force on 28 April 2003.
Section 15 of the CCrP provided that hearings of criminal cases in firstinstance courts had to be conducted, subject to certain exceptions, by a single professional judge or by a panel of one professional judge and two lay judges. In administration of justice lay judges enjoyed the same rights as professional judges.
Section 29 of the Law provided that the regional and other equal courts, including the president of the court, the president's deputies, the court members and the lay judges, should be elected by the relevant council of people's deputies for the duration of five years.
Section 1 of the Act provided that the Russian citizens were entitled to participate in the administration of justice as lay judges. The lay judges were persons entitled by law to hear civil and criminal cases as part of the court panel and carry out their judicial duties on a non-professional basis.
Section 9 of the Act provided that the lay judges could be called to sit in cases heard by a regional court for the whole period of examination of the case and only once a year.
The Ruling provided that the sitting lay judges had to remain in office until new lists of lay judges arrived to the court.
Decree of 25 December 1993
The Decree provided that lay judges serving in the regional courts of general jurisdiction were authorised to remain in office until adoption of the federal law on lay judges.
Decree of 23 January 1997
The Decree provided that lay judges serving in the regional courts of general jurisdiction were authorised to remain in office until adoption of a federal law regulating the order of their appointment or election.
Decree of 25 January 2000
The Decree provided that lay judges serving in the courts of general jurisdiction were authorised to remain in office until the courts received new lists of lay judges confirmed by a regional legislative assembly.