The case originated in two applications (nos. 44920/09 and 8942/10) lodged with the Court against Georgia under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) on 15 August 2009 and 2 February 2010 respectively. Application no. 44920/09 was lodged by Studio Monitori (“the first applicant”), a legal entity established under Georgian law on 14 December 2005, and Ms Nino Zuriashvili (“the second applicant”), a Georgian national born in 1968. Application no. 8942/10 was lodged by Mr Mamuka Nozadze (“the third applicant”), a Georgian national born in 1974.
The first and second applicants were represented successively by Ms S. Japaridze, Ms N. Katsitadze, Ms T. Abazadze, Mr P. Leach and Ms J. Evans, lawyers practising in Tbilisi and London. The third applicant was represented by Ms S. Abuladze, a lawyer practising in Tbilisi. The Georgian Government (“the Government”) were represented successively by their Agents, Mr L. Meskhoradze and Mr B. Dzamashvili, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the relevant domestic judicial authorities had denied them access to information of public interest, in breach of Article 10 of the Convention.
On 24 February 2011 and 8 September 2016 notice of the applicants’ complaint under Article 10 of the Convention was given to the Government.
The first applicant is a non-governmental organisation established with the aim of conducting journalistic investigations into matters of public interest. The second applicant is a journalist and one of its founding members.
On an unspecified date in 2007 the second applicant, acting on behalf of the first applicant, asked the registry of the Khashuri District Court to give her access to a case file concerning an unrelated criminal case brought against a certain T.E, and in which he had been convicted. She did not give any reasons for her request and briefly indicated that she intended to photocopy and photograph the criminal case material stored in the archives of the court registry.
By a decision of 3 August 2007 the court registry stated that the second applicant’s request could not be granted in its current form. More specifically, it invited her to specify exactly which information and/or documents she wished to consult and for what purpose, stating that it would review its decision upon receipt of the requested information. The registry advised the second applicant that the criminal case file in question contained certain classified investigative information, public disclosure of which was strictly prohibited (section 5 (1) and (2) of the Special Investigative Activities Act of 30 April 1999). It further advised her that the criminal case file contained personal data about T.E., as well as other parties to the criminal proceedings in question, and that public disclosure of that information was only possible with their explicit consent (Article 37 § 2 of the General Administrative Code).
The second applicant never provided the further clarification sought by the court registry. Instead, on 14 September 2007 she lodged a court action concerning the registry’s decision of 3 August 2007, requesting its annulment.
As confirmed by a statement of claim dated 14 September 2007 filed with the Borjomi District Court, the second applicant, acting on behalf of the first applicant, did not explain the purpose of her request to access the criminal case file in question. She merely claimed that the registry’s decision of 3 August 2007 had restricted her right of access to information of public interest, which was enshrined in Article 37 § 1 of the General Administrative Code.
According to the transcript of a hearing before the Borjomi District Court on 12 December 2007 attended by both parties, the second applicant briefly mentioned that she needed to obtain access to the criminal case file for the purposes of a journalistic investigation project. However, she did not give any details about the project in question and relied exclusively on the general argument that her right of access to public information should not be limited. She further provided extensive legal arguments as to why the respondent’s interpretation of the relevant provisions of the Special Investigative Activities Act and the General Administrative Code had been erroneous.
By a judgment of 12 December 2007 the Borjomi District Court dismissed the second applicant’s action as ill-founded. It confirmed that the respondent’s decision to withhold the criminal case material from the second applicant had been legitimate and based on a correct interpretation of section 5(1) and (2) of the Special Investigative Activities Act and Article 37 § 2 of the General Administrative Code.
On 30 January 2008 the second applicant appealed against the judgment of 12 December 2007, complaining that the first-instance court had incorrectly interpreted the relevant provisions of domestic law. In her statement of appeal, she focused exclusively on her right to have unfettered access to public information, without giving any details as to why she had sought access to the criminal case material.
According to the transcript of a hearing before the Tbilisi Court of Appeal on 12 June 2008 attended by both parties, the second applicant stated: “I, as a journalist, no longer need access to the criminal case material because the journalistic investigation has already been terminated, and its results have already been published.” However, she emphasised that what was important for her was the creation a legal precedent that would acknowledge the significance of the right to have unfettered access to information of public interest. She considered that a criminal case file was public information within the meaning of Article 37 § 1 of the General Administrative Code and that anyone was entitled to have access to it.
By a judgment of 19 June 2008 the Tbilisi Court of Appeal dismissed the second applicant’s appeal as ill-founded and upheld the judgment of the lower court. On 16 February 2009 the Supreme Court rejected an appeal on points of law lodged by the second applicant as inadmissible, terminating the proceedings.
The third applicant was a practising lawyer in Georgia. On 22 March 2006 he was convicted of fraud for stealing money entrusted to him by a client for the purpose of securing bail in criminal proceedings. He was sentenced to three years and six months in prison (for further details, see Nozadze v. Georgia (dec.) [Committee], no. 41541/05, §§ 4-14, 9 May 2017).
On 11 October 2007 the third applicant, while still in prison, asked the registry of Tbilisi City Court to send him a copy of all the court orders concerning the imposition of pre-trial preventive measures in six distinct and unrelated criminal cases. He did not specify why he was interested in that particular information.
On 10 October 2007 the registry of Tbilisi City Court sent the third applicant a copy of the operative parts of the relevant court orders, stating that, in accordance with Article 140 § 20 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (as in force at the material time), only the operative parts of detention orders could be disclosed.
On 1 November 2007 the third applicant brought a court action against the registry of the Tbilisi City Court, complaining that its refusal to provide him with a full copy of the relevant court orders had infringed his right under Article 37 § 1 of the General Administrative Code to have unfettered access to public information.
By a judgment of 19 December 2008 the Tbilisi Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s action as ill-founded. The court stated that the relevant Chapter of the General Administrative Code and, more specifically, Article 37 § 1 thereof, which provided for the right to receive public information from the State and regulated the procedure for the exercise of that right, did not apply, pursuant to Article 3 §§ 2 and 3 of the same Code, to the judiciary within the framework of the administration of justice. In that connection, the court attached significance to the fact that all six of the criminal cases about which the third applicant had tried to obtain information were still ongoing at that time.
On 27 July 2009 the Supreme Court of Georgia, sitting in camera, rejected an appeal on points of law lodged by the third applicant, terminating the proceedings. A copy of the final decision was served on the third applicant on 30 October 2009.
The relevant provisions of the Special Investigative Activities Act (კანონი ოპერატიულ-სამძებრო საქმიანობის შესახებ), as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
Section 1 –Special investigative activities
“1. Special investigative activities are a form of overt or covert activity carried out by special divisions of State agencies authorised by this Act (hereinafter “special investigative agencies”) within the scope of their powers, with a view to protecting the rights and freedoms of individuals and legal entities [and] public security against criminal offences and other types of wrongdoing.
...”
Section 5 – Special investigative activities and public disclosure
“1. Special investigative activities are strictly classified. All documents, data and sources of information relating to such activities shall be accessible only to people possessing special qualifications who are authorised to do so by the present Act ...
The public disclosure of documents or other material relating to special investigative activities ... shall result in criminal prosecution for disclosure of State secrets.”
Under Article 2 of the General Administrative Code, not all types of information collected and stored by a public authority are considered to be “public information”. More specifically, under Article 2 (m), information collected or stored by a public authority is considered “classified” if it contains either “personal data about third parties” or relates to a “commercial or State secret”.
Under Article 3 §§ 2 and 3, only Chapter III of the Code is to apply with respect to the judiciary and only in connection with purely administrative or organisational functions.
Article 3 § 4 further specifies that the whole of the Code does not apply to bodies of the executive branch of State power concerned with conducting criminal investigations and prosecutions.
Articles 10 and 28 of the Code further specify that everyone has a right to obtain access to public information stored by a public authority “unless this information relates to a State, professional or commercial secret or contains personal data about third parties.”
Chapter III of the Code, of which Article 37 forms part, is dedicated to governing the procedure for the exercise of the right of access to public information. The relevant part of that provision reads as follows:
Article 37 – Request to access public information
“1. Everybody has the right to access public information, regardless of the form in which [it] has been stored. ...
An application to access public information shall be submitted in writing. ... If such an application may result in the disclosure of classified information, it shall be accompanied by a certified consent from the third party concerned. ...”