The case originated in an application (no. 35581/06) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Dmitriy Viktorovich Pokhlebin (“the applicant”), on 13 August 2006.
The applicant was represented by his mother, Ms R. Ldokova. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Y. Zaytsev.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the conditions of his detention had been unsatisfactory and that he had not been provided with appropriate medical treatment during his detention.
On 6 April 2009 the President of the Fifth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1970 and lives in .
On 24 June 2004 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of drug trafficking. He was initially placed in a cell of the Kyivskyy District Police Department of Simferopol and subsequently moved to the Simferopol Pre-Trial Detention Centre (the “Simferopol SIZO”).
On 24 December 2004 in view of his poor health the applicant was released from custody under a written obligation not to abscond.
On 12 November 2005 the applicant, with two accomplices, picked a quarrel with and then beat up Mr. A and his son, who were walking by in the street. During the scuffle the applicant took a jacket, money, a mobile phone and a bicycle which belonged to the victims.
On 16 November 2005 the applicant was arrested for that crime.
On 19 May 2006 the Kyivskyy District Court of Simferopol found the applicant guilty of the above crimes and sentenced him to six years' imprisonment with confiscation of property. The judgment was based on a number of witness statements, expert opinions, documentary and material evidence. The applicant appealed.
On 25 July 2006 the Court of Appeal of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea dismissed the applicant's appeal and upheld the judgment of the first-instance court of 19 May 2006. The applicant appealed in cassation.
On 13 February 2007 the Supreme Court rejected the applicant's cassation appeal and upheld the decisions of the lower courts.
On 3 October 2007 the , having regard to the applicant's poor health and its further deterioration, granted him early release from prison. On 18 December 2007 that decision came into effect.
On 21 December 2007 the applicant was released.
Subsequently, the applicant's part of the flat, which is owned jointly by the applicant and his mother, was attached in the course of enforcement of the confiscation order.
According to the applicant, for an unspecified period of time he was not paid an invalidity allowance to which he was entitled.
Between 16 November 2005 and 20 July 2006 the applicant was detained in the Simferopol Temporary Detention Centre (the “Simferopol ITT”). The cell in which the applicant was held measured 21 sq. m. It was equipped with six bunks while the number of detainees ranged from eight to fourteen persons including the applicant. The cell was dim and badly ventilated because there was only a small window equipped with metal bars. During that period the applicant was never offered outdoor exercise; showers were unavailable.
By letter of 22 December 2005, the Simferopol Prosecutor's Office, replying to the applicant's complaint, informed him that the Simferopol ITT was built in 1977 and did not include a yard for daily exercise outside the cell, nor did it have a bathroom or shower cabin. He further noted that the Simferopol SIZO refused to accept detainees with tuberculosis.
According to the Government, in the Simferopol ITT the applicant was initially held with the other three detainees in a cell measuring 10 sq. m. Subsequently, he was held with other five detainees in a cell measuring 14 sq. m.
The cells were equipped with a sufficient number of bunks, and sanitary units were available there. The ventilation and lighting systems were operating properly. A shower cabin was installed in the Simferopol ITT and the detainees could wash themselves weekly.
According to the applicant, he contracted tuberculosis in June 2004 when he was being held in a cell of the Kyivskyy District Police Department of Simferopol.
In November 2004, in the course of the applicant's pre-trial detention, a medical commission issued a report confirming that he suffered from Aids (since 1997), bronchial tuberculosis (since 2004), chronic hepatitis, and candidiasis. The commission further concluded that the medical treatment provided to the applicant in the detention facility had been ineffective. For this reason the preventive measure in the applicant's respect was replaced with a non-custodial one and on 24 December 2004 the applicant was released.
In February 2005 the applicant underwent a medical examination following which he was designated as Category 2 (medium-level) disabled on account of his illnesses.
During the applicant's detention in the Simferopol ITT (between 16 November 2005 and 20 July 2006) the applicant was provided with medical treatment for his illnesses by the medical staff of that facility.
The Government, referring to the relevant report of the regional police department, submitted that in the Simferopol ITT the applicant was always provided with anti-Aids and anti-tuberculosis pills. Each time the applicant requested it an ambulance arrived and the necessary injections were administered. According to the applicant, he did not undergo any medical examination for his tuberculosis; the anti-Aids medicine was administered irregularly and without proper documentation and control; nor were the other illnesses treated properly.
From February 2006 the applicant started to complain of numbness in the legs.
On 20 July 2006 the applicant was transferred from the Simferopol ITT to the Simferopol SIZO where he continued to undergo medical treatment.
On 11 August 2006 the applicant was moved to the hospital at the Daryivka no. 10 Prison where he was provided with medical assistance till 7 September 2006. By the end of that period the applicant was still suffering from tuberculosis, which at that time had affected his left lung, and all the other above-mentioned illnesses. In addition, he had been diagnosed with toxic polyneuropathy and other less serious illnesses. The medical staff therefore concluded that the strategy of the applicant's subsequent therapy had to be reviewed.
Between 7 September 2006 and 30 January 2007 the applicant was held in the Simferopol SIZO, the Sofiyivka no. 45 Prison, and the Dnipropetrovsk Pre-Trial Detention Centre where the medical staff continued providing treatment to the applicant in respect of his multiple illnesses.
On 30 January 2007, following a further deterioration of the applicant's health, he was returned to the hospital at the Daryivka no. 10 Prison where he was held till 14 March 2007. Following his arrival the applicant was diagnosed with all the above-mentioned illnesses, and additionally with spinal tuberculosis, acute maxillary sinusitis and chronic periodontitis. At the end of the applicant's detention in that facility all the illnesses remained and the applicant was also diagnosed with weight loss.
Between 14 March and 21 December 2007 the applicant was held in the hospital at the Hola Prystan no. 7 Prison, where he was provided with specific anti-tuberculosis and anti-Aids treatment. In that period the spinal tuberculosis progressed to the effect that the applicant became unable to walk on his own.
According to the Government, during that period the applicant refused the prescribed medical treatment. They referred to the report prepared by the medical staff on 23 May 2007 documenting that refusal by the applicant.
On 6 June 2007 the medical commission, having regard to the deterioration of the applicant's health, recommended that he be granted an early release.
Following his release on 21 December 2007, the applicant underwent medical examination and was designated as Category 1 (the highest level) disabled because of his illnesses.
It appears from the latest applicant's submissions that after his release he recovered the ability to walk on his own.
The relevant domestic law and practice is summarised in the judgments of Dvoynykh v. Ukraine (no. 72277/01, §§ 28-37, 12 October 2006) and Yakovenko v. Ukraine (no. 15825/06, §§ 48-55, 25 October 2007).
The relevant international material is summarised in the judgment of Melnik v. Ukraine (no. 72286/01, § 47-53, 28 March 2006).