The case originated in an application (no. 74354/13) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Azerbaijani national, Mr Elchin Yusif oglu Namazov (Elçin Yusif oğlu Namazov - “the applicant”), on 7 November 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr K. Bagirov, a lawyer based in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
The applicant alleged that his disbarment had breached his rights protected under the Convention and that the relevant domestic proceedings had been unfair.
On 3 September 2015 notice of the complaints concerning the alleged violation of the applicant’s right to respect for private life (Article 8 of the Convention) and the alleged violation of the applicant’s right to a fair trial (Article 6 of the Convention) was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1978 and lives in Baku.
The applicant was a lawyer (vəkil) and a member of the Azerbaijani Bar Association (Azərbaycan Respublikası Vəkillər Kollegiyası – hereinafter “the ABA”) at the time of the events described below. He specialised in protection of human rights and had represented a number of people related to opposition political parties.
The applicant was the representative of R.H., who was accused under Article 233 (organisation of or active participation in actions leading to breach of public order) of the Criminal Code within the framework of the criminal proceedings instituted against a number of people following their participation in a demonstration organised by the opposition.
At the hearings held on 9, 16, 18 and 27 August 2011, at the trial before the Nasimi District Court, the applicant got involved in a verbal altercation with the judge (S.A.).
It appears from the verbatim report (stenoqram) of the hearing of 9 August 2011, submitted to the Court by the applicant, that, when the applicant asked the judge to explain the charges against R.H. and, in particular, to clarify the notion of public order, the judge at first refused to answer the questions. As the applicant insisted on that point, the judge then answered, stating that public order means violation of citizens’ right to rest. The applicant objected to the judge’s definition, stating that a violation of citizens’ right to rest did not in all the circumstances constitute a breach of public order. Following the applicant’s objection, the judge accused him of making a scene at the court.
The verbal altercation continued between the applicant and S.A. at the hearings held on 16 and 18 August 2011. It appears from the documents in the case file that on an unspecified date in August 2011 the applicant lodged an application, objecting to S.A. on the grounds that the judge had dismissed all the applications made by the defence and had refused to provide the defence with a copy of the official transcripts of the court hearings held on 28 July and 9, 16 and 18 August 2011.
By a decision of 22 August 2011 of the Nasimi District Court, the applicant’s objection was rejected. That decision was delivered by S.A. and was not amenable to appeal.
It further appears from the verbatim report of the hearing of 27 August 2011, submitted to the Court by the applicant, that a verbal altercation took place between the applicant and S.A. in the course of the questioning of a witness for the prosecution by the defence party. In particular, the applicant asked the witness to reply to the following two questions: “Are you an honest man?” (Siz namuslu adamsınız?) and “Do you think that a judge acting in an arbitrary manner may be considered a conscientious judge?” (Sizcə, özbaşınalıq edən hakim vicdanlı hakim hesab edilə bilərmi?). The judge objected to those questions and interrupted the hearing for a break.
On the same day the judge adopted a decision, informing the ABA of the alleged breach of lawyer ethics (vəkil etikası) by the applicant. The judge noted in the decision that when the applicant had asked a witness to reply to the question “Do you consider yourself to be an honest man?” (Siz özünüzü namuslu insan hesab edirsinizmi?), the public prosecutor had objected to the question and, as the presiding judge, he had warned the applicant. In reply, the applicant answered him as follows:
“You cannot do anything against me. Do all you can do. I admit that I am making a scene at the court. If you want I can also sign the transcript of the hearing in this connection” (Siz mənə heç bir şey edə bilməzsiniz, nə edirsinizsə axırıncısını edin. Mən qəbul edirəm ki, məhkəmədə qalmaqal yaradıram, istəyirsinizsə dediklərimlə bağlı protokola da qol çəkim).
The judge also noted that, despite his warnings, the applicant asked the witness further questions: “Did your administration tell you that whatever you say, Judge S.A. will deliver the judgment that he needs?” (Sizə rəhbərlik deyibmi ki, sən nə danışırsan danış, onsuzda hakim Ş.A. ona lazım olan hökmü çıxaracaq?); “What do you expect of this fake court?” (Bu saxta məhkəmədən nə gözləyirsiniz?); “Do you consider that the judge is an honest and conscientious judge?” (Hakimi namuslu və vicdanlı hakim hesab edirsinizmi?); “Have you ever seen an arbitrary judge like S.A.?” (Ş.A. kimi özbaşınalıq edən hakim görmüsünüzmü?). It was further noted in the decision that the applicant made the following statement about the judge: “I again confirm your legal illiteracy, you are in complete ignorance of the legislation” (Sizin hüquqi savadsızlığınızı bir daha təsdiqləyirəm, sizin qanunlardan xəbəriniz yoxdur). The judge also decided to send a copy of that decision to the prosecuting authorities for institution of criminal proceedings against the applicant under Article 289 (contempt of court) of the Criminal Code. However, no decision concerning the institution or outcome of the criminal proceedings against the applicant for contempt of court was included in the case file. It further appears from the documents in the case file that on 27 August 2011 the judge decided to remove the applicant from R.H.’s case.
The applicant was not provided with a copy of the Nasimi District Court’s decision of 27 August 2011 and the official transcripts of the court hearings held on 9, 16, 18 and 27 August 2011. According to the applicant, he and other lawyers participating in those hearings made written comments on the official transcripts of the court hearings, disputing their content as prepared by the judge. Despite the Court’s explicit request to the Government to submit copies of all the documents relating to the disciplinary proceedings against the applicant, the Government failed to provide the Court with a copy of the official transcripts of the abovementioned court hearings.
On 14 September 2011 the disciplinary commission of the ABA held a meeting at which it examined the complaint against the applicant and decided to refer the complaint to the Presidium of the ABA (Azərbaycan Respublikası Vəkillər Kollegiyası Rəyasət Heyəti – hereinafter “the Presidium”). Relying on the Nasimi District Court’s decision of 27 August 2011 and the transcripts of the above-mentioned court hearings, the disciplinary commission held that the applicant had breached the requirements of Articles 14, 16 (I) and 18 of the Law on Advocates and Advocacy Activity (“the Law”).
It appears from the verbatim report of the meeting, submitted to the Court by the applicant, that, although the members of the disciplinary commission asked the applicant to explain the complaint lodged against him, they refused to provide him with a copy of the Nasimi District Court’s decision of 27 August 2011. In that connection, the applicant stated that, as he had not been provided with a copy of that decision, he was not aware of the content of the complaint against him. He also noted that he had not insulted the judge of the Nasimi District Court and asked the disciplinary commission to hear evidence from other lawyers participating in those hearings. It further appears that the President of the disciplinary commission Z.X., openly criticised the applicant for his frequent appearances in the media and his membership of an opposition party, Musavat. In reply, the applicant stated that he was not a member of any political party and that there was no law which prohibited lawyers from appearing in the media. Moreover, the applicant was not given the opportunity to present his tenpage statement concerning the altercation between him and the judge at the court hearings before the Nasimi District Court.
On 16 September 2011 the Presidium held a meeting at which it examined the complaint against the applicant. It decided to refer his case to a court with a view to his disbarment, citing Article 22 (VIII) of the Law. It also decided to suspend the applicant’s activity as a lawyer pending a decision by the court. The Presidium held that the applicant had failed to comply with Articles 14, 16 (I) and 18 of the Law. In that connection the Presidium referred to the Nasimi District Court’s decision of 27 August 2011 and the extracts from the transcripts of the court hearings held on 9, 18 and 27 August 2011. The Presidium’s decision was almost identical in its wording to that of the disciplinary commission.
It appears from the verbatim report of the meeting, submitted to the Court by the applicant, that the Presidium’s meeting was held in the presence of the applicant, who rejected the complaint against him. The President of the ABA, A.T., confirmed that the applicant had not been provided with a copy of the complaint lodged against him and the documents annexed to that complaint. Moreover, he criticised the applicant for his frequent appearances in the media, stating that the investigators and the judges had complained to him about the applicant.
On 30 September 2011 the Presidium lodged an application with the Fuzuli District Court, asking for the applicant’s disbarment. In that application, the Presidium also referred to its previous decisions taken on 26 April 2006 and 26 August 2009, by which the applicant had been seriously warned (ciddi xəbərdarlıq) and reprimanded (töhmət) respectively.
On an unspecified date the applicant lodged an application with the Fuzuli District Court, asking the court to transfer the case to the Narimanov District Court. He substantiated his application by the fact that his actual residence was in Baku and not in Fuzuli.
By a decision of 3 November 2011 the Fuzuli District Court dismissed the application and decided to continue the examination of the case.
On 15 December 2011 the Fuzuli District Court delivered its judgment on the merits and ordered the applicant’s disbarment. The relevant part of the judgment reads as follows:
“It has been established by the court that [the applicant] ... was seriously warned by a decision dated 26 April 2006 of the Presidium on account of breach of the requirements of [the Law] in relation to the exercise of his professional activity and was instructed to comply with the requirements of the Law. Disciplinary proceedings were again instituted against [the applicant] for breaches of the law in the course of the exercise of his professional activity by the Presidium’s decision of 26 August 2009, and he was reprimanded. Moreover, at the preliminary hearing and at the trial in the court proceedings in which R.H. was accused under Article 233 of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Azerbaijan examined by the Nasimi District Court, the representative of the accused, [the applicant] ... insulted the presiding judge and a witness in breach of lawyer ethics, used indecent expressions [nalayiq ifadələr] about participants in the proceedings, failed to comply with the lawful requests of the presiding judge, used indecent expressions about the court in his applications, objections and pleadings, and by those actions created a stressful and nervous situation at the court hearing. At the court hearings held on 9, 18 and 27 August 2011, [the applicant] attempted to breach on numerous occasions the rules of court hearings, committed contempt of court by insulting the participants in the court examination, intentionally ignored the presiding judge’s warnings relating to keeping silent and compliance with instructions; the court’s hearings were disturbed and confrontations appeared because of his unlawful actions and the proceedings were interrupted in order to prevent that situation.
It appeared during the court examination that [the applicant] in the exercise of his activity as a lawyer, by blatantly violating the requirements of [the Law], failed to respect the lawyer’s oath, lawyer ethics and profession of a lawyer and did not draw a conclusion from the consecutive disciplinary sanctions imposed on him. The court considers that the application is legally justified and, as the claimant is right in lodging such as an application against the defendant, it must be allowed.
In accordance with Article 14 (I) of [the Law], a person admitted as a member of the Bar Association takes the following oath at a meeting of the Presidium of the Bar Association before the State flag of the Republic of Azerbaijan:
‘I solemnly swear that, by complying with the Constitution and laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan, being independent, I will honestly and conscientiously perform the duties of a lawyer, be fair and principled, courageously and firmly defend human rights and freedoms, and preserve professional confidentiality.’
Article 16 (I) of this Law provides that, while performing his or her professional activity, a lawyer is obliged to preserve lawyer confidentiality, comply with the lawyer’s oath, and act in accordance with lawyer ethics, to be guided only by the requirements of the law, and so forth.
Pursuant to Article 18 of this Law, while performing his or her professional activity, a lawyer has to perform perfectly his or her duties in accordance with the procedure established by the Law, to refrain from using lawyer confidentiality for personal purposes and for other persons’ material benefit and other purposes, to refrain from actions incompatible with legal-defence activity, calls for commission of unlawful actions, rude and offensive words and actions humiliating human honour and dignity, to refrain from preventing the judge at a court hearing [from acting], from interrupting those talking at that hearing, from disturbing the order of the hearing and to comply with other requirements of lawyer ethics established by the statute on the rules of conduct for lawyers adopted by the general meeting of the ABA.
In accordance with Article 22 (VIII) of this Law, if there are grounds serving as a basis for the exclusion of a lawyer from the Bar Association, on the basis of an opinion of the disciplinary commission, the Presidium of the Bar Association can apply to a court for resolution of the matter and suspend the lawyer’s activity until the entry into force of the court decision on the issue.”
It was pointed out in the judgment that, although the applicant had been duly informed about the hearing, he had failed to attend it.
On 23 January 2012 the applicant appealed against that judgment. In particular, he complained that he had not insulted the judge at the hearing before the Nasimi District Court, but had tried to defend his client. The applicant further alleged that his case had not been duly examined by the ABA, which had wanted to punish him for his independence and social activism. He also submitted that the first-instance court’s reference to his previous disciplinary sanctions was irrelevant. In that connection, he pointed out that he could not have been seriously warned in 2006 because no such disciplinary sanction had been provided for by the legislation and that he had never been subjected to a reprimand in the disciplinary proceedings instituted against him in 2009. The applicant further complained that, although the first-instance court had relied on Article 22 of the Law as the legal basis for his disbarment, that Law failed to specify the grounds for disbarment of a lawyer and did not comply with the quality of law requirements. Moreover, he had been sanctioned for alleged breach of lawyer ethics in the absence of any statute on the rules of conduct for lawyers, which should have established the rules of conduct for lawyers.
In the course of the court proceedings before the appellate court, in support of his version of the events, the applicant asked the court to hear evidence from the witnesses who had been present at the hearing of 27 August 2011 before the Nasimi District Court. In that connection, he submitted a list of sixteen witnesses, including four lawyers who had been present at the hearing in question.
On 10 May 2012 the Shirvan Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal, finding that the first-instance court’s judgment had been justified. The appellate court held that it could not hear evidence from the witnesses on behalf of the applicant because the applicant had failed to attend the hearing before the first-instance court and submit the same application before that court without any good reason. The appellate court made, however, no mention of the applicant’s particular complaints relating to the previous disciplinary sanctions imposed on him, the failure of the Law to comply with the quality of law requirements and the absence of any statute on the rules of conduct for lawyers.
On 31 October 2012 the applicant lodged a cassation appeal, reiterating his previous complaints.
On 8 May 2013 the Supreme Court upheld the Shirvan Court of Appeal’s judgment of 10 May 2012.
The relevant part of the Law, as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
“I.  A person admitted as a member of the Bar Association takes the following oath at a meeting of the Presidium of the Bar Association before the State flag of the Republic of Azerbaijan:
‘I solemnly swear that, by complying with the Constitution and laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan, being independent, I will honestly and conscientiously perform the duties of a lawyer, be fair and principled, courageously and firmly defend human rights and freedoms, and preserve professional confidentiality.’
...”
“I.  While performing his or her professional activity a lawyer is obliged:
to execute the requirements of the law, use all the means provided for by the legislation to protect the interests of the defended or represented person;
to preserve lawyer confidentiality, comply with the lawyer’s oath, and act in accordance with lawyer ethics;
to be guided only by the requirements of the law;
...”
“While performing his or her professional activity a lawyer has to perform perfectly his or her duties in accordance with the procedure established by this Law, to refrain from using lawyer confidentiality for personal purposes and for other persons’ lucrative and other purposes, to refrain from actions incompatible with legal-defence activity, calls for commission of unlawful actions, rude and offensive words and actions humiliating human honour and dignity, to refrain from preventing the judge at a court hearing [from acting], from interrupting those talking at that hearing, from disturbing the order of the hearing and to comply with other requirements of lawyer ethics established by the statute on the rules of conduct for lawyers adopted by the general meeting of the ABA.”
“I. The disciplinary commission of lawyers is set up within the Presidium of the Bar Association for the purposes of the examination of complaints and applications relating to disciplinary violations committed by lawyers while exercising their professional duties and for the resolution of matters relating to their disciplinary responsibility.
...”
“I.  A lawyer is subjected to disciplinary responsibility in the event of a disclosure of a breach of the provisions of this Law and other legislative acts, the statute on the rules of conduct for lawyers (vəkillərin davranış qaydaları haqqında Əsasnamə), and the norms of lawyer ethics (vəkil etikası normaları) in the exercise of his or her professional duty.
...
The Presidium of the Bar Association may apply in respect of a lawyer the following disciplinary sanctions on the basis of an opinion of the disciplinary commission:
admonition (irad tutma);
reprimand (töhmət);
suspension from practising for a period from three months to one year;
...
If there are grounds serving as a basis for exclusion (xaric edilməyə səbəb ola biləcək əsaslar) of a lawyer from the Bar Association, on the basis of an opinion of the disciplinary commission, the Presidium of the Bar Association can apply to a court for resolution of the matter and suspend the lawyer’s activity until the entry into force of the court decision on the issue.”
The statute was adopted for the first time by a general meeting of the ABA held on 8 December 2012.
Recommendation R (2000) 21 of the Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers to member States on the freedom of exercise of the profession of lawyer (adopted on 25 October 2000) states as follows:
“The Committee of Ministers ...
... Underlining the fundamental role that lawyers and professional associations of lawyers also play in ensuring the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
Desiring to promote the freedom of exercise of the profession of lawyer in order to strengthen the Rule of Law, in which lawyers take part, in particular in the role of defending individual freedoms;
Conscious of the need for a fair system of administration of justice which guarantees the independence of lawyers in the discharge of their professional duties without any improper restriction, influence, inducement, pressure, threats or interference, direct or indirect, from any quarter or for any reason;
... Recommends the governments of member States to take or reinforce, as the case may be, all measures they consider necessary with a view to the implementation of the principles contained in this Recommendation.
...
Principle VI – Disciplinary proceedings
Where lawyers do not act in accordance with their professional standards, set out in codes of conduct drawn up by Bar associations or other associations of lawyers or by legislation, appropriate measures should be taken, including disciplinary proceedings.
Bar associations or other lawyers’ professional associations should be responsible for or, where appropriate, be entitled to participate in the conduct of disciplinary proceedings concerning lawyers.
Disciplinary proceedings should be conducted with full respect of the principles and rules laid down in the European Convention on Human Rights, including the right of the lawyer concerned to participate in the proceedings and to apply for judicial review of the decision.
The principle of proportionality should be respected in determining sanctions for disciplinary offences committed by lawyers.”
The Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers (adopted by the Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held in Havana, Cuba, from 27 August to 7 September 1990) state, in particular:
“Disciplinary proceedings
Codes of professional conduct for lawyers shall be established by the legal profession through its appropriate organs, or by legislation, in accordance with national law and custom and recognised international standards and norms.
Charges or complaints made against lawyers in their professional capacity shall be processed expeditiously and fairly under appropriate procedures. Lawyers shall have the right to a fair hearing, including the right to be assisted by a lawyer of their choice.
Disciplinary proceedings against lawyers shall be brought before an impartial disciplinary committee established by the legal profession, before an independent statutory authority, or before a court, and shall be subject to an independent judicial review.
All disciplinary proceedings shall be determined in accordance with the code of professional conduct and other recognised standards and ethics of the legal profession and in the light of these principles.”