The case originated in an application (no. 28255/07) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Turkish nationals, Mr İlhan Selçuk (“the first applicant”) and Mr Güray Tekin Öz (“the second applicant”) and by Yeni Gün Haber Ajansı Basın ve Yayıncılık A.Ş., a joint-stock publishing company (“the third applicant”) and Cumhuriyet Vakfı, an association, (“the fourth applicant”), on 2 July 2007.
The applicants were represented by Mr M. S. Gemalmaz and Mr A. Atalay, lawyers practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 22 March 2010 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The first applicant, born in 1925, was the chief editorial writer of the daily national newspaper Cumhuriyet (“the Republic”) at the material time and lived in Istanbul. The second applicant, born in 1949, was the editorinchief of the newspaper and lives in Istanbul. The third applicant, a jointstock company established under Turkish law with its registered office in Istanbul, is the publisher of Cumhuriyet. The fourth applicant, an association founded in Istanbul, is the owner of the newspaper.
On 27 November 1995 The Guardian newspaper published an article written by Jonathan Rugman entitled “Turkish Islamists aim for power”, based on an interview held with Mr Abdullah Gül, a Member of Parliament (“MP”) for Refah Partisi (“the Welfare Party”) at the material time. The relevant part of the article read as follows:
“Abdullah Gül is dressed in a well-cut suit and tie. The MP may be the deputy leader of Turkey’s Islamic revivalist Welfare Party, Refah, but he speaks good English and seems to have been schooled within the political traditions of the West.
Such is his charm that Mr Gül is often given the task of explaining Welfare’s policies to suspicious foreigners. Yet his message is unmistakably radical, a direct challenge to Turkey’s unique status as the only secular democracy among 52 Muslim countries.
‘This is the end of the republican period’ Mr Gül says flatly, ‘if 60 per cent of Ankara’s population is living in shacks, then the secular system has failed and we definitely want to change it’.”
On 28 November 1995 a Turkish daily newspaper, Posta, reported on the article published in The Guardian with the following headline: “Here is the Welfare Party’s real aim: the chilling confession”. The news piece, which included a copy of the Guardian article and a summary thereof, indicated that Mr Gül had “openly defied the secular system and the republic”.
On 15 December 1995 The Guardian published another article by Jonathan Rugman, headed “Turkey hails customs deal as step nearer EU”, the relevant part of which read as follows:
“The Turkish press was rejoicing yesterday at the European Parliament’s decision to ratify a customs union with Ankara, 22 years after it was initiated.
...
Abdullah Gül, deputy leader of the pro-Islamic Welfare Party, said state prosecutors planned to take him to court because of a Guardian article which quoted him as saying that his party wanted to change Turkey’s secular system.
Mr Gül said that he did not mean to abolish the Turkish republic, simply to end an era of public unhappiness.”
Following the dissolution of the Welfare Party by the Turkish Constitutional Court, Mr Gül played a leading role in the founding of Adalet ve Kalkınma Partisi (“Justice and Development Party” or “AKP”) in 2001. In November 2002, he formed the 58th Government of the Turkish Republic as Prime Minister, and subsequently served as Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister in the 59th Government from 2003 to 2007.
On 24 April 2007 Mr Gül was named as the AKP candidate for the upcoming Presidential elections.
On 29 April 2007 the daily Cumhuriyet ran an advertisement that headlined the first page, which consisted of the following quote by Mr Gül, printed in white letters against a red background covering approximately one quarter of the page:
“It is the end of the republic in Turkey ... We definitely want to change the secular system −Abdullah Gül.”
The quote was followed by a slogan, “Take care of your Republic”, followed by an inset picture of the newspaper.
It appears that in the following day’s issue, Cumhuriyet published a short article regarding the background of this advertisement, explaining that it was a direct quote from an interview that Mr Gül had given to The Guardian on 27 November 1995.
On 1 May 2007 Cumhuriyet ran the same advertisement, with an identical layout.
On 2 May 2007 another major Turkish daily newspaper, Hürriyet, reported that Jonathan Rugman, the Guardian journalist who had conducted the contentious interview with Mr Gül in 1995, had confirmed that Mr Gül had uttered the statement “we will change the secular system” during the interview.
On 27 April 2007 the first round of the Presidential elections was held at the Grand National Assembly of Turkey (“the Parliament”). Mr Gül, the only candidate running for Presidency, failed to receive the requisite qualified majority for election in the first round, which necessitated the holding of a second round.
However, before the second round of elections could be held, the Constitutional Court of Turkey, upon a request from the main opposition party (Cumhuriyet Halk Partisi), annulled the first round of the elections on 1 May 2007 on the ground that the required quorum had not been reached. Subsequent attempts to repeat the first round of the elections proved unsuccessful on account of the failure to meet the necessary quorum due to boycotts from opposition MPs. In view of the deadlock in the Parliament over the election of the President, it was decided on 9 May 2007 to postpone the elections.
As a result of the failure of the Parliament to elect a President, the Parliamentary elections, which were originally scheduled to be held subsequent to the election of the President, were brought forward in accordance with the terms of the now defunct Article 102 of the Turkish Constitution. Accordingly, on 22 July 2007, Parliamentary elections were held, which resulted in the incumbent AKP securing its second term in office.
In August 2007, the newly elected Parliament restarted the Presidential election process. Mr Gül was renominated by his party as President.
On 28 August 2007 Mr Gül was elected by the Parliament as the President of the Republic of Turkey from amongst three candidates.
In the meantime, on 2 May 2007 Mr Gül brought a civil action for compensation against the applicants before the Ankara Civil Court of First Instance, arguing that the fictitious and defamatory statement published in Cumhuriyet on 29 April and 1 May 2007 carried the sole aim of damaging his reputation and thus constituted an attack on his personality rights. He highlighted that following the publication of the impugned article on 27 November 1995, he had informed The Guardian that he had not made the statements published therein, and requested a correction. The said newspaper had accordingly rectified its error in a subsequent article published on 15 December 1995, explaining that Mr Gül had not pronounced upon the “republic” or “secularity” in his interview, but had only referred to the public discontent in a socio-economic context. He claimed that Cumhuriyet itself had acknowledged the inaccuracy of the statement it had published in its issue of 30 April 2007. He further contended that the statement attributed to him did not serve a “public interest” in any event, for it lacked “currency”, and that the publication of such dated news was a further sign of bad faith on the part of Cumhuriyet. Mr Gül requested compensation for nonpecuniary damage in the amount of 50,000 Turkish liras (TRY) from the Ankara Civil Court of First Instance, as well as an interim injunction against the statement in question. He submitted the relevant copies of Cumhuriyet, as well as a number of Court of Cassation decisions in support of his claim, but not the copies of the Guardian articles in question.
On 5 May 2007 the 25th Chamber of the Ankara Civil Court of First Instance examined the claimant’s request and decided, in the light of the evidence submitted by Mr Gül and without hearing the applicants’ arguments, to grant the interim injunction. The injunction in question was formulated as follows:
“In accordance with Articles 24 and 25 of the Civil Code and Article 103 and the succeeding provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, the publication of the material attributed to the claimant Abdullah Gül, as published on the front page of the newspaper Cumhuriyet in the issues of 29 April 2007 and 1 May 2007, as well as any news that may be subject to the [present] court proceedings, be suspended/prevented as a precautionary measure.”
The court ordered the notification of the injunction decision to the applicants.
On 7 May 2007 the Ankara Civil Court of First Instance held a preliminary hearing in the main compensation proceedings in the absence of the parties, at which it ordered that the claimant’s request and other material submitted by him be communicated to the applicants together with the injunction decision. It also invited the applicants to submit their defence on the merits of the case, along with any objections they might have against the interim injunction, and scheduled the first hearing for 6 June 2007.
On 24 May 2007 the applicants submitted their written defence submissions to the first-instance court, together with a request for the lifting of the interim injunction. The applicants argued, inter alia, that the statement under consideration in the present case was a direct quote from an interview that Mr Gül had given to a journalist from The Guardian on 27 November 1995; that this interview had also been reported in the Turkish daily Posta; that the subsequent article published by The Guardian on 15 December 1995 did not constitute a “correction” as alleged, as it did not entail a denial or retraction of the previous statement; that in a statement he had made to the newspaper Hürriyet, the Guardian journalist Jonathan Rugman had verified that Mr Gül had indeed made the impugned declaration; that the London correspondent of Cumhuriyet had been informed by the foreign affairs editor of The Guardian that there were no correction requests from Mr Gül in their archives in relation to the article of 27 November 1995; and that the article published in Cumhuriyet on 30 April 2007 was an objective account of the background to Mr Gül’s quote, and not an acknowledgment of the inaccuracy of this statement as alleged. The applicants added that contrary to the claimant’s allegations, the statement in question was of great public interest pending the Presidential elections, as the public had the right to be informed about the background and political opinions of Presidential candidates. On the procedural side, the applicants claimed that the interim injunction based on Article 25 of the Civil Code amounted to a “ban” on the publication of the relevant material, whereas Article 26 of the Turkish Constitution only allowed for the “limitation” of the freedom of the press in certain conditions, including for the purposes of the protection of the reputation of others. Moreover, the second part of the injunction, which ordered the suspension/prevention of the publication of “news that might be subject to the court proceedings” in a sweeping manner, was set out in extremely vague terms. It thus had the effect of preventing the publication of any news, articles or commentaries about Mr Gül, thereby granting him quasi-immunity from criticism as a Presidential candidate. For the foregoing reasons, the applicants requested the lifting of the interim injunction.
At the first hearing in the main compensation proceedings held on 6 June 2007, the 25th Chamber of the Ankara Civil Court of First Instance dismissed the applicants’ request for the interim injunction to be lifted without any explanation. According to the information in the case file, the subsequent hearings on 10 July and 23 October 2007 dealt with procedural matters.
On 15 February 2008 Mr Gül instructed his lawyer to withdraw the case from the Ankara Civil Court of First Instance. He stated that although he considered his personality rights to have been violated by reason of the publications in question, he did not deem it appropriate to pursue this case in view of his newly acquired constitutional status as the President of the Republic.
On 27 March 2008 Mr Gül’s lawyer conveyed his client’s request to the first-instance court.
On the same day the Ankara Civil Court of First Instance dismissed the case as requested and lifted the interim injunction effective of that date.
Article 26 of the Turkish Constitution, on the freedom of expression and dissemination of thought, reads as follows:
“Everyone has the right to express and disseminate his thoughts and opinions by speech, in writing or in pictures or through other media, individually or collectively. This right includes the freedom to receive and impart information and ideas without interference from official authorities...
The exercise of these freedoms may be restricted for the purposes of ... protecting the reputation and rights and private and family life of others, ... or ensuring the proper functioning of the judiciary.
The formalities, conditions and procedures to be applied in exercising the right to expression and dissemination of thought shall be prescribed by law”.
Article 28 of the Turkish Constitution, on the freedom of the press, provides that:
“The press is free, and shall not be censored.
...
The State shall take the necessary measures to ensure freedom of the press and freedom of information.
In the limitation of the freedom of the press, Article 26 ... of the Constitution [is] applicable.
...
No ban shall be placed on the reporting of events, except by decision of a judge with an aim to ensure the proper functioning of the judiciary, within the limits specified by law.
...”
Article 141 paragraphs 3 and 4 of the Turkish Constitution provide the following:
“All court decisions shall be reasoned.
It is the duty of the judiciary to conclude trials as quickly as possible and at the minimum cost.”
Article 3 of the Press Law (Law no. 5187) provides as follows:
“The press is free. This freedom includes the rights of accessing, disseminating, criticising, interpreting [information] ...
The exercise of the freedom press can only be limited as necessary in a democratic society, for the protection of the reputation and rights of others, public health and morals, national security, public order, public safety and territorial integrity, for preventing the disclosure of State secrets or commission of crimes, [and] maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.”
The relevant provisions of the Civil Code (Law no. 4721) read as follows:
“A person subject to an unlawful attack on his/her personal rights may claim protection from a judge against the individuals who made the attack.
Any such attack shall be deemed unlawful, unless ... it is justified by a superior private or public interest or by the use of power conferred by law.”
“The plaintiff may ask a judge to prevent the threat of attack, to stop the continuation of an attack ...”
Article 49 of the Code of Obligations (Law no. 818) in force at the material time provided as follows:
“Any person who alleges that his/her personality rights have been unlawfully violated can claim compensation for non-pecuniary damage.
In determining the amount of this compensation, the judge shall take into account the parties’ respective positions, occupations and other social and economic factors ...”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure (Law no. 1086) in force at the material time (repealed on 1 October 2011) provided as follows:
“... The judge may order the execution of an interim measure in circumstances where the deferral [of action] may be dangerous or may cause significant harm, with a view to averting such danger or damage.”
“A request for an interim measure shall be submitted to the judge by a written petition. Immediately after the request and as a matter of urgency both parties shall be summoned and the required decision shall be given even if they do not attend.
In urgent cases or in a case where the immediate protection of the claimant’s rights necessitates, an interim measure may be applied without summoning the parties.”
“Objection to an interim measure granted in absentia is permissible. Such objection shall not postpone the enforcement [of the interim measure], unless a decision for the stay of enforcement is given.”
“Following the pronouncement or delivery of the judgment on the merits, the interim measure is lifted. Nevertheless, the court may decide to prolong the measure for a period that it shall set to ensure the execution of the judgment.”
“A person who does not comply with the order set out in the interim injunction decision ... shall be sanctioned by imprisonment for a period of between one and six months, unless the action in question entails a heavier sanction under the Turkish Criminal Code.”
The Court has reviewed the legislations of nineteen Council of Europe Member States with the aim of obtaining comparative data regarding procedural guarantees afforded in other Member States in interim injunction proceedings concerning personality rights.
It appears that although there is an adversarial hearing at some stage of the injunction proceedings in most of the States surveyed, the domestic court is nevertheless authorised by law to grant an interim injunction in the absence of an adversarial hearing in very urgent or exceptional cases (see, for example, section 12 § 2 of the Human Rights Act of 1998 of the United Kingdom). In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the defendant then has a possibility to object to the injunction, which must be reviewed by the court in an oral hearing to be held in the following three days (Civil Procedure Act Sections 268290). This period is fifteen days in Italy (Article 669 of the Civil Procedural Code).
The relevant legislation and case-law in a number of Member States also indicate that an interim injunction should not be construed too broadly and that any decision ordering one should be reasoned.
A further procedural safeguard observed in some Member States concerns the issue of placing a time-limit on interim injunctions. For instance, in Austria, an interim injunction should specify the time period for which it has been issued. There are also various examples from the Belgian case-law of interim injunctions being limited to a specific time period.
As part of its International Standards Series, “Article 19” (a non-governmental organisation specialising in freedom of expression based in London) published a study on the “Principles on Freedom of Expression and Protection of Reputation” in July 2000. One of the principles mentioned therein is the procedural requirement for “courts to ensure that each stage of defamation proceedings is conducted with reasonable dispatch, in order to limit the negative impact of delay on freedom of expression”. Another principle concerns the necessity for “any application of a restriction on freedom of expression to be subject to adequate safeguards against abuse”.