The case concerns legislative amendments removing the applicants’ usufruct rights over agricultural land. The applicants relied on Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
The applicant in application no. 11599/14 (“the first applicant”), C.A. Zrt., is a joint stock company registered under Hungarian law, seated in Csárdaszállás. The applicant in application no. 11602/14 (“the second applicant”), Mr T.R., was born in 1978 and lives in Bölcske. The applicants were represented by Mr D. Karsai, a lawyer practising in Budapest.
The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Z. Tallódi, of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
Between 1995 and 2011, the applicants acquired usufruct rights over Hungarian agricultural lands by concluding usufruct contracts with Hungarian landowners. Under these contracts, the applicants were entitled to use the agricultural lands for different periods of time, ranging from a 50year to a life-long beneficiary status.
The rights were formally registered in the land register.
Up until 31 December 2001, domestic natural and legal persons, as well as foreign natural and legal persons, were able to contract usufruct rights on agricultural land without any legal limitation. After this date, no foreign person could establish such rights over agricultural lands in Hungary. According to the Government, this legislative change resulted in an increase in the number of concealed contracts by means of which foreign natural and legal persons obtained usufruct rights in Hungary. As of 1 January 2013, new contracts between domestic natural persons for the pro futuro establishment of usufruct rights over agricultural lands were statutorily declared null and void by the implementation of an amendment contained in section 7 of Act no. CCXIII of 2012 on the Amendment of Certain Acts on Agriculture with the exception of those concluded by and between close relatives.
With a view to terminating these usufruct rights over agricultural lands obtained through concealed contracts, Parliament enacted Act no. CCXII of 2013 on Certain Provisions and Transitional Rules related to Act no. CXXII of 2013 on Transactions in Agricultural and Forestry Land (hereafter “the Transition Act”) which was promulgated on 12 December 2013 and came into effect on 14 December 2013. Section 108 of the Transition Act (see paragraph 14 below) terminated ipso iure all usufruct rights over agricultural lands as of 1 May 2014, except for rights established between close relatives.
The deregistration of the usufruct rights was implemented under the then effective rules of Act no. CXLI of 1997 on the Land Registry (hereafter “the Land Registry Act”). Section 94 of the Land Registry Act obliged the authority to request a declaration from natural persons affected by the measures in order to verify whether they were close relatives of the owner of the land. The usufruct rights were struck out of the land register as a matter of course in cases where the affected natural persons failed to submit a declaration demonstrating close relationship with the owner of the land or where the usufruct right holder was a legal person.
The applicants’ usufruct rights were struck out of the land register, on various dates, by decisions of declarative effect given by the competent administrative authorities in accordance with the Transition Act, since the first applicant was a legal person and the second applicant was not a close relative of the owner of the land.
In February 2014 constitutional complaints were lodged by various complainants, including the applicants, with the Constitutional Court against the provisions of the Transition Act, arguing that the ex lege termination of lawfully acquired usufruct rights without any indemnification or transitory period violated the constitutional protection of property rights.
The Constitutional Court analysed the alleged unconstitutionality of section 108.
On 21 July 2015 it found, in decision no. 25/2015. (VII.21.) AB, that the legislator had failed to enact extraordinary rules to compensate the contracting parties for the financial disadvantages deriving from the ex lege termination of the usufruct and use contracts regulated by the Transition Act. It emphasised that, given the diversity of the concerned legal relationships, the general settlement rules applicable under civil law were not capable of resolving all possible claims between the parties concerned. Therefore, as a result of the failure of the legislator to enact a statutory settlement regime, an unconstitutional omission was found. The Constitutional Court called the legislator to put an end to it by 1 December 2015 at the latest.
At the date of the latest information available to the Court provided by the applicants on 30 May 2018, the Government had not yet created the compensation scheme prescribed by the Constitutional Court.
Section 108 of the Transition Act provides as follows:
“(1) Any usufruct and right of use existing on 30 April 2014, founded by a contract entered into by and between not close relatives, for indefinite or a definite period of time ending after 30 April 2014, shall cease on 1 May 2014, by operation of law.
(2) A contract on the assignment of the right to use a piece of land for a period of time following the cessation of the usufruct right is null and void if it has been entered into by the beneficiary of the usufruct right existing until the end of the period of time determined under subsection (1).
(3) A contract on the assignment of the right to use the piece of land existing until the end of the period of time determined under subsection (1), entered into by a beneficiary of the usufruct right, prior to the entry into force of Act no. XVI of 2014 on the amendment of collective investment forms and their trustees as well as of certain financial acts, ceases on 1 September 2014 by operation of law.”