The case concerns the applicant’s allegations that he had been punished twice for the same offence in violation of Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention. The applicant was first fined in minor-offence proceedings for speeding, driving a defective vehicle and failing to remain at the scene of an accident. In subsequent criminal proceedings, the applicant was sentenced to a prison term for causing a road-traffic accident in which another person died.
The applicant was born in 1966. He was represented before the Court by Mr G. Marjanović, a lawyer practising in Rijeka.
The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
At around 11.20 a.m. on 13 October 2004 the applicant, who was driving over the speed limit, caused a road accident in Rijeka in which a person died.
On 25 November 2004 the Rijeka police requested that minor-offence proceedings be brought against the applicant in the Rijeka Minor Offences Court (Prekršajni sud u Rijeci). On 31 July 2006 the court issued a penalty notice (prekršajni nalog) finding the applicant guilty. In so far as relevant, the court stated as follows.
“[O]n 13 October 2004 at 11.20 a.m. [the applicant] was driving a vehicle ... in the settlement of Draga Brig from the direction of Sv. Kuzan towards Rijeka.
[The applicant] reached house no. 73/9 on a section of the road with no pavement, where the road is narrow and visibility reduced owing to the high walls and hedges of the courtyards of the houses alongside and speed is limited to 40 kph by a road sign. The length of the skid marks, which measured 29 metres, helped establish that the speed [reached] had been at least 80 kph. This amounted to exceeding the speed limit by 40 kph at the moment when he spotted a pedestrian, S.M., stepping out onto the road from the courtyard of house no. 73/9. [The applicant] lost control of the vehicle and with its front right side hit the pedestrian and continued to move uncontrollably. After a further 12.5 metres the front right side of the vehicle hit a stone wall by the right edge of the road, after which [the applicant] left the scene of the accident without stopping, or coming to the aid of the victim, or informing the police of the accident or waiting for the arrival of the police. A later inspection of the vehicle showed that it was technically defective in that the tread on the front tyres was worn to below the .TWI [tread wear indicator] recommended by the manufacturer. Thus:
by driving [a vehicle] in a settlement while exceeding the speed limit by 40 kph, which is contrary to section 53(1) of the Road Traffic Safety Act,
[the applicant] committed a minor offence punishable under section 53(5) of the same Act;
by driving a vehicle [some of] whose equipment was faulty and as a driver in [road] traffic who was acting contrary to section 239(1) of the Road Traffic Safety Act,
[the applicant] committed a minor offence punishable under section 239(9) of the same Act;
by acting contrary to section 176(1)(3) of the Road Traffic Safety Act because he did not stay at the scene of the accident or inform the nearest police station or wait for the arrival of a person authorised to carry out an on-site inspection,
[the applicant] committed a minor offence punishable under section 176(3) of the above-mentioned Act.”
The applicant was fined 700 Croatian kunas (HRK – approximately 95 euros (EUR)) for exceeding the speed limit, HRK 400 (approximately EUR 55) for driving a defective car and HRK 3,000 (approximately EUR 400) for leaving the scene without informing the police. A six-month driving ban was imposed on him and he had five points added to his driving licence.
No appeal having been lodged against the Rijeka Minor Offences Court’s penalty notice, that decision became final on 31 July 2006.
In the meantime, having questioned the applicant and several other witnesses, on 9 June 2005 the Rijeka State Attorney’s Office indicted the applicant on charges under Article 272 of the Criminal Code of causing a fatal road accident on 13 October 2004. The relevant part of the bill of indictment (optužnica) reads as follows:
“[O]n 13 October 2004 at 11.20 a.m. in the settlement of Draga Brig at house no. 73/9 [the applicant] drove a vehicle ... from the direction of Sveti Kuzma towards Rijeka, ... agreeing to jeopardise the safety of other road users, contrary to section 53(1) of the Road Traffic Safety Act, at a speed of at least 72 kph despite the speed limit being set at 40 kph... lost control of the vehicle and with its front right side hit a pedestrian... S.M., causing her injuries... [and ultimately] death;
so that, by violating the regulations on road-traffic safety, he jeopardised traffic causing a car accident in which one person died,
by which he committed a criminal offence against the general safety of persons and property and road-traffic safety by causing a road accident under Article 272 §§ 1 and 3 of the Criminal Code...”
On 21 March 2011 the Rijeka Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Rijeci) found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to one year and six months’ imprisonment. The relevant part of the court judgment reads as follows.
“[O]n 13 October 2004 at about 11.20 a.m. in the settlement of Draga Brig at house no. 73/9 [the applicant] drove a vehicle ... from the direction of Sveti Kuzma towards Rijeka, at a speed of 69.6 kph, contrary to section 53(1) of the Road Traffic Safety Act, despite the speed limit being set at 40 kph as indicated by a road sign, recklessly thinking that such driving would not put at risk the safety of other road users. It was because of this that, on reaching house no. 73/9 on a section of the road without a pavement, and while braking, he lost control of the vehicle and with its front right side hit a pedestrian, S.M., who had stepped out onto the road from a courtyard ... Owing to this S.M. sustained numerous bodily injuries ... which were classified as particularly serious and resulted in [S.M.’s] death. Thus his reckless conduct, which violated the regulations on road-traffic safety, put [road users] at such a risk that he caused a road accident in which a person died, by which he committed a criminal offence against the general safety of persons and property and road-traffic safety by causing a road accident under Article 272 §§ 1, 2 and 4 of the Criminal Code....
Furthermore, [the court] inspected documents in the case file... It also inspected the case file of the Rijeka Minor Offences Court in case no. P-678/05...”
On 5 September 2012 the Rijeka County Court (Županijski sud u Rijeci) upheld the judgment at first instance. In reply to the applicant’s ne bis in idem complaint, the second-instance court held as follows:
“[The applicant] challenges the judgment at first instance, claiming that ... the case at hand has been previously adjudicated, since the penalty imposed for the criminal act stems from a judgment of the Minor Offences Court ... However, the breach of traffic regulations in question, which resulted in causing danger in traffic and ultimately a person’s death, is not classified as a minor offence, so [the applicant] could not have been charged in substance with the same facts. The case concerns a different subject of protection from an offence and a different degree of seriousness of a violation, so the [applicant’s] argument that the matter has already been adjudicated cannot be accepted ...”
On 29 January 2013 the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske) rejected the applicant’s request for extraordinary review of a final judgment (zahtjev za izvanredno preispitivanje pravomocne presude). In so far as relevant, the Supreme Court held as follows:
“[S]ince the matter concerns a different subject of protection from an offence and a different degree of seriousness of the violation, it should be emphasised that the case in question does not concern a matter which has already been adjudicated ...”
On 29 May 2013 the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske) declared a constitutional complaint brought by the applicant inadmissible as manifestly ill-founded. The Constitutional Court’s decision was served on the applicant’s representative on 13 June 2013.
The relevant parts of the Road Traffic Safety Act (Zakon o sigurnosti prometa na cestama, Official Gazette nos. 56/1990, 135/1997, 113/2000, 28/2001 and 76/2010) provide as follows.
Section 53(1) provides that on roads in populated areas, the speed limit is 50 kph or whichever limit is displayed on a road sign. Section 53(2) provides that the penalty for driving between 30 and 50 kph above the speed limit is a fine of HRK 700 and an endorsement with two points on the person’s driving licence.
Section 176(1) and (3) requires that anyone involved in a road accident in which a person has been injured must stay at the scene of the accident, come to the aid of victims, do everything in his or her power to remove any other hazards so as to allow traffic to keep moving, preserve evidence, inform the nearest police station of the accident and wait for the arrival of a person authorised to carry out an on-site inspection. Failure to comply carries a fine of at least HRK 3,000.
Section 239(1) and (8) requires that vehicles in road traffic satisfy certain conditions as regards their dimensions, maximum weight, axle load and environmental considerations and that they are fitted with appropriate devices and equipment. Failure to comply carries a fine of HRK 400.
The relevant provisions of the Criminal Code (Kazneni zakon, Official Gazette no. 110/1997 with subsequent amendments), as in force at the material time, read as follows:
“2.  A prison sentence, a fine or a fine imposed in minor-offence proceedings shall count towards the penalty for a criminal offence if the description of that criminal offence corresponds to the minor offence for which the penalty has been imposed.”
“1.  Any person who, by violating road-traffic safety regulations, endangers traffic such that he causes an accident in which another person suffers serious bodily injury or extensive pecuniary damage shall be liable to a term of imprisonment of six months to five years.
If the criminal offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article has been committed recklessly, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or a term of imprisonment of up to three years. ...
If the criminal offence referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article results in the death of one or more persons, the perpetrator shall be punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to five years.”
In its judgments in case C-525/15 Luca Menci, adopted on 20 March 2018, the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) examined whether there had been a violation of the ne bis in idem principle in a case where both criminal and administrative sanctions had been imposed for failure to pay VAT. The CJEU concluded that such duplication of proceedings and penalties constituted a limitation of the ne bis in idem principle requiring justification. In particular, national legislation authorising a duplication of proceedings and penalties of a criminal nature had to pursue an objective of general interest, such as to justify a duplication of proceedings and penalties, it being necessary for those proceedings and penalties to pursue additional objectives; establish clear and precise rules allowing individuals to predict which acts or omissions were liable to be subject to such duplication of proceedings and penalties; ensure that the proceedings were coordinated in order to limit to what is strictly necessary the additional disadvantage which results, for the persons concerned, from a duplication of proceedings; and limit the severity of all of the penalties imposed to what is strictly necessary in relation to the seriousness of the offence concerned.