The case originated in an application (no. 41226/09) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Murat Işıkırık (“the applicant”), on 29 July 2009.
The applicant was represented by Ms C. Vine, Ms S. Karakaş and Mr O. Moore, lawyers practising in London, and Ms M. Danış Beştaş and Mr B. Büyük, lawyers practising in Diyarbakır and Mardin respectively. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged violations of Article 5 § 3, Article 6 § 1, and Articles 10, 11 and 14 of the Convention.
On 22 October 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1984 and lives in Mardin. At the time of the events giving rise to the present application, the applicant was a student at the Philosophy Department of the Faculty of Arts and Science at Dicle University.
On 28 March 2006 a funeral of four militants of the PKK (Kurdish Workers’ Party), an illegal armed organisation, took place in Diyarbakır.
An incident report regarding events that took place between 28 March and 1 April 2006 was prepared on 3 April 2006 by the police and was signed by more than 220 officers. It stated that on 24 March 2006 fourteen PKK militants had been killed by the security forces and that the remains of four of the militants were released to their families in order to be buried in Diyarbakır. On 28 March 2006 at around 7 a.m., the remains were taken to a mosque where around 1,5002,000 people had gathered. The crowd blocked the traffic as they carried the coffins, chanted separatist, hostile slogans in Turkish and Kurdish in support of the organisation and Abdullah Öcalan, the leader of the PKK, and waved PKK posters and banners. The crowd then walked to a cemetery for the burial of the deceased. The security forces did not intervene as there were relatives of the deceased, including children and old people, in the crowd. The police report stated that after the burial ceremony had been completed, a group of about 1,000 people continued to march. They were warned by the police that they were not allowed to chant illegal slogans, disseminate propaganda in support of the organisation or wave illegal flags. However, the crowd became agitated and started throwing stones at the police officers on duty, injuring a number of them and causing extensive damage to State buildings and vehicles, banks, shops and other vehicles belonging to private individuals. According to the police report, more people later joined the illegal demonstration, which continued on 29, 30 and 31 March and 1 April. The report further stated that prior to those events some media organs controlled by the PKK had called for mass protests.
On 5 March 2007 a demonstration was held on the campus of Dicle University to protest about the conditions of Abdullah Öcalan’s detention, and in particular about his alleged poisoning by the Turkish authorities. A group of forty people entered the university building and asked the students to leave. They held a press conference on the premises of the university and chanted slogans in favour of the PKK and Abdullah Öcalan.
On 9 March 2007 the applicant was arrested.
On 10 March 2007 he was questioned at the anti-terror branch of the Diyarbakır police headquarters where he denied taking part in both the demonstration of 5 March 2007 and the funeral of 28 March 2006 and the subsequent events.
On the same day, the applicant made a statement to the Diyarbakır public prosecutor. He was shown photographs that had been taken of him on 28 March 2006 and 5 March 2007 during the funeral and the demonstration at the university. The applicant accepted that he had participated in the funeral of one of the PKK militants. He stated that the militant had been a relative of a friend of his, that he had attended the funeral as a religious duty, but that he had not attacked the police with stones. The applicant also stated that on 5 March 2007 he had stood in front of the university building with other students for a short while and that his photograph must have been taken then. He stated that he had not chanted slogans with the demonstrators.
The applicant was brought before a judge of the Diyarbakır Assize Court later that day. He maintained that his statements to the public prosecutor had reflected the truth. The judge remanded the applicant in custody on the basis of a strong suspicion that he had committed the offence of disseminating propaganda in support of a terrorist organisation or its purposes.
On 8 May 2007 the Diyarbakır public prosecutor filed a bill of indictment against the applicant with the Diyarbakır Assize Court. The applicant was charged with disseminating propaganda in support of the PKK and with membership of an illegal organisation under section 7(2) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act (Law no. 3713) and Article 314 § 2 of the Criminal Code (Law no. 5237), on the basis of Articles 220 § 6 and 314 § 3 of the same Code. The public prosecutor noted that on 28 March 2006 the applicant had participated in an illegal demonstration held under the pretext of a funeral; had chanted a slogan; and had covered his face with the hood of his coat during the demonstration. The public prosecutor also noted that the applicant had supported the chanting of slogans in favour of the PKK by applauding during the demonstration of 5 March 2007. The public prosecutor further claimed that the applicant had regularly, willingly and knowingly participated in illegal demonstrations organised by political parties, associations and persons who supported the PKK and that therefore he should be punished for membership of an illegal organisation.
In support of the indictment, the public prosecutor submitted police video recordings of the funeral held on 28 March 2006 and the demonstration at Dicle University of 5 March 2007 to the court. In the first recording, the applicant was seen in a crowd next to a coffin making a “V” sign. In the second recording the applicant was again seen in a crowd with the hood of his coat on his head. In the third recording, the applicant was seen applauding with other students.
On 19 June 2007 the Diyarbakır Assize Court held the first hearing during which the applicant made defence submissions. He stated that he had attended the funeral on 28 March 2006 and that he had briefly participated in the gathering at the university on 5 March 2007. He accepted that he was the person in the photographs. He denied the accuracy of the allegation that he had chanted slogans during the funeral and the demonstration. He noted that he did not remember that he had made a “V” sign, but that he might have done so, along with the rest of the crowd. A witness was also heard by the trial court, and confirmed the applicant’s version of events of 5 March 2007. At the end of the hearing the court ordered the applicant’s continued detention on remand.
On 30 November 2007, at the end of the fourth hearing, the Diyarbakır Assize Court convicted the applicant of membership of an illegal organisation, the PKK, pursuant to Article 314 § 2 of the Criminal Code, on the basis of Articles 220 § 6 and 314 § 3 of the same Code, and sentenced him to six years and three months’ imprisonment. The applicant was also convicted of two counts of disseminating propaganda in support of the PKK under section 7(2) of Law no. 3713, for which he received a sentence of a total of one year and eight months’ imprisonment.
The court first gave a summary of the applicant’s defence submissions, the public prosecutor’s observations on the merits of the case and the evidence in the case file. That evidence was the applicant’s statements to the police, the public prosecutor and the judge, dated 10 March 2007; a photograph relating to the funeral of 28 March 2006; printed versions of news articles published by various media in support of the PKK which had been downloaded from the Internet; the arrest and incident reports; reports on the video recordings; a copy of the leaflet distributed at Dicle University on 5 March 2007; reports by experts on the examination of the video recordings; the applicant’s identity documents; and a document showing that he had no previous criminal record.
In its judgment, the Assize Court observed, on the basis of the police video recordings and the photographs extracted from those recordings, that the applicant had attended the funeral of four PKK militants on 28 March 2006; that he had walked in front of one of the coffins during the funeral; and that he had made a “V” sign. Noting that the funeral had subsequently turned into propaganda for the PKK-KONGRA/GEL, thus an illegal demonstration, and considering that the applicant had walked close to the coffins, the court considered that the applicant had played an active role in the illegal demonstration. The court noted that it was not established that the applicant had chanted slogans during the funeral. As to the demonstration held on 5 March 2007 at Dicle University, the trial court noted that the applicant had applauded while other demonstrators had chanted slogans in support of Abdullah Öcalan.
The Assize Court noted that the funeral of the PKK militants and the demonstration of 5 March 2007 had both been held in line with calls and instructions issued by the PKK. They had subsequently turned into propaganda events in favour of the PKK and had become illegal demonstrations. Hence, the court found it established that the applicant had acted with the intention of supporting the deceased on 28 March 2006 and had acted together with illegal demonstrators on 5 March 2007, thereby committing the offence of disseminating propaganda in favour of the PKK and its leader.
The Diyarbakır Assize Court further referred to a decision dated 22 March 2007 (case no. 2006/9165, decision no. 2007/2432) of the Ninth Criminal Division of the Court of Cassation, in which the latter had considered that the acts of the accused demonstrators (participation in the demonstration of 28 March 2006 after calls for a demonstration had been made by the PKK, in accordance with the latter’s aims; the chanting of slogans in support of the PKK and Abdullah Öcalan; singing the PKK’s youth march song; burning tyres and blocking traffic; carrying PKK flags and banners and Öcalan posters; attacking public buildings, as well as police and civilian vehicles with stones and Molotov cocktails; carrying the bodies of the PKK militants who had been killed by the security forces) should be considered as offences committed on behalf of that organisation. The Court of Cassation found therefore that the accused should be punished for those offences and also be convicted of membership of an illegal organisation. Noting that the applicant had acted together with the aforementioned demonstrators on 28 March 2006, the Diyarbakır Assize Court considered that the applicant’s participation in the funeral and demonstration and his conduct at that time had also occurred as a result of instructions and calls by the PKK. The court considered that the applicant had acted on behalf of the organisation, in line with the goals and activities of the PKK, and that therefore he should be punished for not only disseminating propaganda, but also for membership of an illegal organisation.
One of the three judges sitting on the bench of the assize court dissented. In his dissenting opinion, the judge stated that neither Article 220 § 6 of the Criminal Code nor the explanatory memorandum on Article 220 § 6 explained the concept of committing an offence on behalf of an illegal organisation. The dissenting judge noted that such an offence should be capable of producing a result for a terrorist organisation and its aims, such as the offences of aggravated injury, kidnapping, deprivation of liberty, murder or bombing. He also noted that such an offence should have devastating repercussions for society when the way of committing the offence, the time of the offence and its effects were taken into consideration. He finally opined that in order to conclude that non-members of an illegal organisation had committed an offence on behalf of that illegal organisation, there should be a decision to commit an offence on behalf of that organisation and an intention to join the organisation in question. The judge therefore concluded that the applicant should only have been convicted under section 7(2) of Law no. 3713.
The applicant appealed.
On 29 January 2009 the Court of Cassation upheld the judgment of 30 November 2007 in so far as it related to the applicant’s conviction under Article 314 § 2 of the Criminal Code, on the basis of Articles 220 § 6 and 314 § 3 of the same Code, for membership of an illegal organisation. The higher court, however, quashed the applicant’s conviction under section 7(2) of Law no. 3713 on procedural grounds.
On 23 March 2009 the Court of Cassation’s decision of 29 January 2009 was deposited with the registry of the first-instance court.
On 28 April 2009 the Diyarbakır Assize Court once again convicted the applicant under section 7(2) of Law no. 3713.
On 17 October 2012 the Court of Cassation quashed the applicant’s conviction under section 7(2) of Law no. 3713.
On 14 December 2012 the Diyarbakır Assize Court decided to suspend the criminal proceedings against the applicant under section 7(2) of Law no. 3713, pursuant to Law no. 6352, which had entered into force on 5 July 2012. The suspension was for a period of three years, on the condition that he did not commit an offence when expressing ideas and opinions through the medium of the press or other media, or by any other method.
In the meantime, on 25 October 2010 the applicant was expelled from Dicle University by the administrative board of the Faculty of Arts and Science because he had failed to complete his degree within the maximum period of seven years for an undergraduate programme. The case lodged by the applicant against that decision was dismissed by the Diyarbakır Administrative Court on 5 June 2012. The court considered that the fact that the applicant had been serving a prison sentence did not justify his nonattendance at classes and examinations.
After serving four years and eight months of his sentence, the applicant was released from prison on 15 November 2011.
On 1 April 2005 Law no. 5237 entered into force. At the material time, Article 220 of the Criminal Code read as follows:
“(1)  Anyone who establishes or directs organisations for the purpose of criminal activity shall be liable to imprisonment of between two and six years, provided that the structure of the organisation, the number of the members, and the quantity of the equipment and supplies are sufficient to commit the intended crimes.
(2)  Anyone who becomes a member of an organisation established for the purpose of criminal activity shall be liable to imprisonment of between one and three years.
(3)  If the organisation is armed, the sentences stated above shall be increased by between one quarter and one half.
(4)  Any crime committed within the framework of the organisation’s activities shall be punished separately.
(5)  The heads of organisations shall also be sentenced as perpetrators of all crimes committed within the framework of such organisations’ activities.
(6)  Anyone who commits a crime on behalf of an (illegal) organisation, even if they are not a member of that organisation, shall also be punished for being a member of the organisation.
(7)  Anyone who aids and abets an (illegal) organisation knowingly and intentionally, even if they do not belong to the hierarchical structure of the organisation, shall be punished as a member of the organisation.
(8)  Anyone who spreads propaganda for the organisation or its objectives shall be punished by imprisonment of between one and three years. If the said crime is committed through the media and press the sentence shall be increased by one half.”
Paragraphs 6 and 7 of Article 220 were amended by Law no. 6352, which entered into force on 2 July 2012, as follows:
“(6)  Anyone who commits a crime on behalf of an (illegal) organisation, even if they are not a member of that organisation, shall also be punished for being a member of the organisation. The penalty to be imposed for membership may be reduced by up to half.
(7)  Anyone who aids and abets an (illegal) organisation knowingly and intentionally, even if they do not belong to the hierarchical structure of the organisation, shall be punished as a member of the organisation. The penalty to be imposed for membership may be reduced by up to two thirds, depending on the nature of the assistance.”
Article 220 § 6 was further amended by Law no. 6459, which entered into force on 11 April 2013. It currently reads as follows:
“(6)  Anyone who commits a crime on behalf of an (illegal) organisation, even if they are not a member of that organisation, shall also be punished for being a member of the organisation. The penalty to be imposed for membership may be reduced by up to half. This paragraph shall be applicable only for armed organisations.”
Article 314 of the Criminal Code reads as follows:
“(1)  Anyone who forms an armed organisation to commit the crimes listed in the fourth and fifth sections of this chapter, or commands such an organisation, shall be liable to a term of imprisonment of between ten and fifteen years.
(2)  Anyone who becomes a member of an (armed) organisation mentioned in the first paragraph of this Article shall be liable to a term of imprisonment of between five and ten years.
(3)  Other provisions relating to the crime of forming an organisation for the purpose of criminal activity are also applicable for this crime.”
At the material time, section 7(2) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act read as follows:
“Any person who disseminates propaganda in support of a terrorist organisation shall be liable to a term of imprisonment of between one and five years ... ”
Law no. 6459 also amended section 7 of Law no. 3713. According to a new paragraph in the provision, people who have committed the offences proscribed by sections 6(2) and 7(2) of Law no. 3713 (printing and disseminating declarations made by terrorist organisations which provide legitimacy to or praise the methods of violence or threats used by terrorist organisations or which encourage the use of such methods and disseminate propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation respectively), and the offence proscribed by section 28(1) of the Marches and Demonstrations Act (Law no. 2911) (participating in an unlawful demonstration), shall not in addition be held criminally liable under Article 220 § 6 of the Criminal Code.
On 29 September 2006, the Diyarbakır Assize Court convicted a certain F.Ö. in criminal proceedings under section 7(2) of Law no. 3713 and section 32(1) and (3) of Law no. 2911 for participation in and his conduct during three demonstrations. On 21 February 2007 the Ninth Criminal Division of the Court of Cassation quashed the first-instance judgment, holding that F.Ö.’s acts had constituted not only the offences for which he had been found guilty, but also membership of an illegal organisation under Article 314 § 2 of the Criminal Code, on the basis of Articles 220 § 6 and 314 § 3, as he had committed the offences on behalf of the organisation. The Ninth Criminal Division therefore considered that F.Ö. should be punished for the offence of membership of an illegal organisation and the other offences proscribed by section 7(2) of Law no. 3713 and section 32(1) and (3) of Law no. 2911. On 31 May 2007 the Diyarbakır Assize Court reiterated its previous judgment that F.Ö.’s acts had not constituted the offence proscribed by Article 314 § 2 of the Criminal Code. The Assize Court noted, inter alia, that in order for a court to conclude that a crime had been committed on behalf of an organisation, the latter must have issued a call for action to an individual who was capable of directly committing that act, rather than to an undefined collective group. As a result of the disagreement between the Diyarbakır Assize Court and the Ninth Criminal Division, the case was transferred to the Plenary Court of Cassation (Criminal Divisions). On 4 March 2008 the Plenary Court decided to quash the Assize Court judgment. It held that participation in unauthorised demonstrations held after appeals by an illegal organisation and acts which constituted independent offences committed during those demonstrations could be considered as having been carried out on behalf of the organisation. The Plenary Court considered that such acts should therefore also be sanctioned under Article 314 § 2 of the Criminal Code on the basis of Articles 220 § 6 and 314 § 3, along with the other criminal-law provisions. In the view of the Court of Cassation, appeals by an illegal organisation made in concrete terms through broadcasts by its media outlets did not need to target identified individuals.
At its 106th plenary session, held on 11 and 12 March 2016, the Venice Commission adopted an Opinion on Articles 216, 299, 301 and 314 of the Penal Code of Turkey (CDL-AD(2016)002)). The relevant parts of the Opinion read as follows:
“1.  Membership of an armed organisation (art. 314)
The Penal Code does not contain a definition of an armed organisation or an armed group. In its judgment E. 2006/10-253 K. 2007/80 of 3 April 2007, the General Criminal Board of the Court of Cassation listed the main criteria that a criminal organisation – for the purposes of Article 220 of the Penal Code – should display. The group has to have at least three members; there should be a tight or loose hierarchical connection between the members of the group and an “abstract link” between the members is not sufficient; the members should have a common intention to commit crimes (even though no crime has yet been committed); the group has to present continuity in time; and the structure of the group, the number of its members, tools and equipment at the disposal of the group should be sufficient/appropriate for the commission of the envisaged crimes.
...
There is a rich case-law of the Court of Cassation in which the high court developed the criterion of “membership” in an armed organisation. The Court of Cassation examined different acts of the suspect concerned, taking account of their “continuity, diversity and intensity” in order to see whether those acts prove that the suspect has any “organic relationship” with the organisation or whether his or her acts may be considered as committed knowingly and wilfully within the “hierarchical structure” of the organisation...
If this “organic relationship” with the organisation cannot be proven on the basis of acts attributed to the defendant, which do not present any “continuity, diversity or intensity”, the paragraphs on “aiding and abetting an armed organisation” or “committing crime on behalf of an armed organisation” under Article 220 may be applied (see below). A person who has sympathy for the organisation, but who was arrested while he was trying to cross the border in order to join the organisation or a person who was trying to contact members of the organisation in order to become its member was not considered members of an armed organisation, since the organic relationship was not yet established at the moment of the arrest. Further, acts such as “participating in a public demonstration following a general call from pro-PKK media outlets, making victory sign and shouting slogans to support and in favour of the leader of a terrorist organisation, clashing with the security forces and forming barricades” are considered crimes committed on behalf of an organisation and not as membership.
...
... the Venice Commission recommends, first, that the established criteria in the case law of the Court of Cassation that acts attributed to a defendant should show “in their continuity, diversity and intensity”, his/her “organic relationship” to an organisation or they should prove that he/she acted knowingly and willingly within the “hierarchical structure” of the organisation, should be applied strictly. The loose application of these criteria may give rise to issues concerning in particular the principle of legality within the meaning of Article 7 ECHR.
Second, the expression of an opinion in its different forms should not be the only evidence before the domestic courts to decide on the membership of the defendant in an armed organisation. Where the only evidence consists of forms of expression, the conviction for being a member of an armed organisation, would constitute an interference with the right of the defendants to freedom of expression, and that the necessity of this interference on the basis of the criteria as set forth in the case-law of the ECtHR, in particular the criteria of “incitement to violence”, should be examined in the concrete circumstances of each case.
Application of Article 314 in conjunction with Article 220
...
In a judgment of 4 March 2008 the General Criminal Board of the Court of Cassation held that acts such as participating in a public demonstration following a general call from pro-PKK media outlets, making a victory sign and shouting slogans to support and in favour of the leader of a terrorist organisation, and clashing with the security forces, are considered crimes committed on behalf of the terrorist organisation. In this case, although the membership in an armed organisation was not established, the defendant was convicted as a member of a criminal organisation, according to paragraph 6 of Article 220 applied in conjunction with Article 314. By this judgment, the Court of Cassation annulled the decision of the Diyarbakır Assize Court, which had considered that, in order for a court to conclude that a crime was committed on behalf of an organisation, “the latter must have called for action not to an undefined collective, but rather to an individual person who is capable of directly committing that act”.
...
... a new paragraph has been added to Article 7 of the Anti-Terror Law no. 3713 by an amendment of 11 April 2013. According to this new paragraph, those who committed the crime indicated in the second paragraph of Article 7 (propaganda in support of a terrorist organisation); the crime indicated in the second paragraph of Article 6 (printing and disseminating declarations made by terrorist organisations which legitimise or praise the violent or threatening methods of terrorist organisations or encourage the use of such methods); the crime indicated in the first paragraph of Article 28 of the Public Demonstrations Law no. 2911 (participating to an unlawful demonstration), shall not be sentenced separately under Article 220(6) of the Penal Code. The authorities indicated that with this amendment, the scope of the freedom of expression was broadened in the application of anti-terror legislation.
The Venice Commission welcomes the amendment introduced to Article 7 of the Anti-Terror Law, which excluded the above-mentioned crimes from the scope of application of Article 220(6). With this amendment, the suspects accused of having committed such crimes shall not be punished separately as members of an armed organisation under Article 314.
Nevertheless, the Venice Commission considers that the scope of this amendment is rather limited and does not provide for sufficient protection to the exercise of freedom of expression and assembly in particular. First, the amendment to Article 7 of the Anti-Terror Law excluded the above-mentioned crimes only from the scope of application of Article 220(6). However, some forms of expression, as indicated in the judgments of the Court of Cassation cited in paragraph 111, may also fall under the scope of Article 220(7) (aiding and abetting an organisation). This may lead to abusive application in practice, since a form of expression considered as being in support of an organisation, may be sanctioned under Article 220(7), instead of Article 220(6), in order to sentence the defendants as if they were members of an armed organisation under Article 314, although their organic relationship with an armed organisation is not established.
Secondly, the new paragraph added to Article 7 of the Anti-terror Law refers to the first paragraph of Article 28 of the Law on Public Demonstrations. This paragraph merely criminalises the organisation of or participation in unlawful public demonstrations, while for instance the crime regulated under Article 32(1) of the Law on Public Demonstrations, i.e. “to refuse to obey the warnings of the security forces during a public demonstration to disperse”, may still fall under the scope of Article 220(6) (committing crime on behalf of an organisation), in conjunction with Article 314.
...
In conclusion, the Venice Commission recommends that the sentence “although he is not a member of that organisation, shall also be sentenced for the offence of being a member of that organisation.” in paragraphs 6 and 7 of Article 220 be repealed. In this case, those who commit the crimes indicated in paragraphs 6 and 7 of Article 220 would not be sanctioned as members of an armed organisation under Article 314, but by other, separate sanctions.
Should this sentence in paragraph 6 and 7 be maintained, the Turkish authorities should consider limiting the application of Article 220 in conjunction with Article 314, to cases which do not involve the exercise of the rights to freedom of expression and assembly.”
In a report published on 1 October 2009 following a visit to Turkey between 28 June and 3 July 2009, Mr Thomas Hammarberg, the former Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe, expressed concerns about the interpretation and application of, inter alia, Article 220 of the Criminal Code. In a report dated 12 July 2011, Mr Hammarberg stated that his concerns regarding Article 220 remained valid.
In a report published on 10 January 2012 following a visit to Turkey between 10 and 14 October 2011, Mr Hammarberg stated the following:
“...68.  The Commissioner is fully aware of the severe threat posed to Turkish society by terrorism and terrorist organisations, as well as of the obligation of the Turkish state to combat it with effective measures, including effective investigations and fair proceedings. He wishes to underline, however, that a major lesson learned in the fight against terrorism in Europe has been the importance of public confidence in the justice system. This means that any allegation of terrorist activity must be established with convincing evidence and beyond any reasonable doubt. Experience has shown time and time again that any deviation from established human rights principles in the fight against terrorism, including in the functioning of the judiciary, ultimately serves the interests of terrorist organisations.
In this connection, it is crucial to bear in mind that violence or the threat to use violence is an essential component of an act of terrorism, and that restrictions of human rights in the fight against terrorism ‘must be defined as precisely as possible and be necessary and proportionate to the aim pursued’.
The Commissioner considers that the provisions contained in the Turkish anti-terror legislation and Article 220 TCC allow for a very wide margin of appreciation, in particular in cases where membership in a terrorist organisation has not been proven and when an act or statement may be deemed to coincide with the aims or instructions of a terrorist organisation. The Commissioner encourages the Turkish authorities to reflect on and address these concerns through legislative measures and/or case-law.”
In a memorandum on freedom of expression and media freedom in Turkey, published on 15 February 2017 following a visit to Turkey between 6 and 14 April 2016 (CommDH(2017)5), Mr Nils Muižnieks, the Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe, stressed the need for a complete overhaul of the Turkish Criminal Code, including Article 220 §§ 6 and 7 and Article 314. He considered that the overhaul should take full account of the Court’s case-law and the aforementioned Venice Commission opinion.