The case originated in an application (no. 58954/09) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Andrey Delionovich Obote (“the applicant”), on 27 October 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr I. Sivoldayev, a lawyer practising in Voronezh. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant alleged a violation of his right to freedom of assembly.
On 13 May 2015 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1986 and lives in Mozhaysk, Moscow Region.
On 31 January 2009 the applicant and six other people decided to hold a “flash mob” in front of the Office of the Russian Government in Moscow.
They arrived there at around 1 p.m. on the same day and positioned themselves at Gorbatyy Bridge, each holding a blank sheet of paper with their mouths covered with adhesive tape.
At 1.20 p.m. the police ordered the group to disperse. The applicant asked to be informed of the grounds for such an order. He was taken to Presnenskiy police station.
The applicant was charged under Article 20.2 § 2 (breaches of the established procedure for the organisation or conduct of public gatherings, meetings, demonstrations, marches or pickets) of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”) relating to his participation in a public gathering because the requirement of prior notification under the Federal Law on Gatherings, Meetings, Demonstrations, Processions and Pickets, no. FZ-54 of 19 June 2004 (“the Public Events Act”) had not been respected.
On 11 March 2009 the justice of the peace of the 378th circuit of the Presnenskiy District of Moscow convicted the applicant of the administrative offence under Article 20.2 § 2 of the CAO and sentenced him to a fine of 1,000 Russian roubles (approximately 22 euros (EUR)). The judgment read, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“At 1.20 p.m. on 31 January 2009 [the applicant] ... as a participant in the public event [in the form of] a static demonstration (пикетирование), breached the established procedure for the conduct of a public event ...
[The applicant] denied his guilt in respect of the administrative offence ... He had been aware of the need to comply with the notification procedure when organising a public event, but in this particular case, in his opinion, such compliance had not been necessary as the act had not been political in character but had been a flash mob, that is to say a synchronised action of several people. ... He had told the police officers that the participants in the act had not been involved in a public event but had been taking photos on the bridge while holding blank sheets [of paper] ...
The court declines [the applicant’s] arguments because his guilt in the administrative offence ... has been proved by the bulk of evidence examined in the course of the court hearing ...
... [The applicant] voluntarily and directly participated in the public event in the form of a static demonstration that had been taking place in breach of the procedure set out by the [Public Events Act] and failed to comply with the lawful order by the police officers to stop the static demonstration.
The court dismisses [the applicant’s] argument that the act did not amount to a public event in the form of a static demonstration and that he did not participate in a public event because the evidence collected in this case has shown otherwise. ...”
The applicant appealed, challenging the applicability of the Public Events Act to the circumstances of the case and contesting the fine imposed on him.
On 28 April 2009 the Presnenskiy District Court of Moscow upheld the judgment of 11 March 2009. The appeal judgment read, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“The court dismisses [the applicant’s] and the lawyer’s arguments [presented] in the statement of appeal because, in the court’s opinion, the objective side of the [applicant’s] actions in the form of his appearance at around 2 p.m. on 31 January 2009 among the group of comrades, [with whom] they had agreed [to do so] on the Internet, on the bridge in front of the building at 2 Krasnopresnenskaya Embankment in Moscow, his covering his mouth with adhesive tape, carrying sheets of A4 paper without any inscriptions or images, and being present for ten to fifteen minutes in that place in the absence of any permission whatsoever fully meets the criteria of the administrative offence set out in Article 20.2 § 2 of [the CAO] in the form of a static demonstration.”
For a summary of the relevant domestic law and practice see Kasparov and Others v. Russia (no. 21613/07, § 35, 3 October 2013); Navalnyy and Yashin v. Russia (no. 76204/11, §§ 43-44, 4 December 2014); Novikova and Others v. Russia (nos. 25501/07 and 4 others, §§ 67-69, 26 April 2016); and Lashmankin and Others v. Russia (nos. 57818/09 and 14 others, §§ 216312, 7 February 2017).
The provisions of the Public Events Act as in force at the material time directly relevant to the present case are set out below.
Section 2(1) defined a “public event” as an open, peaceful event accessible to all, organised at the initiative of citizens of the Russian Federation, political parties, other public associations, or religious associations with the aims of expressing or developing opinions freely and voicing demands on issues related to political, economic, social or cultural life in the country, and issues related to foreign policy.
The Public Events Act distinguished between five types of a public event: a gathering (собрание); a meeting (митинг); a demonstration (демонстрация); a march (шествие); and a “static demonstration” (пикетирование) (for further details, see Lashmankin and Others, cited above, § 219).
Section 2(6) defined a static demonstration as a form of public expression of opinion that does not involve movement or the use of loudspeaker equipment, where one or more citizens with placards, banners and other means of visual expression station themselves near the target object of the static demonstration.
In accordance with sections 5(4)(1) and 7(1)(3), notification in respect of a static demonstration involving several persons must be submitted no later than three days before the intended static demonstration or, if the end of the time-limit falls on a Sunday or a public holiday, no later than four days before the intended static demonstration. No notification was required for “gatherings” and static demonstrations involving one person.
In accordance with section 7(3), notification must contain the following elements: (a) the purpose of a public event; (b) its form; (c) its place; (d) its date and the time of its beginning and ending; (e) an envisioned number of participants; (f) methods by employing which the organiser of a public event intends to ensure that public order be maintained and emergency medical aid be made available; (g) the full name of the organiser of a public event, his or her address and phone number; (h) the full names of persons authorised by the organiser of a public event to represent him or her in the course of a public event; (i) the date of submitting the notification.