The applicants, who had been granted legal aid, were represented by Mr W. Hermeliński, a lawyer practising in . The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Mr K. Drzewicki and, subsequently, by Mr J. Wołąsiewicz.
The applicants alleged that their right to the peaceful enjoyment of their property had been breached since the land they owned had been designated for expropriation at some undetermined future date. As a result, they had been refused final construction permits and under domestic legislation were not entitled to any compensation for this interference with their ownership.
THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE CASE
Changes in land development legislation during the period concerned
Outline of procedure in which local land development plans are adopted
Compensation entitlements of owners to be expropriated in the future
From 29 April 1985 to 1 January 1998 the rules governing the administration of land held by the State Treasury and municipalities were laid down in the Land Administration and Expropriation Act of 29 April 1985 (the “1985 Land Administration Act”).
Article 50 of this Act provided that properties could be expropriated only for the benefit of the State or a municipality.
Pursuant to Article 53 (1) of the Act, a decision on expropriation had to include in particular:
“(1) an indication of the property to be expropriated, ...
(3) an indication of the party upon whose initiative the property is being expropriated,
(4) an assessment of the amount of compensation,
(5) identification of the persons (name, surname and address) entitled to compensation,
(6) detailed factual and legal grounds,
(7) instructions on appeal procedures.”
Under Article 55 of the Act, expropriation was to be carried out against payment of compensation. The payment was to be made within fourteen days from the date on which a decision to expropriate had become final.
On 1 January 1998 the 1985 Land Administration Act was repealed and the Land Administration Act of 21 August 1997 (Ustawa o gospodarce nieruchomościami – “the 1997 Land Administration Act”) was adopted, containing similar provisions on expropriation and compensation.
“Every person has a right to build on land, provided that he or she possesses a right to use this land for building purposes and that the building project is in compliance with applicable provisions of building laws.”
Section 20 of the Building Act 1974 provided that all essential urban planning, architectural and technical questions connected with a given building project were to be resolved before construction was started. Pursuant to Section 30, the local land development plan was the basis on which all relevant decisions were to be taken.
Land owners wishing to commence building projects . were obliged to obtain first from the local administration an initial development permit (decyzja o warunkach zabudowy i zagospodarowania terenu).
Under Section 28 of the Act, building works could be commenced after a final construction permit (pozwolenie na budowę) had been granted.
The Construction Act 1974 was repealed by a new law enacted on 7 July 1994. It entered into force on 1 January 1995.
Under Section 28 (1) of the Act, building works could be commenced once a final construction permit (pozwolenie na budowę) had been granted.
Under Section 32 (4) of Act, prior to submitting to the competent local authority a request to be granted a construction permit, an owner is obliged to obtain from the local authorities a decision on building conditions (decyzja o warunkach zabudowy i zagospodarowania terenu), provided for in Section 59 (1) of the Local Planning Act 2003 as it stands today.
Under this latter provision, such a decision should specify the essential characteristics of the land concerned and of the future construction project, if they differ from the use of that land provided for by the local land development plan.
Under Section 39 of the Building Act, once such a decision has been obtained, the owner can apply for a construction permit (pozwolenie na budowę).