The case originated in an application (no. 36701/09) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Hrvatski liječnički sindikat (Croatian Medical Union – hereinafter “the applicant union”), on 17 June 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr S. Posavec, an advocate practising in Zagreb with the Law Firm Posavec, Rašica and Liszt d.o.o. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant union alleged that the decisions of the domestic courts prohibiting it from holding a strike had violated its freedom of association.
On 5 September 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant union is a trade union of medical practitioners incorporated under Croatian law. Its registered office is in Zagreb.
On 8 December 2004 the Government of Croatia on the one side, and the Autonomous Trade Union for the Health Service and Social Protection Service of Croatia, the Croatian Professional Trade Union of Nurses, the Trade Union of Workers in the Health Service, Social Service and Disability Pension Insurance of Croatia, and the applicant union on the other, concluded the Collective Agreement for the Health and Health Insurance Sector (Kolektivni ugovor za djelatnost zdravstva i zdravstvenog osiguranja – hereinafter “the Collective Agreement” or “the main Collective Agreement”). Its clause 102 stipulated that the agreement would enter into force on 15 January 2005 if approved by a majority of the votes cast in a referendum, in which at least one third of those employed in the health-care institutions and the Croatian Health Insurance Fund voted. The Collective Agreement was approved in the referendum held on 5 January 2005 and entered into force, as envisaged, on 15 January 2005.
In order to regulate issues specific to doctors and dentists, on 8 December 2004 the Government of Croatia and the applicant union also concluded the Collective Agreement for the Medical and Dentistry Sector (Strukovni kolektivni ugovor za liječničku i stomatološku djelatnost), which formed an annex (hereinafter “the Annex”) to the above-mentioned main Collective Agreement. Clauses 6 and 98(2) of the Annex stipulated that if doctors approved it in a referendum, it would enter into force on 15 January 2005.
On 15 December 2004 the Autonomous Trade Union for the Health Service and Social Protection Service of Croatia and the Croatian Professional Trade Union of Nurses instituted civil proceedings against the State and the applicant union, seeking to declare the Annex null and void because it had not been entered into by all the trade unions that had concluded the main Collective Agreement, contrary to the law (for a more detailed description of the course of those proceedings see paragraphs 26-30 below).
On 29 December 2004 the Government of Croatia adopted an instruction whereby it (a) instructed the State Attorney’s Office to acknowledge the plaintiffs’ claim in those proceedings because it was well-founded, with a view to having the Annex declared null and void, and (b) instructed the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare to immediately commence negotiations on the conclusion of a new collective agreement for the medical and dentistry sector.
Meanwhile, on 21 December 2004 the referendum committee issued a decision to hold the referendum mentioned in the Annex (see paragraph 7 above).
However, on 31 December 2004 the President of the Socio-Economic Council (Gospodarsko-socijalno vijeće) – a tripartite body consisting of representatives of trade unions, employers and the Government – set aside the decision on holding the referendum.
The referendum was nevertheless held on 5 January 2005. Of 11,016 doctors, 8,290 voted; 8,255 voted “yes” and twenty-five voted “no”.
On 18 January 2005 the President of the Socio-Economic Council issued a decision not to recognise the results of the referendum.
In a letter to the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare of 23 March 2005, the applicant union announced a strike for 11 April 2005. It stated that the strike was being organised in order to (a) protect the social and economic interests of doctors by insisting that the Government of Croatia honour its obligations arising from the Annex, (b) have the results of the referendum on the approval of the Annex recognised, and (c), as an subsidiary ground for the strike, address issues specific to doctors and dentists within the healthcare system by demanding that a collective agreement for the medical and dentistry sector be concluded. In particular, as regards the last-mentioned ground the applicant union stated as follows:
“–  addressing issues specific to doctors within the healthcare sector by concluding a collective agreement for the medical and dentistry sector.
As a subsidiary ground for the strike, the Croatian Medical Union notes that the [main] Collective Agreement for the Health and Health Insurance Sector does not address issues specific to the medical and dentistry professions. Therefore, on the instruction of the Government of Croatia and in accordance with the opinion of the Socio-Economic Council ... of 31 March 2004, the Annex to that Collective Agreement addressing issues specific to doctors was concluded at the same time [as the aforementioned collective agreement]. In that way, issues specific to doctors within the healthcare and health-insurance sectors were comprehensively addressed. Given that at present the Government of Croatia refuse to apply the Collective Agreement for the Medical and Dentistry Sector [i.e. the Annex], and issues specific to the medical and dentistry professions, including a salary increase and other pecuniary rights of doctors, are not addressed in the [main] Collective Agreement for the Health and Health Insurance Sector, a subsidiary ground for the strike is to demand that the Government address issues specific to jobs and professions of doctors and dentists within the healthcare and health-insurance sectors.”
On the same day the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare invited the applicant union to conclude a new collective agreement for the medical and dentistry sector in the form of an annex to the main Collective Agreement. The draft of the new annex was enclosed with the Ministry’s letter. The Ministry emphasised that the draft envisaged a salary supplement amounting to 10% of the basic salary of doctors and dentists in 2005 on account of their increased responsibility for the life and health of patients. It also added that the other trade unions, parties to the main Collective Agreement agreed with the draft, and invited the applicant union to inform it within seven days whether it accepted the draft.
On 30 March 2005 the applicant union informed the Ministry that, regrettably, the proposed draft did not address the important issues specific to doctors and dentists within the healthcare sector.
On 5 April 2005 the Government of Croatia adopted a decree whereby it unilaterally increased salaries of doctors and dentists by 10% in 2005 (see paragraph 38 below).
On the same day, 5 April 2005, the State brought an action against the applicant union in the Zagreb County Court (Županijski sud u Zagrebu), asking the court to prohibit the announced strike. The plaintiff argued that the announced strike would be illegal because it would seek to enforce the Annex, which had never entered into force given that the decision to hold the referendum required for its coming into force had been set aside (see paragraphs 7, 11 and 13 above).
By a judgment of 8 April 2005 the County Court found for the State and prohibited the strike. It held that seeking compliance with the obligations arising from a collective agreement or the recognition of the results of a referendum were not permitted grounds for a strike under section 210(1) of the Labour Act (see paragraph 32 below). The relevant part of that judgment reads as follows:
“From the cited provision [that is, section 210(1)] it follows that, by using the formulation ‘in order to protect and promote the economic and social interests’, the legislator clearly excluded enforcement of the rights stipulated in a particular collective agreement as a permitted ground for a strike because ... the individual and collective enforcement of rights stipulated in a collective agreement is regulated by sections [191] and [202] of the Labour Act.
...
As regards the subsidiary ground for the strike ... it has to be noted that the defendant’s representative stated at the main hearing that this ground had been listed as subsidiary in case [the Annex was in the meantime declared invalid] in the [parallel] proceedings pending before the Municipal Court.
...
Finally, it has to be concluded that a strike is legally allowed only in industrial disputes on ... matters that are not legally regulated, and not in those which [are]. Given that the defendant insists on compliance with the [Annex], it is evident that the matters [in dispute] ... are regulated by that Annex and that the procedure for [its] entry into force is also legally regulated, for which reason the substantive requirements for organising the strike are not satisfied.”
The applicant union then appealed against that judgment to the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske).
On 11 April 2005 the applicant union held the strike as planned because under the domestic law its appeal prevented the County Court’s judgment from becoming final. According to media reports the applicant union alleged that almost 90% of some 8,000 doctors and dentists had participated in the strike whereas the Minister of Health claimed that only 25% of them had actually been striking while the others had merely expressed solidarity. The Minister also stated for the media that 85% of the services had been rendered and that work stoppages occurred in one out of five clinical centres, one out of seven university hospitals and in six out of 22 general hospitals. The strike lasted until 13 April 2005 when the applicant union called it off in order to comply with the County Court’s subsequent provisional measure of 12 April 2005 prohibiting the strike (see the next paragraph).
Following a request by the State, on 12 April 2005 the Zagreb County Court imposed a provisional measure prohibiting the strike until that court’s judgment of 8 April 2005 became final, that is, until the Supreme Court decided on the applicant union’s appeal against the judgment. On 21 April 2005 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant union’s appeal against the decision imposing the provisional measure.
By a judgment of 27 April 2005 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant union’s appeal against the County Court’s judgment of 8 April 2005 (see paragraphs 19-20 above). It held that the Annex was invalid because it had not been entered into by all the trade unions that had concluded the Collective Agreement, contrary to section 186(1) of the Labour Act (see paragraph 32 below), and that therefore any further action based on that agreement, including the strike, was unlawful. The relevant part of the Supreme Court’s judgment reads as follows:
“Given that the Annex was found to be invalid, that is, unlawful, any further actions by the signatories of such an unlawful collective agreement, such as calling for and holding a referendum ... as well as the two first grounds for the strike, which are also based on the unlawful Annex, are also unlawful.
The view of the first-instance court that it was not necessary to address the third, subsidiary, ground for the strike is correct. This is so because, as stated by the defendant’s representative at the hearing held on 8 April 2005, this ground had been listed as subsidiary in case [the Annex was in the meantime declared invalid] in the [parallel] proceedings pending before the Municipal Court, a condition which has not been met.”
On 30 May 2005 the applicant union lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske) against the Supreme Court’s judgment alleging violations of, inter alia, its constitutionally-guaranteed right to strike and its freedom of association guaranteed by the Convention. In so doing the applicant union relied on Article 60 of the Constitution (see paragraph 31 below) and Article 11 of the Convention.
On 17 December 2008 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant union’s constitutional complaint and served its decision on the applicant union’s representatives on 26 January 2009. The relevant part of that decision reads as follows:
“Having established that the [contested] judicial decisions were based on the relevant provisions of the Labour Act, the Constitutional Court finds that those decisions were not in breach of the complainant’s constitutional right [provided] in Article 60 paragraph 1 of the Constitution nor [were they in breach] of the international-law provisions the complainant relied on.”
Meanwhile, as already noted above (see paragraph 8) on 15 December 2004 the Autonomous Trade Union for the Health Service and Social Protection Service of Croatia and the Croatian Professional Trade Union of Nurses brought a civil action in the Zagreb Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Zagrebu) against the State and the applicant union, seeking to declare the Annex null and void.
On 19 October 2006 the Zagreb Municipal Court found for the plaintiffs and declared the Annex null and void.
On 16 December 2008 the Zagreb County Court dismissed the applicant union’s appeal and upheld the first-instance judgment, which thereby became final.
On 17 March 2010 the Supreme Court dismissed a subsequent appeal on points of law (revizija) lodged by the applicant union. It endorsed the reasoning of the lower courts which had found the Annex invalid because it had not been entered into by all the trade unions that had concluded the main Collective Agreement, contrary to section 186(1) of the Labour Act (see paragraph 32 below) and clause 21 of that collective agreement (see paragraph 36 below).
On 16 March 2011 the Constitutional Court dismissed a constitutional complaint lodged by the applicant union.
The relevant Articles of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 56/90 with subsequent amendments) read as follows:
“Everyone shall be guaranteed the right to freedom of association for the protection of their common interests or for the promotion of social, economic, political, national, cultural and other convictions and aims. For this purpose, anyone may freely form trade unions and other associations, join them or leave them, in accordance with the law.”
“In order to protect their economic and social interests, all employees shall have the right to form trade unions and to freely join them or leave them.”
“The right to strike shall be guaranteed.
The right to strike may be restricted in the armed forces, the police, the civil service and public services specified by law.”
The relevant provisions of the Labour Act of 1995 (Zakon o radu, Official Gazette no. 38/95 with subsequent amendments), which was in force between 1 January 1996 and 1 January 2010, at the material time provided as follows:
“If more than one trade union ... exists in the sector in respect of which a collective agreement is to be concluded, the employer ... may negotiate a collective agreement only with a bargaining committee composed of representatives of those trade unions.”
“(1)  The parties to a collective agreement and persons to whom it applies shall comply with its provisions in good faith.
(2)  An injured party or a person to whom a collective agreement applies may claim compensation for the damage sustained as a result of non-compliance with the obligations arising from it.”
“A party to a collective agreement may seek judicial protection of the rights arising from such an agreement by bringing an action in the competent court.”
“Trade unions and their higher-level associations have the right to call and undertake a strike in order to protect and promote the economic and social interests of their members or on the ground of non-payment of salary ... within thirty days of it becoming due.”
Under the case-law of the Croatian courts, a strike is allowed only if its aim is the conclusion or revision of a collective agreement. By converse implication, a strike is illegal if a collective agreement exists. That is so because in such a situation there is an obligation to maintain social peace, which prohibits the calling of a strike in relation to matters that are already governed by a collective agreement. The only exception to that rule is the non-payment of salary, on which ground, as of 10 March 2001 when the 2001 Amendments to the Labour Act entered into force, trade unions may organise a strike. In case no. Gž-4/1996 the Supreme Court interpreted section 210(1) of the Labour Act (see the preceding paragraph) in the following terms:
“In the Supreme Court’s view – having regard to section 210(1) ... of the Labour Act – a strike is lawful only in industrial disputes arising from a conflict of interests, [that is, in disputes over issues] that are not legally regulated but may be regulated by a collective agreement. A strike is therefore a lawful means of industrial action if its purpose is to meet [workers’] demands [as regards matters] that may be subject to a collective agreement. Even though the legislator does not explicitly exclude that a strike on issues which are legally regulated ... and thus susceptible to judicial or arbitral adjudication, may be lawful, the above legal view follows from the textual interpretation of section 210(1) of the Labour Act and in connection with [some other] provisions of the same Act. By using the phrase ‘to protect and promote the economic and social interests’, the legislator clearly excluded the enforcement of employment-related rights (legal disputes) as a permissible ground for a strike. ... [Section 210(1)] ... indicates that means of pressure ([of which] a strike is the means of last resort) serve to protect and promote workers’ interests, but not their rights, which may only be protected during negotiations on the conclusion of collective agreements, and not in matters that are governed by such agreements.”
In its judgment no. Gž 5/2000 of 13 April 2000 the Supreme Court held that the rule contained in section 210(1) of the Labour Act (see paragraph 32 above) was not mandatory, that is, that parties to a collective agreement could agree otherwise and, for example, provide that a strike was allowed even while the collective agreement was in force. In particular, the Supreme Court held as follows:
“Section 210(1) of the Labour Act reads: ‘Trade unions and their higher-level associations have the right to call and undertake a strike in order to protect and promote the economic and social interests of their members’. The way in which this provision was drafted suggests that it is not mandatory ... There is no doubt that section 210(1) of the Labour Act entitles trade unions to strike in cases of collective disputes, that is, as regards issues that may be, but are not, regulated by a collective agreement. ... [T]he Labour Act has only provided for the protection of the basic rights of employees. [However], there are many other sources of labour law governing employment-related rights and duties. Collective agreements may regulate employment relations in a manner more favourable for employees ... The question therefore arises whether a strike undertaken on grounds provided for in the collective agreement is lawful. ... If the employer, by signing a collective agreement, agreed that the trade union could undertake a strike even in cases of a breach of that agreement by the employer, then the strike cannot be considered unlawful only because it was undertaken on that ground. ...”
The relevant provision of the Obligations Act of 1978 (Zakon o obveznim odnosima, Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia no. 29/78 with subsequent amendments, and Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia no. 53/91 with subsequent amendments), which was in force between and 1 October 1978 and 31 December 2005, read as follows:
“(1) A contract that is contrary to the Constitution, mandatory rules or morals shall be null and void unless the purpose of the breached rule indicates some other sanction or the law in a particular case provides otherwise.
(2) If the conclusion of a contract is prohibited only to one party, the contract shall remain valid, unless the law in a particular case provides otherwise, and the party that has breached the statutory prohibition shall bear the relevant consequences.”
The relevant clauses of the Collective Agreement for the Health and Health Insurance Sector (Kolektivni ugovor za djelatnost zdravstva i zdravstvenog osiguranja, Official Gazette nos. 9/05, 156/09, 52/10 and 7/11 – “the Collective Agreement” or “the main Collective Agreement”), which was in force between 15 January 2005 (see paragraph 6 above) and 31 December 2010, read as follows:
“(1)  During the validity of this Agreement trade unions shall not strike in respect of the matters regulated by this Agreement.
(2)  The abstention from striking referred to in paragraph (1) of this clause does not exclude the right to strike in respect of all other unresolved issues or in the case of a dispute concerning the amendment or supplement to this Agreement.
(3)  Trade unions shall have the right to organise a solidarity strike with other trade unions, provided that prior notice is given in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement.”
“(1)  Every party may propose amendments or supplements to this Agreement.
(2)  Proposals on behalf of trade unions for amendments or supplements to this Agreement may be submitted by a bargaining committee.”
The relevant clauses of the Collective Agreement for the Medical and Dentistry Sector (Strukovni kolektivni ugovor za liječničku i stomatološku djelatnost – “the Annex”), which was declared null and void by a judgment of the Zagreb Municipal Court of 19 October 2006, that became final on 16 December 2008 (see paragraphs 26-28 above), read as follows:
“This agreement is to be considered a special part of the [main] Collective Agreement for the Health and Health Insurance Sector. In the event that a certain right is regulated differently by the [main] Collective Agreement for the Health and Health Insurance Sector, the law that is more favourable for the employee shall apply.”
“During the validity of this Agreement the Croatian Medical Union shall not strike in respect of matters regulated by this Agreement, unless they [that is, the obligations arising from the Annex] have not been complied with.
The prohibition of a strike referred to in paragraph (1) of this clause does not exclude the right to strike in respect of any other unresolved issue.”
On 5 April 2005 the Government of Croatia adopted the Decree on a salary supplement for doctors and dentists (Uredba o dodatku na plaće doktora medicine i doktora stomatologije, Official Gazette no. 44/05 of 5 April 2005 – “the Decree”) which entered into force on the same day. The relevant provision of that Decree read as follows: