The case originated in two applications (nos. 41995/14 and 50276/15) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Mr Dragoş Ciupercescu (“the applicant”), on 6 August 2014 and 11 November 2015 respectively.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms C. Boghină, a lawyer practising in Bucharest. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Ms S.-M. Teodoroiu, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his rights protected by Articles 3 and 8 of the Convention had not been respected by the prison authorities in Giurgiu and Jilava Prisons.
On 9 February 2016 and 15 July 2016, respectively, notice of the applications was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1971 and lives in Bucharest.
In 2005 the Bucharest County Court sentenced the applicant to eighteen years’ imprisonment. He was detained in Giurgiu Prison between 21 January 2009 and 26 January 2015.
On 26 January 2015 the applicant was transferred to Jilava Prison, where he stayed until 13 October 2016, when he was transferred to Ploieşti Prison.
On 15 December 2016 the applicant was released on parole after serving eleven years of his sentence.
On the basis of Law no. 254/2013 on the execution of sentences (“Law no. 254/2013”, see paragraph 53 below), the applicant complained to the relevant post-sentencing judge of the inhuman conditions of his detention in both prisons.
As regards Giurgiu Prison, the applicant complained of overcrowding, limited access to cold and warm running water, bedbug and cockroach infestations in his cell, a lack of adequate ventilation and lighting, and a lack of heating for one month.
The applicant lodged a complaint with the post-sentencing judge, claiming, inter alia, that the temperature in his cell was lower than 19˚C. On 12 November 2014 the judge allowed his complaint and ordered the prison authorities to ensure an appropriate minimum temperature of 19˚C in the cell. That decision was upheld by the Giurgiu District Court on 19 January 2015.
The applicant complained of overcrowding and having no adequate place in which to have meals. He also maintained that because of the inadequate temperature in his cell, there were traces of damp on the walls. He also complained of the poor quality of the water, which contained worms and had a disagreeable smell and taste.
By a judgment of 16 March 2015 the post-sentencing judge dismissed as unfounded a complaint by the applicant of a lack of personal space and medical treatment during the period between 20 and 23 February 2015. The applicant challenged that decision before the Bucharest District Court. On 20 April 2015 the court allowed the applicant’s complaint in part, holding that in cell E 5.26, where the applicant had been detained between 20 and 23 February 2015, he had had less than 4 square metres of personal space at his disposal.
A similar complaint was lodged in respect of cell E 6.2, where the applicant had been placed between 21 January 2015 and 20 February 2015. By a judgment of 23 March 2015 the Bucharest District Court found that the personal space afforded to the applicant had been less than 4 square metres.
On the basis of those judgments, the applicant filed another complaint with the post-sentencing judge, asking to be compensated for the ill-treatment which he had suffered on account of the poor conditions of his detention in Jilava Prison between 21 January and 23 March 2015.
By a judgment of 3 December 2015 the Bucharest District Court dismissed the applicant’s claim, finding that the prison authorities were not at fault for that breach. The court also held that the period in question – going from 21 January until 23 March 2015 – had been short, and therefore the treatment during that period could not constitute such humiliating or degrading treatment for the applicant as to warrant financial compensation, especially having regard to the fact that he was serving his sentence under a semi-open regime.
The court also considered that by subsequently placing the applicant in cells where he had had more than 4 square metres of personal space, the breaches complained of had been remedied. The court concluded by stating that the judgment in itself constituted an appropriate remedy for the
The Government’s account
The Government contended that while in Giurgiu Prison the applicant had had a minimum of 3.39 square metres of personal space at his disposal at all times. He had had access to warm water twice a week, while the conditions relating to ventilation, lighting and heating had been satisfactory.
The Government indicated that as of 23 February 2015 the applicant had been placed in cells affording him at least 4.9 square metres of personal space. More specifically, the applicant had been detained:
- from 23 February to 25 February 2015 in a cell measuring 9.76 square metres, occupied by only the applicant;
- from 26 February to 11 August 2015 in a cell measuring 14.72 square metres, occupied by one to three prisoners;
- from 12 August to 16 November 2015 in a cell measuring 13.50 square metres, occupied by one to two prisoners;
- from 16 to 20 November in Jilava Hospital;
- from 20 November 2015 to 10 March 2016 in a cell measuring 13.50 square metres, occupied by two prisoners;
- from 11 March to 9 May 2016 in a cell measuring 42.39 square metres, occupied by four to seven prisoners.
The Government also contended that the applicant had been serving his sentence under a semi-open regime, which meant that at the material time he had not been confined to his cell all the time; on the contrary, he had had free access to the courtyard between 8 and 11 a.m. and 1 and 6 p.m., and the doors to his cell had been open all day, with the exception of lunchtime, when his meals had been served in the cell.
The Government further submitted medical documents certifying that the quality of the water was up to standard. These documents were issued on the basis of samples taken at the beginning of 2016.
The Government contended that if any traces of damp appeared on the walls, prisoners needed to request their removal.
The applicant complained that he had been exposed to passive smoking while being transported from Giurgiu Prison to the courts and while in the waiting rooms at the courts. He further stated that the prison vans had been full of fumes.
According to the applicant’s medical record, he suffered from bronchial asthma (astm bronşic). He declared that he had been a
Before the post-sentencing judge, the applicant complained of the conditions of transport to the court, claiming that he had been placed together with smokers. Those complaints were dismissed as unsubstantiated on 7 May 2014, the court indicating that smoking was not allowed in prison transport vehicles or in public places like court waiting rooms. A similar complaint was dismissed for similar reasons on 12 June 2014, the court holding that the technical inspections of the vehicles used for transporting the applicant were up to date.
As regards the applicant’s complaints concerning passive smoking, the Government indicated that according to documents that had been submitted by the National Prison Administration, the applicant had declared himself to be either a smoker or a non-smoker, depending on the type of cell in which he had been placed. One recent declaration signed by the applicant on 26 January 2014 stated that he was a smoker. Furthermore, following a medical check-up completed on 19 October 2014, the relevant doctor had prescribed specific treatment for the applicant’s asthma and had recommended that he stop smoking. The applicant had even bought cigarettes from the prison shop.
The Government argued that in any event smoking had been forbidden in prison transport vans and in all public places, including the waiting rooms at courts.
The Government further noted that the vehicles used for transporting detainees had accommodated the number of detainees without exceeding their capacity, and had had proper ventilation. Also, the vehicle inspections were up to date. The duration of the journeys from the prison to the courts had never exceeded sixty minutes.
On 27 April 2015 the applicant asked to be taken for an urgent dental examination, claiming that he had lost a filling and was in a lot of pain. He indicated that he was ready to pay for the consultation, and that he preferred to be taken to a private practice outside the prison.
Since no specific steps were taken by the authorities, on 14 May 2015 the applicant lodged a complaint with the post-sentencing judge, complaining that he had not received adequate medical treatment for his dental problems.
On 15 May 2015 the prison authorities contacted the Bucharest Central Military Hospital to obtain an appointment for the applicant. An appointment was confirmed for 27 May 2015.
On that day the applicant was taken to the hospital, where he did not receive any treatment, as there was a lack of adequate medical supplies.
On 2 June 2015 the post-sentencing judge rejected the applicant’s complaint (see paragraph 30 above), in view of the fact that a medical appointment had been made (see paragraph 31 above). The judge considered that the prison authorities could not be held responsible for the lack of adequate medical supplies, and that in any event a new appointment was about to be made.
The applicant challenged that decision. The Bucharest District Court allowed his claims on 11 August 2015; the court noted that the authorities had reacted to the applicant’s request only after he had addressed his complaint to the judge, and most probably only because of that action. In that regard, the court considered that a detained person’s right to adequate medical assistance was prescribed by law, and therefore the authorities needed to ensure that this right was respected without detainees being required to take further action.
On 8 June 2015 the applicant had addressed another similar complaint to the post-sentencing judge. That complaint was dismissed on 11 June 2015, the court holding that the prison authorities could not be held liable for the relevant lack of medical supplies or the manner in which the hospital fixed appointments.
On 12 July 2015 that decision was confirmed by the Bucharest District Court.
With respect to the dental care available to the applicant, the Government submitted that he had been examined and diagnosed, either in the prison’s medical unit or in a dental practice located in a different prison; he had undergone treatment, including having dental fillings on various occasions: on 25 April, 6 May, 22 May, 27 May, 25 June, 3 July, 15 July, 31 July, 15 September and 10 November 2015, as well as on 13 May, 27 July, 30 September and 12 October 2016. On most of those occasions (save for 27 May and 15 July 2015, as well as 13 May and 12 October 2016) he had also received treatment involving antibiotics and/or painkillers.
The dentition model in the medical report shows that in 2005 the applicant had five fillings and one dental cavity, and he was missing one tooth. On 30 September 2016 two of his teeth were missing, one tooth had only its root, four teeth had fillings and one tooth had a cavity.
On two occasions, on 3 and 15 July, the applicant refused to be transferred to another prison which had a dental practice, on account of the fact that he did not trust a place where other detainees were also treated, as he could contract different contagious diseases. He refused to go to an appointment made for 22 June 2015, in view of the fact that he had a court hearing on the same date.
The Government indicated that the applicant’s request to be taken to a private practice had not had a legal basis, as private doctors were free to choose their own clients. Nevertheless, the applicant could have asked to have a consultation with a private dentist in the prison’s dental practice, at his own expense; such a request had never been formulated, as the applicant had been very reluctant to have consultations in the prison’s medical offices.
In April 2015 the applicant complained to the post-sentencing judge in Jilava Prison that his right to online communication with his wife had been infringed; his wife lived in Italy and could not come to visit him often, only once every three months. He relied on Article 66 of Law no. 254/2013 (see paragraph 54 below).
By a decision of 11 May 2015 the judge dismissed the applicant’s complaint as unfounded.
A challenge by the applicant against that decision was allowed in part by the Bucharest District Court on 23 June 2015. The court noted that his right to online communication had been infringed. It also noted that although, in accordance with Article 66 of Law no. 254/2013, detainees were entitled to online communication with their families, in practice, they could not have the benefit of that right, as the regulation for the implementation of the Law had not been adopted. The court concluded that although the prison administration could not be held liable for that infringement, the applicant’s rights had been infringed on account of the lack of foreseeability of the Law.
On an unspecified date the applicant complained once again to the post-sentencing judge that his right to online communication had been infringed. The judge dismissed the complaint on 19 August 2015, noting that online communication had become possible between prison facilities only, and it was not yet used for communication with persons outside the prison network. The judge held that the prison authorities could not be held liable for other State authorities’ failure to adopt the regulation for the implementation of the Law within the time-limit provided for by law.
On 30 September 2015 the Bucharest District Court dismissed an appeal by the applicant against that decision. The court noted that another final decision delivered on 23 June 2015 had already found that his right to online communication had been infringed (see paragraph 43 above). It held that the applicant’s right continued to be infringed by the failure to adopt the implementation regulation.
On 11 April 2016 the implementation regulation was adopted (see paragraph 55 below).
In the period between April 2015 and February 2016 the applicant filed four applications requesting that he be allowed the right to communicate online with his wife. All of them were dismissed, in view of the fact that the implementation regulation had not been adopted.
The Government contended that the applicant had not lodged a similar complaint following the adoption of the implementation regulation.
The applicant complained to the post-sentencing judge in Jilava Prison that his right to the confidentiality of his telephone communications had been infringed. He alleged that he had to inform the prison authorities of all the telephone numbers which he wanted to call, and those numbers had to be approved by the prison authorities. A maximum of ten numbers were allowed.
On 4 August 2015 the judge dismissed the applicant’s complaint on the grounds that the prison authorities should know the identity of all persons with whom the applicant had telephone contact, in order to prevent the commission of fraud or other crimes; the court also held that the right to private telephone communications in prison was not an absolute right, but a right that could be restricted in order to ensure discipline in a detention facility.
The applicant challenged that decision before the Bucharest District Court. On 29 September 2015 the Bucharest District Court dismissed his complaint and upheld the decision of the post-sentencing judge.
According to the Government, the applicant lodged another similar complaint with the post-sentencing judge. That complaint was dismissed on 22 June 2015 for reasons similar to those given in the previous judgment (see paragraph 50 above); the decision was upheld by the Bucharest District Court on 20 October 2015.
Article 56 of Law no. 254/2013 on the serving of prison sentences, which entered into force on 1 February 2014, provides that detainees may complain to a post-sentencing judge about measures taken by the prison authorities in respect of their rights within ten days of becoming aware of such measures. The judge’s decision may be challenged before the domestic courts within five days of the detainee being notified of the decision.
In accordance with Article 66 of the same Law, certain categories of detainees are entitled to online communication with family members or other persons. The specific way of implementing this provision was to be set out by a regulation to be adopted within six months of the Law entering into force.
The relevant regulation was adopted on 11 April 2016. Its Articles 134-136 set out the conditions for granting detainees the right to communicate online with family members, and also set out how that right was to be implemented.