The case originated in an application (no. 37801/97) against the  lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Finnish national, Mrs Kersti Hannele Suominen (“the applicant”), on 17 April 1997.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr Pauli Alankoja, a lawyer practising in . The Finnish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Mr Holger Rotkirch, Director General for Legal Affairs, and Mr Arto Kosonen, Director, Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged that she had been denied a fair trial as the District Court (käräjäoikeus, tingsrätt) refused, without giving a reasoned decision, to admit part of the evidence submitted by her.
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
The application was allocated to the Fourth Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
By a decision of 26 February 2002, the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1942 and lives in Forssa.
The applicant was the owner and managing director of company X. Between 26 June 1991 and 16 February 1993 she had made arrangements with a bank to finance her company.
In the spring of 1993 the bank refused to grant any more loans and made a request that part of the existing loans be paid back.
On 24 February 1995 the bank instituted civil proceedings against the applicant before the District Court of Pori, seeking the return of loans made to her.
The applicant received an invitation dated 2 January 1996 to the preparatory hearing at the District Court. The purpose of the preparatory hearing was explained in the invitation, which indicated that the applicant had to list all the evidence she intended to present and what she intended to prove with each piece of evidence. She was also advised to present all the written evidence invoked.
The preparatory hearing was held on 25 January 1996. According to the applicant, she was prepared to hand in all the documents she wanted to submit as evidence. The presiding judge admitted only two of the documents and a list on which all the documents were listed. The applicant was allegedly told that the remaining evidence could be presented at the main hearing.
The main hearing was held on 8 February 1996. According to the applicant, she was denied the possibility to present the other evidence listed, because she had not submitted those documents earlier at the preparatory hearing. This is not mentioned in the minutes of the District Court.
On 15 February 1996 the District Court gave its judgment, accepting the bank’s claims. The applicant’s property was distrained. The applicant appealed to the Court of Appeal (hovioikeus, hovrätten) of , requesting an oral hearing or that the case be referred back to the District Court. On 3 October 1996 the Court of Appeal refused the applicant’s claims and upheld the District Court’s judgment. The Court of Appeal reasoned that the applicant had not shown it to be probable that she had not been allowed, or had been unable, to invoke all evidence in the District Court. There was thus no reason to accept the documents which she had submitted to the Court of Appeal.
On 18 March 1997, the Supreme Court (korkein oikeus, högsta domstolen) refused the applicant leave to appeal.
The applicant did not have legal counsel until seeking leave to appeal to the Supreme Court.
According to Chapter 5, section 10, paragraphs 1 and 3, of the Code of Judicial Procedure (1052/1991, oikeudenkäymiskaari, rättegångsbalken), the defendant must be exhorted to list, as far as possible, the evidence he intends to present and what is intended to be proved with each piece of evidence, and to state the postal addresses and telephone numbers of witnesses and other persons to be heard already in the summons.
According to Chapter 5, section 19, paragraph 3, of the Code of Judicial Procedure, the evidence that is going to be presented and what is intended to be proved with each piece of evidence must be determined in the preparatory hearing of the civil proceedings.
According to Chapter 5, section 21, paragraph 1, of the Code of Judicial Procedure, in the preparation of the case a party must without delay present his claims and the grounds for them and express his opinion on what the opposing party has presented. In addition, he must list all the evidence he intends to present and what is intended to be proved with each piece of evidence. He must also present all the written evidence invoked.
According to the Government Bill for the amendment of the Code of Judicial Procedure (HE 15/1990) the purpose of the preparation of a case is to
“...establish the claims of the parties to the proceedings and the grounds on which they are based, as well as the issues on which the parties disagree. The preparation should also establish what evidence the parties are going to present, what is intended to be proved with each piece of evidence and whether there are possibilities to reach a friendly settlement. [...] The court should declare the preparation terminated as soon as the claims of the parties and the issues on which they disagree have been established, [and] when the pieces of evidence to be presented have been listed ...”
Furthermore, according to the Government Bill,
“...a decision should already be made in the preparation as to what particular pieces of evidence shall not be admitted in the main hearing by virtue of Chapter 17, section 7.” 
According to Chapter 6, section 9 of the Code of Judicial Procedure in a case amenable to settlement a party must not in the main hearing invoke a circumstance or evidence that he has not invoked in the preparation of the case, unless he establishes a probability that he had a valid reason for not doing so.
According to Chapter 17, section 7 of the Code of Judicial Procedure (571/1948) if a piece of evidence that a party wishes to present pertains to a fact that is not material to the case or that has already been proven, or if the fact can be proven in another manner with considerably less inconvenience or cost, the court may not admit this piece of evidence.
According to Chapter 25, section 14, paragraph 2, of the Code of Judicial Procedure (1052/1991), as in force at the relevant time, in case the appellant wishes to present new evidence in support of his appeal, he must inform the court of such evidence and must also mention which facts he intends to prove with the new evidence, and give the reasons for not having presented the evidence earlier. A comparable provision has been included in section 17 (1) (165/1998) of the existing Chapter 25 of the Code of Judicial Procedure.