The case originated in an application (no. 66895/10) against Montenegro lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Montenegrin national, Mr Rizo Alković (“the applicant”), on 9 November 2010.
The applicant was represented by Ms S. Lompar, a lawyer practising in Podgorica. The Montenegrin Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs V. Pavličić.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the authorities had failed to effectively investigate a series of ethnically and/or religiously motivated attacks against him perpetrated by individuals between 26 May and 22 September 2009.
On 14 December 2015 the application was communicated to the Government.
On 23 March 2016, under Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court, the President of the Section granted the European Roma Rights Centre leave to intervene as a third party in the proceedings.
The applicant was born in 1960. He currently lives in Belgium, but at the material time lived in Podgorica, Montenegro.
The applicant is a Roma and a Muslim. On an unspecified date in 2006 the applicant and his family moved into an apartment in a building constructed for socially disadvantaged families. According to the applicant, because of constant attacks in which his car and the apartment were damaged, the perpetrators of which were never found, he installed a camera outside his apartment.
On 26 May 2009 the applicant’s next-door neighbour, Y, was watching a kickboxing match between a Montenegrin and a Bosnian contestant on television. The applicant overheard the next-door conversation as the doors of both his and Y’s (adjacent) terraces were open. When the Bosnian kickboxer appeared with his coaches, all of whom were Muslim, Y allegedly said that he would slaughter one of them, and X, another neighbour, made a disparaging reference to the Bosnian kickboxer’s Turkish descent. According to the applicant, X left Y’s apartment at a certain point and went to his car, from which he took a gun. Y said “turn it to the left”, which was the direction of the applicant’s terrace. This was followed by nine to ten gunshots, and Y’s calling out insulting references to the applicant’s “Turkish mother”. X, Y and Y’s family picked up the spent cartridges from the ground afterwards.
On 9 September 2009 three neighbours, V (Y’s wife), S and B, were talking on the next-door terrace. As he was on his terrace, the applicant overheard the conversation. V said that she was fighting “cockroaches, frogs, nits and lice, and all sorts of other things”, which had been brought by “those dirty gipsies” (“od ovija gabeljčina”). V continued by saying that B and S “[could] use a hammer and a pruning knife (kosijer), and [she] would use an axe”. S replied that “her [people] carried swords”. V said that the axe could serve just as well. S answered “no, no, he is a Muslim, I have a sword”. B said “all is fine, whatever is more readily available” (“valja što god prije stigne”). V said loudly “An axe, an axe, a sledgehammer, like the one used on pigs”.
On 15 September 2009 Y was having an argument with M, another neighbour, when X joined and said, among other things, that if he “saw red”, he would “kill both you and your brother here like a dog” (“e ću te ubit ka psa i tebe i brata ođe”), apparently pointing at the applicant’s apartment, adding “dirty gypsy” (“cigane glibavi”) and “trash” (“ovo smeće”). This was witnessed by M’s brother, D. It is unclear from the casefile if the applicant was present during the argument or if he learned about it in some other manner.
On 22 September 2009, the day of Ramadan Bayram, a religious holiday celebrated by the applicant and his family, a large cross was drawn on the applicant’s apartment door, and a large message was written on the wall next to it saying “move out or you’ll bitterly regret it” (“seli se, usko će ti bit”). The applicant called the police, who came and took photographs of the cross and the message. The same day the applicant lodged a criminal complaint with the police against the families of X, Y, S and B, and one more family living in the building.
Between 19 and 22 October 2009 the police interviewed X, Y, V, B, M, D, and three other neighbours.
X, Y, V, and B denied the applicant’s allegations. X and Y also denied that they had watched the match together, and Y submitted that everything he had said had been addressed to the Bosnian kickboxer. Both X and Y confirmed that they had heard the shots but said they did not know who had fired them. Y and his children had indeed picked up the spent cartridges from the ground, not in order to hide anything, but because the children found the spent cartridges interesting to play with. Neither X nor Y knew who was responsible for the incident of 22 September 2009, but they suspected the applicant himself.
V submitted that the discussion of 9 September 2009 had referred to another person sought by the police at the time in relation to various attacks, and they had been discussing how they would defend themselves in the event of an attack. B denied that she had been in V’s apartment on that occasion.
M confirmed that during the argument with Y, X had come and said that if he “saw red” he would “kill them, as well as this gypsy” (“napraviću dženaze i vama, a i ovom ciganinu”), pointing in the direction of the applicant’s flat. M had assumed that he had meant the applicant. D confirmed M’s statement.
The other two neighbours were not aware of any conflicts amongst the neighbours, or that anybody ill-treated or insulted the applicant on the basis of his national origin. They had no idea who could be responsible for the incident of 22 September 2009. The third neighbour, N.L., confirmed the applicant’s submissions in relation to another incident (see paragraph 30 (b) below).
On 26 October 2009 the case file was transmitted to the State prosecutor’s office (Osnovno državno tužilaštvo) in order to assess whether there were any elements of the criminal offence of jeopardising someone’s security (ugrožavanje sigurnosti).
On 18 November 2009 the applicant lodged a criminal complaint with the higher State prosecutor’s office (Više državno tužilaštvo) in Podgorica in relation to the above events. He filed the complaint against X, Y, V, S and B for incitement to ethnic, racial and religious hatred, discontent and intolerance (izazivanje nacionalne, rasne i vjerske mržnje, razdora i netrpeljivosti, hereinafter “hate crime”) in connection with discrimination, racial and otherwise (see paragraphs 38-39 below). He also enclosed relevant video material.
On 24 November 2009 the higher State prosecutor’s office rejected the complaint on the grounds that there were no elements of any hate crime or other criminal offence within its competence. The applicant was notified that he could take over the prosecution as a subsidiary prosecutor and that the case file had already been forwarded to the State prosecution service on 26 October 2009 (see paragraph 17 above).
On 25 November 2009 the State prosecution service issued an official report (službena zabilješka) finding that the impugned words of 26 May, as well as those of 9 September 2009, which referred to the use of swords and axes, had not been addressed to either the applicant or anybody close to him, and that the incident of 15 September 2009 could not be considered a threat. It was concluded that none of those three events had involved an element of jeopardising someone’s security, or any other criminal offence subject to public prosecution. The incident of 22 September 2009, however, could be considered as jeopardising security. On 27 November 2009 the State prosecution service asked the police to undertake measures in order to find the perpetrator. At the same time the police were informed that the applicant’s criminal complaint in this regard would be kept until the perpetrator was found, or until 22 September 2012, when the prosecution of that criminal offence would become time-barred.  On 31 December 2009 the State prosecutor informed the applicant of this, as well as of the fact that he could file a criminal complaint against a specific person with appropriate evidence (uz valjane dokaze).
On 14 December 2009 the applicant filed an application for an investigation (zahtjev za sprovođenje istrage) with the High Court (Viši sud) in Podgorica. He enclosed the relevant videos, and proposed that the court hear a number of neighbours, including those he suspected.
On 17 March 2010 the High Court dismissed that application for lack of evidence. In particular, the submitted video material was considered to be inadmissible, having been obtained without a prior court order, and the court observed that the suspected neighbours had denied that what they had said related to the applicant. It was further held that the applicant had not submitted any evidence in relation to the incident of 22 September 2009, nor had he called the police at the time to come to the scene and “collect the necessary material for further analysis” in order to verify his suspicions.
On 26 March 2010 the applicant appealed against that decision. He submitted, in particular, that on 22 September 2009 he had actually called the police, who had only taken photographs of the scene. The fact that they had failed to do what they should have done was in no way his fault, as it was not up to him to tell the police what to do, but only to lodge a criminal complaint, which he had done.
On 31 May 2010 the Court of Appeal dismissed his appeal for lack of evidence, in substance endorsing the reasoning of the High Court. In doing so, the court held that the applicant’s objections as to the gathering of evidence by the police “could not be the subject of [that] court’s assessment”.
On 19 July 2010 the applicant lodged a constitutional appeal. He maintained, inter alia, that because of the failure of the domestic authorities to protect him and his family, they had had to move out of the apartment (see paragraph 35 below). He relied on the right to private life, the right to an effective domestic remedy, and the prohibition of discrimination.
On 25 March 2014 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s constitutional appeal. It considered that it should be examined under Articles 6 and 14 of the Convention and corresponding Articles of the Montenegrin Constitution, and found there had been no violation of any of them.
On 7 April 2016, as regards the incident of 22 September 2009, the police informed the State prosecutor’s office that “[they] had acted on [the applicant’s] criminal complaint and undertaken measures in accordance with their authority, having dedicated a significant amount of time [to the complaint]. While carrying out those official actions [they] had not found material evidence which would undoubtedly indicate the perpetrator of this criminal offence”.
The Government submitted information from the applicant’s criminal record reflecting convictions for minor offences in 1981, 1990 and 2002. For each of these offences he had received a suspended sentence.
On 20 December 2007 the applicant was celebrating Bayram. X and Y claimed before the domestic bodies that the applicant had celebrated inappropriately by playing loud music from very early in the morning, shooting in the air and calling Turks and Wahhabi (vehabije) to jihad. He had apparently also tried to hit X with a flagpole (koplje od zastave). The applicant submitted that X and W (the husband of X’s niece) had been insulting him and his family, while X had also spat on him, shouted obscenities and thrown stones at him, causing him minor physical injuries. On 30 September 2008 the applicant was found guilty in misdemeanour proceedings of disturbing public order and peace (narušavanje javnog reda i mira) by shooting several shots in the air from his starting pistol on 20 December 2007. He was sentenced to a ten-day period of imprisonment and the pistol was confiscated. The decision was upheld by a secondinstance body on 23 December 2008. In relation to the same incident, on 29 July 2008 X and W were charged with violent behaviour against the applicant. In the course of the proceedings, a medical expert witness submitted that the applicant had a contusion (nagnječenje) on the left part of the back of his head, which would have been classified as a minor physical injury at the time it had been inflicted. The medical expert submitted that the injury had been caused by a blunt object, possibly a “larger stone”, and that it could not have been caused by sand or “stones the size of beans”. On 24 May 2011, after the case had been remitted, the Court of First Instance acquitted X and W, considering that it had not been proved that they had committed the offence.
The applicant reported the following events to the police, but to no avail: (a) on 6 October 2008 an unknown person had thrown a brick and broken one of the windows of his apartment; (b) on 11 September 2009 S and her husband, Z, had tried to hit the applicant’s parked car with their own car; this was confirmed by another neighbour, N.L., who witnessed this event and was interviewed by the police in October 2009 (see paragraph 16 above); (c) on 16 October 2009 S had asked Y aloud if he was going to “slaughter” somebody, and he had answered that he was, both of them looking at the applicant; S had said that he would “make [his] car dirty with that man”; (d) on 19 December 2009 an unknown person had fired several shots in front of the applicant’s apartment, below the children’s bedroom; the applicant gave the police eight bullet shells that he had found on the ground; (e) on 1 January 2010, shortly after midnight, X had thrown firecrackers at the applicant’s car and broken its windscreen; he had also thrown a glass bottle at the applicant and a metal bar at his son, swearing profusely and threatening to slaughter them all; this had been followed by gunshots.
On 21 October, 23 October and 30 October 2009 X, V and M.Ć. respectively lodged criminal complaints against the applicant for insulting and provoking them, and for playing loud music and calling Turks and Wahhabi to jihad. On 25 December 2009 those complaints were rejected by the State prosecutor.
On 24 April 2010 the Court of First Instance (Osnovni sud) in Podgorica found the applicant guilty of recording Y without authorisation and eavesdropping (prisluškivanje) on him, and sentenced him to 40 days’ imprisonment, suspended for a period of one year. That judgment was upheld by the High Court on 15 October 2010. On 26 December 2012 the Constitutional Court dismissed a constitutional appeal by the applicant in this regard.
On 7 May 2010 the applicant was fined 800 euros (EUR) in minor offence proceedings (prekršajni postupak) for threatening (izazivanje osjećaja ugroženosti) V, a decision which was upheld on 7 July 2010.
On 26 May 2010 the applicant lodged a criminal complaint against X with the State prosecution service, alleging that in August and September 2009 he had threatened to “cut [the applicant’s] gypsy head off and impale it on a pike” (nabiti na kolac). On 27 July 2010 the deputy State prosecutor rejected the criminal complaint. On 12 August 2010 the applicant filed a private criminal action (optužni predlog) against X, who was acquitted by the Court of First Instance on 7 June 2011. The court found that X had indeed said the impugned words in front of a witness, and that the words could have made the applicant feel frightened and insecure, but the court could not accept “that [the applicant] had taken those words seriously, especially since the witness, who was the only one who had heard the words, had not taken them seriously, which was why he had informed the applicant about them only two months later”. That decision was upheld by the High Court on 7 March 2012.
On 6 July 2010 X threatened the applicant’s daughter by saying that he would kill and slaughter them all, with his hands stretched towards her neck. The girl apparently fainted and was admitted to hospital unconscious. The same day the applicant and his family moved out of their apartment. They were allegedly on a hunger strike for the next twenty-four days, seeking help from various State institutions.
Respectively, Articles 168, 370 and 443 of this Code provide for the criminal offences of jeopardising another person’s security, incitement to ethnic, racial and religious hatred, and discrimination, racial or otherwise.
Article 168 provides, inter alia, that whoever jeopardises another person’s security by threatening an attack on their life or on the life of someone close to them shall be fined or sentenced to a year in prison. Whoever commits this offence in respect of several persons or commits the offence out of hatred shall be sentenced to between three months and three years in prison.
Article 370 provides, inter alia, that whoever publicly encourages violence or hatred towards a group or a group member on the basis of their race, skin colour, religion, origin, or nationality shall be sentenced to between six months and five years in prison. If this offence is committed by jeopardising someone’s security, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to between one and eight years in prison.
Article 443 provides, inter alia, that whoever violates someone’s fundamental human rights and freedoms on the basis of their race, skin colour, nationality, ethnic origin or other personal characteristic, shall be sentenced to between six months and five years in prison.
Articles 19, 20, 44, 45, 59 and 243, read in conjunction, provided, inter alia, that formal criminal proceedings (krivični postupak) could be instituted at the request of an authorised prosecutor. In respect of crimes subject to public prosecution, the authorised prosecutor would be the State prosecutor. However, his authority to decide whether to press charges was bound by the principle of legality, which required that he had to act whenever there was a reasonable suspicion that a crime subject to public prosecution had been committed. For crimes subject to private prosecution (za koja se goni po privatnoj tužbi), the authorised prosecutor would be a victim (privatni tužilac).
Article 59 provided that, should the State prosecutor decide that there was no basis on which to press charges, he had to inform the victim of that decision, and the latter would then have the right to take over the prosecution of the case on his own behalf, as a “subsidiary prosecutor” (oštećeni kao tužilac), within eight days of being notified of that decision.
This Code entered into force on 1 September 2011 and thereby repealed the previous Code (except for Chapter XXIX, which is not relevant to the present case).
Articles 437 and 438 provide for a possibility for the Supreme State Prosecutor to lodge a request for the protection of legality (zahtjev za zaštitu zakonitosti), either of his own motion or upon a proposal to that effect submitted by a defendant sentenced to unconditional imprisonment of one year or more.
Sections 148 and 149 set out the different grounds for claiming compensation for both pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage, including for a violation of personal rights (povreda prava ličnosti). In particular, section 148(1) provides that whoever causes somebody else damage is liable to pay compensation, unless he or she can prove that the damage was not his or her fault.
Sections 206-207 provide that anyone who has suffered fear, physical pain or mental anguish as a consequence of a breach of personal rights (prava ličnosti) is entitled to sue for financial compensation in the civil courts and, in addition, to request other forms of redress “which might be capable” of affording adequate non-pecuniary relief. This Act entered into force on 15 August 2008.