The case originated in an application (no. 70107/11) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Turkish nationals, Mr Emrah Sarıtaş and Mr Mesut Geyik (“the applicants”), on 10 October 2011.
The applicants were represented by Mr B. Yıldırım, a lawyer practising in Tunceli. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicants complained of a violation of their rights to a fair trial and freedom of expression under Articles 6 and 10 of the Convention, respectively.
On 13 November 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
On 3 June 2015 the President of the Section decided, in accordance with Rule 34 § 3 of the Rules of Court, to grant the applicant leave to use the Turkish language in the written proceedings before the Court.
On 5 December 2017 the Government were informed that the Court intended to assign the application to a Committee. In a letter dated 3 January 2018 the Government objected to the examination of the applications by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicants were born in 1987 and 1985, respectively, and live in the Hozat district of Tunceli.
On 5 April 2007 the applicants attended a concert performed by a band called “Grup Yorum” in Hozat. During the concert they chanted certain slogans, such as “Revolutionary prisoners are immortal” (“Devrimci tutsaklar ölümsüzdür”), “Revolutionary prisoners are our honour” (“Devrimci tutsaklar onurumuzdur”).
On 17 October 2007 the Malatya public prosecutor filed an indictment with the Malatya Assize Court charging the applicants with disseminating propaganda in favour of the “DHKP/C” (Revolutionary People’s Liberation Party/Front), an illegal armed organisation, under section 7(2) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act (Law no. 3713). The public prosecutor noted that the first applicant had chanted the slogan “Revolutionary prisoners are our honour” (“Devrimci tutsaklar onurumuzdur”) during the concert. As regards the second applicant, the public prosecutor alleged that he had chanted the following slogans during the same concert: “Mahir, Hüseyin, Ulaş; Fight until emancipation” (“Mahir, Hüseyin, Ulaş; Kurtuluşa kadar savaş”); “Martyrs of the revolution are immortal” (“Devrim şehitleri ölümsüzdür”); “Revolutionary prisoners are our honour”, “Victory on mountains, emancipation at the front; long live victory, long live resistance” (“Dağlarda zafer, cephede kurtuluş; yaşasın zafer, yaşasın direniş”).
During the criminal proceedings against them, the applicants stated that they had attended the concert of 5 April 2007 and had sung along with the musicians but had not chanted the slogans noted in the indictment.
On 6 March 2008 the Malatya Assize Court convicted the applicants as charged and sentenced them to ten months’ imprisonment each. In its judgment, the assize court considered it established, on the basis of a police video recording of the concert of 5 April 2007, a report on the video recording, the indictment, the applicants’ defence submissions and the public prosecutor’s observations on the merits of the case, that the applicants had chanted the slogans noted in the indictment. The court considered that the concert in question had become a propaganda activity in favour of the DHKP/C and that the applicants had chanted slogans that were used by that organisation. The Malatya Assize Court concluded that the applicants had committed the offence of dissemination of propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation.
The applicants appealed.
On 4 July 2011 the Court of Cassation upheld the first-instance court’s judgment.
On 13 and 14 September 2011 the applicants were informed that they had to start serving their prison sentences within ten days. According to the applicants’ submissions, which were not contested by the Government, upon receipt of the summons to serve the prison sentences, both applicants duly served them.
The relevant domestic law applicable at the material time can be found in Belge v. Turkey (no. 50171/09, § 19, 6 December 2016).
In particular, at the time of the events giving rise to the present application, section 7(2) of Law no. 3713 read as follows:
“Any person who disseminates propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation shall be liable to [serve] a term of imprisonment of one to five years ...”