The case originated in an application (no. 10597/03) against the Federal Republic of Germany lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a German national, Mr Manfred Ommer
The applicant was initially represented by Mr B. Schreiber, a lawyer practising in Brühl, and subsequently by Mr U. Sommer, a lawyer practising in Köln, and also by Mr G. Widmaier, a lawyer practising in .
The applicant complained under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention that the length of the criminal proceedings against him had been excessive and that German law did not provide for sufficient compensation for the damage suffered by him as a consequence of the protracted length of the proceedings.
On 14 November 2006 the President of the Fifth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1950 and lives in . In the 1970s he participated as a sprinter in the Olympic Games and from 1986 to 1993, he was the president of FC Homburg, a football club playing in the German Football League.
From 1982 the applicant was the sole shareholder and sole managing director of the DETAG investment trust corporation, which arranged the sale of apartments.
By a letter dated 19 February 1987, which reached the applicant on that day, the  police headquarters summoned the applicant to question him on charges of fraud in relation with his business activities for the DETAG corporation. Thereby the applicant obtained knowledge of the criminal investigations instituted against him.
On 24 May 1988 and on 19 August 1988 the Cologne Public Prosecutor’s Office joined several different sets of proceedings concerning charges of fraud against the applicant, which had partly been transferred to it by other Public Prosecutor’s Offices (no. 110 Js 24/88).
In February 1989, court orders issued in October 1988 and February 1989, authorising the search of the applicant’s home, those of four
In February 1990 the police submitted to the Public Prosecutor’s Office an evaluation of the documents seized and the statements of numerous witnesses who had been heard by way of a mailed questionnaire.
Between 5 October 1990 and 6 December 1990 further search orders, inter alia against the applicant and his company, were executed.
On 27 August 1992 the  police headquarters, having heard ten witnesses since December 1990, sent back the files to the Public Prosecutor’s Office with a summary note on the results of their investigations.
On 28 July 1994 the Cologne Public Prosecutor’s Office, having questioned the applicant twice and following unsuccessful negotiations with the defence with a view to discontinuing the proceedings under Article 153a of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 37 below), preferred an indictment (running to 460 pages) against the applicant with the Cologne Regional Court. It charged the applicant, who was represented by counsel, with seventy-four cases of aggravated fraud and attempted fraud, committed together with his co-defendants G. and D. between September 1984 and November 1986. The applicant, acting as the DETAG corporation’s managing director, was accused of having incited investors to buy apartments at a price far above their market value. According to the indictment, the applicant had obtained the investors’ consent to buy the apartments by misleading them about their true value and by orally undertaking, in particular, to repurchase the apartments after two years at the investors’ request, a guarantee which he never intended to keep.
On 21 November 1994 the  opened the main proceedings in respect of sixty-seven charges of aggravated fraud and attempted fraud against the applicant, who was represented by defence counsel throughout the proceedings.
On 1 June, 1 September and 1 December 1995 and on 1 March 1996 the president of the chamber of the Regional Court noted that due to two other sets of proceedings pending before the Regional Court which had to be granted priority as the defendants concerned were in custody, it was not possible to fix dates for the hearing in the applicant’s case.
On 13 June 1996 the  ordered seven experts to submit reports on the market value of sixty-eight apartments at the time they were bought by the investors. The expert reports were submitted to the  between 19 July 1996 and 20 March 1997.
On 21 March, 21 August and 21 November 1997 and on 20 February, 6 May and 24 June 1998 the president of the chamber of the Regional Court noted that due to hearings in other proceedings which were granted priority as the defendants concerned were in custody, in particular the hearings in the proceedings against F. and others, against L. and S. and against Fe., it was not possible to fix dates for the hearing in the applicant’s case.
On 27 July 1998 the applicant requested that the proceedings against him be discontinued on account of their excessive length, if necessary after he had complied with a condition for discontinuance, pursuant to Article 153a of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
As proposed by the , the applicant and the Public Prosecutor’s Office subsequently entered into negotiations about discontinuing the proceedings in exchange for the payment of a sum of money (see Article 153a of the Code of Criminal Procedure, paragraph 37 below) which lasted until 3 December 1998. However, they were unable to reach agreement.
From 13 January 1999 until 30 September 1999 the  held forty-four hearings in which it questioned forty-eight witnesses and two experts. It stressed that in its view, the case appeared to be suitable for discontinuance in accordance with Article 153a of the Code of Criminal Procedure, but the prosecution and the defence were unable to reach a settlement.
On 21 June 1999 the applicant requested that the proceedings be discontinued pursuant to Article 260 § 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 38 below) because their excessive length was an impediment to the proceedings (Verfahrenshindernis).
On 4 October 1999 the , having heard the parties, discontinued the proceedings pursuant to Article 260 § 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. It ordered the Treasury to bear the costs of the proceedings and the applicant’s necessary expenses pursuant to Article 467 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 39 below). The court found that the length of the proceedings constituted a procedural impediment to their continuation, as proceeding with them would breach Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
The  found that it would not be possible to deliver a judgment in due course and before all offences became time-barred in November 2001. It was unclear at that stage of the proceedings whether the applicant would have to be convicted or acquitted. Even assuming that the applicant was found guilty of fraud, his guilt could not be considered serious, notably because the investors who had bought the apartments had in fact received the tax benefits they had sought by their investment.
Having regard to all the circumstances of the case, the Regional Court found that the length of the proceedings since the applicant’s notification thereof and their further expected duration was excessive and violated the right to a hearing within a reasonable time as guaranteed by Article 2 § 1 of the Basic Law, read in conjunction with the rule of law, and Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. This warranted the discontinuance of the proceedings. The duration of the proceedings, which had lasted for more than twelve and a half years, had been caused by structural problems at the Cologne Public Prosecutor’s Office and the , which were understaffed. The applicant had not caused any delays in the proceedings. The proceedings were quite complex, but this did not sufficiently explain their length. The ongoing proceedings imposed a burden on the applicant because there had been several, partly polemical, press articles about the case, so that his business activities kept being adversely affected.
The  found that it was not possible to take into consideration the excessive duration of the proceedings when fixing the applicant’s sentence, as this presupposed his conviction. The applicant could, however, no longer be convicted, as continuing the proceedings would breach Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. Moreover, if the proceedings resulted in the applicant being acquitted, it would likewise be impossible to consider the length of the proceedings when fixing the sentence.
On 25 October 2000 the Federal Court of Justice, allowing the appeal on points of law lodged by the Public Prosecutor’s Office, quashed the judgment of the  and remitted the case to the . It found that it was not in a position fully to examine whether there was in fact a procedural impediment to the continuation of the proceedings for failure to comply with the reasonable time requirement.
Having heard the parties at an oral hearing, the Federal Court of Justice stated that in very exceptional circumstances a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, taken in conjunction with the rule of law, could lead to an impediment to the proceedings.
According to the Federal Court of Justice there had been a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention in the present case. The length of the investigation and court proceedings, which was attributable to the organisation within the judiciary, had been excessive, and the applicant had no responsibility for it. However, the  had failed sufficiently to ascertain the extent of the applicant’s guilt. Without that knowledge, it was impossible for the Federal Court of Justice to assess whether the violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention was so severe that it could neither be compensated when fixing the sentence nor by discontinuing the proceedings pursuant to Article 153 or 153a of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraphs 36-37 below) and consequently was a procedural impediment to continuing the proceedings. Having regard to the contents of the case file and assuming the speedy processing of the case by the Bonn Regional Court, it still appeared possible to take into consideration the violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention when fixing the sentence.
In January 2001 the applicant lodged a complaint with the  against this judgment (see 5. below).
On 30 November 2001 the , having held
Having heard ninety-four witnesses, the  found that the applicant was not guilty of fraud, because he had not misled or caused his staff to mislead the purchasers of apartments about their true value or by giving a binding guarantee to repurchase the apartments.
On 4 February 2002 the judgment became final, the Cologne Public Prosecutor’s Office having withdrawn its appeal on points of law.
On 11 January 2001 the applicant, represented by counsel, lodged a complaint with the  against the judgment of the Federal Court of Justice. He argued in particular that remitting the case to the  and continuing the proceedings despite the fact that his right to be heard within a reasonable time had been disregarded throughout the proceedings further violated his right to a fair trial. Following the judgment of the , he further submitted that he had suffered pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage caused by the excessive length of the criminal proceedings against him despite his acquittal. German law did not provide for adequate compensation for this.
On 24 September 2002 the , having stayed the proceedings between 22 November 2001 and 15 March 2002 at the applicant’s request awaiting the outcome of the proceedings in the criminal courts, refused to admit the applicant’s constitutional complaint.
The  found that the applicant was no longer prejudiced by the judgment delivered by the Federal Court of Justice as the criminal proceedings against him had been terminated by his final acquittal. Assuming that the constitutional complaint would be
Article 153 of the Code of Criminal Procedure governs the discontinuance of criminal investigation or court proceedings on grounds of insignificance. According to that provision, criminal proceedings may be discontinued if they concern an offence for which it is not mandatory to impose a sentence of at least one year’s imprisonment (Vergehen), if the defendant’s guilt would be of a minor nature and if there was no public interest in criminal prosecution. If the indictment has already been preferred, the court may only discontinue the proceedings with the consent of both the Public Prosecutor’s Office and the defendant (§ 2 of the Article).
Pursuant to Article 153a § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the Public Prosecutor’s Office may discontinue criminal proceedings concerning offences for which the regular minimum punishment is less than one year’s imprisonment at the investigation stage with the defendant’s consent, if the latter complies with certain conditions. These conditions must be suitable to remove the public interest in criminal prosecution and may not be in conflict with the severity of the defendant’s guilt. Such conditions notably entail the payment of a sum of money to a
Pursuant to Article 260 § 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the discontinuance of the proceedings shall be pronounced in a judgment if there is a procedural impediment to the continuation of the proceedings.
Provisions governing costs, expenses and compensation for damage caused by investigation and court proceedings when the defendant is subsequently acquitted
Pursuant to Article 467 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure the costs of the criminal proceedings and the defendant’s necessary expenses shall be borne by the Treasury if the defendant is acquitted, if the court refuses to open the main proceedings against him or if the proceedings against him are discontinued. According to Article 467 § 3 of the said Code, the court may decline to award the defendant’s necessary expenses against the Treasury where the defendant has avoided conviction merely because of an impediment to the proceedings (Verfahrenshindernis).
Article 464a § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure stipulates that the necessary expenses of a participant in the proceedings shall also comprise compensation for an inevitable loss of time in accordance with the provisions on compensation of witnesses (no. 1) and the fees and expenses of a lawyer in so far as these are to be reimbursed under Article 91 § 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure (no. 2). Section 2 of the Act on Compensation of Witnesses and Experts (Gesetz über die Entschädigung von Zeugen und Sachverständigen), in its version in force between 1 January 2002 and
Compensation for damage caused by wrongful prosecution is covered by the Act on Compensation for Measures of Criminal Prosecution (Gesetz über die Entschädigung für Strafverfolgungsmaßnahmen).
Pursuant to section 2 of that Act, a defendant is notably entitled to compensation for damage incurred by certain specified measures of criminal prosecution if he is acquitted, if the proceedings against him are discontinued or if the court refuses to open the main proceedings against him. The measures of criminal prosecution for which compensation may be granted notably comprise pre-trial detention and searches and seizures of property.
Section 7 § 1 of the Act on Compensation for Measures of Criminal Prosecution stipulates that pecuniary damage incurred as a result of the criminal prosecution measure is compensated for, as well as non-pecuniary damage in the event of a deprivation of liberty by a court decision. Once the finding that the Treasury is under a duty to compensate has become final, the compensation claim must be submitted within six months with the Public Prosecutor’s Office which last was in charge of the investigations at first instance (section 10 § 1 of the said Act).
Pursuant to Article 34 of the Basic Law, taken in conjunction with Article 839 of the Civil Code, an individual has the right to be compensated by the State for any damage arising from a breach of official duty committed by a public servant. These provisions are also applicable to a breach of duty in giving judgment on an action if the breach consists in a refusal to discharge a function or a delay in performing it contrary to professional duty.
Damages are afforded to the individual concerned in accordance with Articles 249 et seq. of the Civil Code. By Article 253 of the Civil Code, in the version in force until 31 July 2002, compensation for