The case originated in an application (no. 48068/06) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Belarusian national, Mr Valeriy Valeryevich Novik (“the applicant”), on 4 December 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. P. Bushchenko, a lawyer practising in Kharkiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Y. Zaytsev, from the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his detention awaiting extradition was not lawful.
On 13 March 2007 the Court declared the application partly inadmissible and decided to communicate the complaint concerning unlawfulness of the applicant’s detention to the Government. It also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1969 and lives in Kyiv.
On 30 November 2006 the applicant was apprehended by the police in Kyiv under the international arrest warrant issued by the General Prosecutor’s Office of Belarus.
On 1 December 2006 the Pechersky District Court of Kyiv ordered the applicant’s detention for forty days pending an official request for his extradition to Belarus and in order to effect his transfer to the law enforcement authorities of .
On 4 December 2006 the applicant appealed against the decision of 1 December 2006. He contended that the first instance court had not taken into account his state of health and the fact that he, together with his wife and three minor children, had been residing in Ukraine for a long period of time, and that the court had not examined the applicant’s submissions concerning his political persecution in .
On 7 December 2006 the Kyiv City Court of Appeal rejected the applicant’s appeal against the decision of 1 December 2006. It held that the first instance court had duly taken into account the applicant’s state of health. However, it took the view that his family situation was irrelevant for the case and that the applicant’s allegations of political persecution in  were unsubstantiated.
On 8 December 2006 the Deputy Prosecutor of the Republic of Belarus submitted an official request to the General Prosecutor’s Office of Ukraine, seeking the applicant’s extradition to .
By letter of 25 December 2006 the Deputy Prosecutor General of  informed the Belarusian Deputy Prosecutor General that the applicant would not be extradited on the ground that, under Ukrainian law, the charges against the applicant did not carry imprisonment.
On 27 December 2006 the applicant was released from detention.
Relevant domestic law and practice is summarised in the case of Soldatenko (Soldatenko v. Ukraine, 2440/07, §§ 21-29 and 31, 23 October 2008).