The case originated in an application (no. 25148/07) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Mehmet Emin Ekinci (“the applicant”), on 5 June 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr İ. Akmeşe, a lawyer practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been subjected to ill-treatment while in police custody and that he had been denied the right to a fair trial on account of the use by the trial court of his police statements and the evidence he had given during the crime-scene reconstruction, both of which took place without a lawyer present.
On 26 June 2017 notice of the above-mentioned complaints concerning were given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1986 and lives in Tekirdağ.
On 28 July 2004 at approximately 10.15 a.m. the applicant was arrested by security forces within the scope of intelligence and operational activities carried out in respect of a terrorist organisation, namely the PKK (the Workers’ Party of Kurdistan). According to the arrest report, the applicant’s bag contained five copies of the book entitled “To defend the people” (Halkı savunmak) signed by Abdullah Öcalan.
Subsequently, the applicant was medically examined at the Fatih branch of the Forensic Medicine Institute. The doctor who examined the applicant observed a hyperaemia of 2 cm and two 0.5 cm-long skin-deep lesions on the applicant’s left wrist, adding that the applicant had told him that it had been the result of the handcuffs. That report also contained the applicant’s statement that he had been subjected to psychological pressure by the police. Although the report does not contain any information as to its time of issuance, it appears to be a report on the first medical examination carried out following his arrest.
On the same day the applicant’s statement was taken in the Istanbul Security Directorate and they were transcribed on printed forms, the first page of which was filled in to indicate, inter alia, that the applicant was suspected of acting on behalf of the PKK. The same page also included a printed message which stated, inter alia, that the person being questioned had the right to remain silent and the right to a lawyer of his or her choosing. It appears from the form that the applicant refused legal assistance, since the first page of the record includes a printed phrase stating “No lawyer sought” and a box next to it that is marked with a printed “X”. Moreover, according to the record, he also stated that he did not want a lawyer and that he waived his right to silence. In his statement, which was five pages long, the applicant admitted that he had thrown a Molotov cocktail at a police vehicle on 9 July 2004 with S.B., F.A. and another person known to him only as Mehmet. He further stated that he had been frequenting the Beyoğlu branch of the People’s Democratic Party (DEHAP). Lastly, the statement form does not contain any information as to its time of issuance.
According to a separate document dated 28 July 2004, the applicant had been informed of his rights under Article 135 of the Code of Criminal Procedure as in force at the material time and stated that he would like to give his statements without a lawyer present. This was also a printed form that bore the applicant’s signature and the indication that a copy of a form explaining his rights had been given to him. On another form explaining arrested people’s rights, which was also undated and which the applicant duly signed, he was reminded of his right to remain silent and to have access to a lawyer. However, those forms do not contain any information as to their time of issuance.
Again on 28 July 2004, at 10.05 p.m., the applicant was required to participate in a crime-scene reconstruction (yer gösterme). According to the record drafted by police officers and signed by the applicant, the latter told the police officers that he had thrown a Molotov cocktail at a police car on 9 July 2004 on Dolapdere Street in Istanbul. Subsequently, the police officers brought the applicant to the crime scene, where he made further statements. According to the report, the applicant stated that he and two other accused – S.B., F.A. and another person known to him as Mehmet – had decided to hold a demonstration in order to protest the detention in isolation of Abdullah Öcalan and that they had all met in the Dolapdere district and started waiting on the street for a police car. When they had seen the police car approach, the applicant and Mehmet had thrown one Molotov cocktail each at the police car and then had run away. This report did not indicate any information as to whether the applicant had been advised of his rights prior to or during the crime-scene reconstruction.
Also on 28 July 2004 the Incident Scene Investigation and Identification Branch of the Istanbul Security Directorate drew up a report in which it concluded that one of the fingerprints found on the blue plastic shopping bag containing three Molotov cocktails seized in the crime scene belonged to F.A.
The police also contacted Turkcell (a mobile-telecommunications provider) with a view to obtaining the telephone records of the mobile telephones used by the applicant, F.A., S.B. and Mehmet. The results showed that the applicant and S.B. had been present at the crime scene on the date and time the offence had taken place; that S.B. had left the crime scene within a short time and that S.B. had called the applicant three times within the period between the time of the incident and the following fifteen minutes. Moreover, approximately one hour after the incident, the applicant called F.A. three times.
On 1 August 2004 at 7.10 a.m., at the end of his time in police custody, the applicant was once again examined by a doctor in the Forensic Medicine Institute. According to the report drawn up in respect of the applicant, there were no new marks on the applicant’s body other than those mentioned in the medical report dated 28 July 2004. However, as the applicant told the doctor that the police had hit him on the ear and that they had beaten him up in order to force him to sign the statement record, the doctor decided that a conclusive report could only be drawn up after a detailed medical examination in a fully equipped hospital.
Subsequently, the applicant was transferred to Şişli Etfal Research Hospital, where he was examined by a doctor who ordered the applicant’s transfer to the ear, nose and throat department of the hospital. Following examination there, the applicant was given another medical examination by a different doctor, who concluded that the applicant’s auricles (right and left ears), external auditory canals and ear drum were normal (mutat) and his nasal pyramid and facial nerve functions were natural.
On the same day at 10.30 a.m. the applicant was given another medical examination at the Şişli Directorate of Forensic Medicine Institute by a specialist doctor, who concluded that the findings did not put the applicant’s life at risk but rendered him unfit to carry out daily activities for one day. The applicant told the doctor that the police had beaten him up.
On the same day, the applicant was brought before the public prosecutor where he gave statements in the presence of his lawyer. Denying the content of his police statements, the applicant submitted that he had had to sign those statements as the police had forced him to do so. Moreover, the applicant stated that he had been to Kağıthane Sanayi district to see the public school in which he had sat the university entrance exam on 10 July 2004. The applicant once again denied having thrown a Molotov cocktail at a police car. The applicant’s lawyer stated on the lawyerclient-meeting form that the applicant had stated that he would not give any statements without his lawyer present. As such, the applicant did not make any statements but the police had forced him to sign the statements prepared by them.
Again on the same day, the applicant was brought before the investigating judge. He gave statements in the presence of his lawyer, and accepted his prior statements to the public prosecutor, while denying once again his statements to the police, alleging that the police had made him sign the statement record without allowing him to read it first. The applicant’s lawyer stated that the applicant had been subjected to illtreatment starting from his time in police custody and that no lawyer had been appointed in respect of him despite his requests to have the aid of counsel. He also argued that the evidence had been collected unlawfully. After the questioning was over the investigating judge remanded the applicant in custody, referring to the nature of the offence and the state of the evidence.
On the same day, another suspect, S.B., also made statements before the public prosecutor. He stated that on the date of the incident, F.A. had come to Dolapdere Street with a bag containing Molotov cocktails; that there had been four people at the scene of the incident and that these people had had Molotov cocktails in their hands; that the applicant and another person called only Mehmet had been at the side of the police car, which had been burning, and that they had thrown away a plastic bag when they had run away. According to his statement form, he did not ask for a lawyer when making those statements.
On 4 August 2004 the Istanbul public prosecutor’s office filed a bill of indictment, charging the applicant, F.A. and S.B. with being members of an illegal terrorist organisation under Article 168 § 2 of the now defunct Criminal Code and of using explosive materials under Article 264 § 6 of the same code.
On 11 November 2004, at the first hearing in the case, the applicant gave evidence in person, submitting that he had been arrested because of the books he had had in his bag. He pleaded not guilty and denied all the accusations against him. When asked about his statements before the police, the public prosecutor and the investigating judge, the applicant did not accept his statements to the police, but told the trial court that he had nothing to say about the statements he had made to the public prosecutor and the investigating judge. When asked about the crime-scene-reconstruction report, he did not accept them, alleging that he had been taken to a place at night and had repeated certain things in order not to become a victim of an extrajudicial killing.
At the same hearing, S.B. also gave evidence in person without a lawyer being present and rejected the statements he had made during the pretrial stage of the proceedings.
At a hearing held on 31 August 2005, the public prosecutor read out his observations on the merits of the case (esas hakkında mütalaa) to the trial court and advised that the trial court find the applicant guilty as charged, but under the relevant articles of the new Criminal Code.
On 15 February 2007 the Istanbul Assize Court rendered its judgment in the case and found that on the basis of the police statements of the applicant and S.B., the expert report showing that the fingerprints found on the bag which had been seized from the crime scene belonged to F.A., the other reports and the content of the case file as a whole that the applicant had thrown a Molotov cocktail at a police car on 9 July 2004. The trial court also held that the applicant had committed that offence on behalf of the PKK. Accordingly, it sentenced him to six years and three months’ imprisonment for membership of the PKK and to one year and eight months imprisonment for criminal damage to property.
On 27 March 2007 the applicant’s lawyer lodged an appeal against the trial court’s judgment, arguing that the applicant had been subjected to torture while in police custody and had been forced by the police to sign statements. In that connection, he referred to Article 148 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, pursuant to which statements that had been obtained through such methods could not be used in evidence. Moreover, the applicant’s lawyer argued that Article 148 § 4 of that Code specifically proscribed the use of police statements taken without a lawyer present unless they had been confirmed by the individual before a judge or a court. Thus, the lawyer asked the Court of Cassation to quash the trial court’s judgment on account of the use of the police statements of the applicant and S.B.
On 19 September 2007 the Court of Cassation quashed the judgment on the grounds that the trial court had failed to determine whether the new Criminal Code or the old Criminal Code had provided more favourable provisions in respect of the offences of criminal damage to property and using explosive materials. Likewise, the trial court also did not examine whether alternative sanctions or the provisions relating to suspension of sentences had been applicable in the case. Lastly, the Court of Cassation held that the act of throwing a Molotov cocktail at a police car was an aggravating circumstance in respect of the offence of criminal damage to public property using flammable or explosive materials, and thus the trial court ought to have sentenced the applicant only for the offence of criminal damage to property.
On 19 June 2008 the Istanbul Assize Court rendered its second judgment on the merits of the case. It endorsed its previous findings and sentenced the applicant to six years and three months’ imprisonment for the offence of membership of an armed terrorist organisation and to one year and eight months’ imprisonment for the offence of criminal damage to property using explosive materials. After quoting the content of the defence submissions made by the three accused, including the applicant, and the information on whether they accepted the attributed offences in their previous statements taken in the course of the pre-trial stage, the trial court went on to hold that the applicant and S.B. had given the description of the incident as they had given in their statements to the police. In the trial court’s judgment, there was no reference either to the content of the case file as a whole or to the public prosecutor’s observations on the merits of the case or to the indictment.
On 22 August 2008 the applicant lodged an appeal against his conviction and reiterated his previous appeal grounds.
On 21 April 2011 the Court of Cassation upheld the conviction.
On 18 May 2007 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Fatih chief public prosecutor’s office against the police officers who had been working in the anti-terror branch of the Istanbul police headquarters between 28 July and 1 August 2004, alleging that he had been subjected to illtreatment and that he had had to sign statements under duress.
On 21 May 2007 the public prosecutor requested from the antiterror branch of the Istanbul police headquarters the following pieces of information: a copy of the medical and forensic reports, the applicant’s statement form, the custody records related to the applicant’ custody period, information concerning other persons who had been in custody with the applicant during the same period, information as to whether any coercive force had been used against the applicant and the names of the police officers who had participated in the investigation in respect of the applicant. On the same day, noting that the applicant was in Tekirdağ Prison, the public prosecutor issued a letter of request to the Tekirdağ chief public prosecutor’s office, requesting that the latter obtain his statements.
On 4 May 2007 the anti-terror branch of the Istanbul police headquarters sent the relevant documents.
On 11 June 2007 the applicant gave a statement to the Tekirdağ public prosecutor’s office in his capacity as a complainant. He stated that the police officers had threatened him when his statement had been taken and that four or five of them had attacked and beaten him. As a result, he had given his statements in line with what the police officers had dictated.
On 21 June 2007 the Fatih public prosecutor took the statements of Officer İ.Ö. as a suspect. İ.Ö. stated that the applicant’s allegations had not been true, and that sometimes mentally unwell people stretched their hands in order to make marks on their wrists.
On 16 July 2007 the public prosecutor issued a letter of request to the Merzifon chief public prosecutor’s office, requesting that the latter obtain a statement from Officer G.A. On 8 August 2007 a public prosecutor from the Merzifon chief public prosecutor’s office took G.A.’s statement. He stated that he had worked in Istanbul as a police chief in the applicant’s arrest, and added that neither he nor his colleagues had illtreated the applicant.
On 17 September 2007 the Fatih public prosecutor rendered a decision not to prosecute in respect of the police officers, holding that there was insufficient evidence indicating that the police officers had illtreated the applicant. It further held that the applicant’s allegations and the findings on the medical reports did not match up. In that connection, the prosecutor noted that although the applicant had told the doctor on 28 July 2004 that he had had a lesion on his left wrist due to handcuffs, the doctor had noted that the applicant had had a lesion on his right wrist. Likewise, the applicant had told the doctor on 1 August 2004 that he had had a pain in his left ear whereas the doctors had concluded that the findings in relation to his ears had been normal.
On 11 December 2007 the applicant’s lawyer lodged an objection (itiraz) against the above-mentioned decision of the Fatih public prosecutor.
On 31 December 2007 the Beyoğlu Assize Court dismissed the applicant’s objection.
The relevant domestic law in force at the material time, as well as case-law of the Constitutional Court on the issue of waiver of the right to a lawyer, may be found in Ruşen Bayar v. Turkey, (no. 25253/08, §§ 4146, 19 February 2019).