The case originated in an application (no. 16744/14) against the Swiss Confederation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Sri Lankan national, Mr X (“the applicant”), on 21 February 2014. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Bosonnet, a lawyer practising in Zürich. The Swiss Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr A. Scheidegger, their Deputy Agent.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the Swiss authorities’ failure to properly assess his asylum application and his subsequent deportation to Sri Lanka had entailed a violation of Article 3.
On 1 July 2015 the complaint concerning the alleged violation of Article 3 was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible under Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant, Mr X, is a Sri Lankan national of Tamil origin, who was born in 1979 and resides in Switzerland.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the applicant, may be summarised as follows.
During the 1990s the applicant was a member of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (“the LTTE”) and participated in armed resistance against the Sri Lankan Government. In late 2003 he was detained in Colombo for about three months. The applicant stated that during this time he had been ill-treated. He furthermore stated that he had been threatened and subjected to surveillance after his release.
On 2 April 2007 the applicant left Sri Lanka for Italy, where he lived until May 2009. His wife, who had remained in Sri Lanka, had allegedly been subjected to searches and questioning by the Sri Lankan police and security forces. She left Sri Lanka on 13 March 2009 and joined the applicant in Italy.
On 25 May 2009 the applicant and his wife illegally entered Switzerland and applied for asylum on grounds of political persecution in Sri Lanka. The applicant emphasised that, as a member of the LTTE, he had participated in armed resistance against the Government of Sri Lanka and had been ill-treated in detention.
On 8 December 2009 the applicant’s wife gave birth to their first child.
In a decision taken on 1 June 2011, the Federal Migration Office (“the FMO” – now the State Secretariat for Migration) held that the applicant and his wife did not fulfil the criteria necessary to obtain refugee status because they had failed to present sufficient evidence in support of their claim. Furthermore, the FMO rejected the applicant’s asylum application and ordered the execution of their deportation order to Sri Lanka, finding it enforceable, legal and reasonable (möglich als auch rechtmässig und zumutbar).
On 9 June 2011 the applicant’s wife gave birth to their second child.
On 5 July 2011 the applicant and his wife appealed against the FMO’s decision to the Federal Administrative Court, requesting that it annul the deportation order according to which the authorities of the Canton of St Gallen had to deport them no later than 27 July 2011, by force if necessary (pursuant to points 3, 4, and 5 of the operative part of the FMO’s decision of 1 June 2011). However, the applicant did not challenge the FMO’s decision refusing to grant him asylum or to recognise him as a refugee (points 1 and 2 of the operative part of the FMO’s decision of 1 June 2011).
In its judgment of 1 October 2012, the Federal Administrative Court rejected the applicant’s appeal on the merits. The court held that the FMO had violated the applicant’s right to be heard by refusing to grant him and his wife access to certain documents in its possession, namely a country report of 22 December 2011 on the conditions in Sri Lanka, which had been established during an official mission of the FMO in September 2010. Nevertheless, since the FMO had provided the parties with access to these documents at a later date, the Federal Administrative Court concluded that the original violation had been remedied.
The Federal Administrative Court further held that there was no impediment to enforcing the deportation order. In particular, weighing the preponderance of the evidence (mit beachtlicher Wahrscheinlichkeit), it held that neither the applicant’s submissions nor the official file indicated that he or his wife would be subjected to treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Convention if they returned to Sri Lanka.
On 2 November 2012 the applicant and his wife applied to the Federal Administrative Court to have its judgment of 1 October 2012 reconsidered. The applicant claimed that the court had not adequately considered all the relevant evidence. He also submitted a copy of an LTTE magazine cover from 1997, which included his photograph. He also submitted a letter from his sister dated 19 October 2012, as well as confirmation from the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka that he had lodged a complaint with that institution on 5 October 2012.
In its judgment of 27 November 2012, the Federal Administrative Court rejected the applicant’s application for reconsideration, holding that there were insufficient grounds to reopen the case. It emphasised that the application for reconsideration was an extraordinary remedy, which could not be used to submit facts which could have been raised during the ordinary proceedings.
On 21 August 2013 the applicant and his family were deported to Sri Lanka. Upon arrival at the airport in Colombo, they were detained and questioned for thirteen hours. Following that, the applicant’s wife and children were released, whereas the applicant was incarcerated and illtreated in Boosa Prison. According to his wife, when she visited the applicant in prison she noted that his face appeared swollen and concluded that her husband had been beaten.
On 6 December 2013 a representative of the Swiss Embassy and a senior protection officer of the UNHCR visited the applicant in the prison governor’s office. During this visit, the representatives noted that the applicant was visibly afraid to speak and that a free conversation with him was impossible.
Following this, the applicant’s family was relocated to Switzerland.
On an unknown date the applicant was transferred to a so-called “rehabilitation” prison, from which he was released on 12 April 2015.
After his release, the applicant applied for a visa on humanitarian grounds to the Swiss authorities in order to return to Switzerland and submit a fresh asylum application.  On 21 April 2015 the FMO allowed the applicant to return to Switzerland and he did so on 25 April 2015.
On an unspecified date the applicant submitted a fresh asylum application to the Swiss authorities and on 26 June 2015 his application was granted.
In his application to the Court, the applicant pointed out that in a parallel case another Tamil, Mr Y, had been deported from Switzerland to Sri Lanka on 25 July 2013, that is to say almost a month before the applicant’s own deportation. According to Y’s lawyer, upon his arrival in Sri Lanka he had been detained and subjected to ill-treatment which had led to his hospitalisation.
Furthermore, on 2 August 2013 Y’s lawyer had written to the Swiss Minister of Justice and to the director of the Migration Office asking that all deportations of Tamils to Sri Lanka be suspended.
The director of the FMO commissioned an external investigation into the expulsions of the applicant and Y. The report delivered by Prof. W. Kälin on 23 February 2014 concluded that, due to a combination of several shortcomings of the Swiss authorities, the individual risk of illtreatment of the two Tamils in Sri Lanka had not been properly assessed.
In addition, the UNHCR also carried out an assessment of the decision-making process of the FMO in the applicant’s case and identified a number of shortcomings. These consisted of, in particular, the prolonged lapse of time between the asylum application (May 2009) and the execution of the deportation order (August 2013); the fact that the situation in Sri Lanka had changed considerably after the end of the civil war in 2009; the involvement of several FMO employees in different phases of the decision-making process throughout an extended period of time; the fact that the applicant’s hearing had been partly held in a superficial manner and that the authorities had not conducted additional investigations.
The results of both reports were made public on 26 May 2014.
On 10 December 2013 the FMO adopted an internal report on the arrest of the applicant by the Sri Lankan authorities.
After the end of the civil war in Sri Lanka, in 2011 Switzerland resumed deportations of Tamils to that country. The practice was again stopped in September 2013, following the expulsion and ill-treatment of the applicant and Y.
Subsequently, the FMO analysed the situation in Sri Lanka in the light of the results of its missions to that country, the case-law of international courts, the practices of other countries and the reports of international organisations. As a consequence, the FMO has modified its practice concluding that the assessment of risk would now be carried out following criteria developed by the European Court of Human Rights in all cases involving deportations or Sri Lankan nationals.
The Federal Act on liability of the Confederation, members of its authorities and its officials (Loi fédérale sur la responsabilité de la Confédération, des membres de ses autorités et de ses fonctionnaires, RS 170.32 – hereinafter “the Liability Act”), in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“1The State is liable for damage caused unlawfully by a civil servant in the exercise of official functions and regardless of his or her guilt ...
3The injured party has no recourse to the courts in respect of the civil servant in question ...”
“Lawfulness of decisions, orders and judgments that have become final cannot be reviewed in proceedings for liability for damage.”
“1State liability (Art. 3 above) is extinguished if the injured party does not lodge a claim for damages ... within one year from the day he or she learned that damage had incurred and, in any event, after ten years from the commission of the disputed act by the civil servant.”
The relevant parts of the Federal Court judgment in case BGE 119 Ib 208 read as follows (unofficial translation):
“3.3 It is clear from the claim that the plaintiff considers that the alleged damage was caused by the decision of the [competent second-instance authority] of 9 August 1988, which confirmed both the decision of the [competent first-instance authority] of 26 August 1986 on his asylum application as well as the ordered deportation. The applicant submits that he was tortured during his detention in Turkey and has thereby suffered considerable damage.
a) As to the cause of the detention and alleged torture in Turkey, the removal of the plaintiff from Switzerland to Turkey on 4 April 1989 is the only consideration from the Swiss point of view. The deportation was, in turn, the consequence of the decision in the negative of the [competent second-instance authority] of 9 August 1988.
b) Pursuant to Article 3(1) of the Liability Act, the State is liable for the damage which an official inflicts unlawfully on a third party in the exercise of his or her official duties. In the case of a fault on the part of the official, there is also the right to pecuniary compensation, provided that the seriousness of the infringement justifies it and that it has not been otherwise repaid (Article 6(2) of the Liability Act).
c) In each case, pursuant to the above provisions, the liability of the Confederation is subject to the unlawfulness of damage incurred (die Widerrechtlichkeit der Schadenszufügung).
In this connection, Article 12 of the Liability Act provides:
‘Lawfulness of decisions, orders and judgments that have become final cannot be reviewed in proceedings for liability for damage.’
Thus, if the cause of the alleged damage is a formal legally binding decision, the [liability] claim must be dismissed without further examination of the question of the unlawfulness of the conduct of the State, pursuant to Article 12 of the Liability Act (BGE 91 I 451 E. 2; 93 I 74 cons. 4).
The purpose of this regulation is to prevent a citizen from reopening what is in his or her opinion an uncomfortable but legally binding decision or judgment by way of liability proceedings (BBl 1956 I 1401). Different cantons contain identical or similar rules, which determine the singularity of the appeal (Einmaligheit des Instanzenzugs)... Anyone who has unsuccessfully contested a decision as far as the court of highest instance (court or administrative authority) or who has not made use of the legal remedies available for contesting the [allegedly] injurious decision shall not be allowed to have the legality of that decision (re-)examined in liability proceedings ...
5 Given that the liability of the State is excluded from the decision of the [competent second-instance authority] under Article 12 of the Liability Act, the only question which remains to be answered is whether the [competent domestic authorities] in connection with the expulsion of the plaintiff to Turkey have otherwise, and beyond the formally legally binding decision, behaved in a manner that could at most be qualified as unlawful. Any omission of the competent authorities should also be taken into account, should action have been required.
a) Liability of the [State] under Article 3(1) of the Liability Act for any omission of the competent authorities would have been considered if the circumstances between the appeal decision on 9 August 1988 and the applicant’s expulsion on 4 April 1989 had changed to the extent that the competent authorities should have re-evaluated the deportation decision.
Since the alleged omission to re-examine in any event concerns a legal act, the same degree of liability applies as in the case of liability for legal acts. It follows that the unlawfulness of the conduct of a judge or an official in the exercise of his or her official functions presupposes a special error which is not already present when his or her decision later proves to be incorrect, unlawful or even arbitrary. Liability-causing unlawfulness is present only if the judge or official has violated a duty essential to the performance of his or her functions ...
b) The decision as to whether a rejected asylum-seeker may be returned to his home country, or whether the non-refoulement principle laid down in Article 45 of the Asylum Act requires otherwise, entails a prognosis from the competent authorities which should contain a careful examination of the circumstances but at the same time leave the competent authorities a certain room for manoeuvre.
The mere fact that the prognosis underlying a deportation decision on the presumed developments in the home country of a rejected asylum-seeker proves to be incorrect in the future and that the returned foreigner is persecuted in his home State contrary to the assumption of the Swiss authorities is not sufficient to justify State liability under the Liability Act. Such liability – in so far as Article 12 of the Liability Act leaves room for this – will be taken into account only in case of an inexcusable wrongful decision, for example a defect in the assessment of the case which would not have occurred under a dutiful judge or official.”
The relevant part of the report commissioned by the FMO entitled “Asylum proceedings Sri Lanka”, prepared by Prof. W. Kälin, reads as follows (unofficial translation):
“5.3. Transfer of liability...
Furthermore, the question arises as to the relationship between the decision of the [first-instance authority] and the judgment of the Federal Administrative Court, in particular whether the appeal proceedings resulted in a transfer of liability.
From the point of view of Switzerland’s responsibility under international law, the question is irrelevant since a breach of the principle of non-refoulement results in liability of Switzerland as a Contracting State and not of the deciding authority.
Pursuant to the Liability Act, it is the Confederation, and not a particular authority, which is liable for damage caused by its officials. In this case, the question does not arise either. It would be relevant only in the case of an extremely hypothetical internal recourse to the deliberately or grossly negligent official under Article 7 of the Liability Act, since at that point in time it would have to be decided who had caused the actual damage. It is also necessary to note Article 12 of the Liability Act, under which the legality of formal, legally-binding decisions, ordinances and judgments cannot be re-examined in proceedings for liability. In the case of the expulsion of a rejected asylum-seeker who had been arrested after his arrival and allegedly tortured in Turkey, the Federal Court held in its judgment BGE 119 Ib 208 that, following the conclusion of the appeal proceedings, the [impugned] decision had become final and was thus not amenable to review ... [The Federal Court] therefore appeared to conclude that the responsibility [lay with] the appeal authority, but pointed out further that, however, the first-instance authority could be held liable for possible omissions if the relationships between the appeal decision and the expulsion of the plaintiff had changed so much that the competent authorities would have had to reconsider the expulsion decision ... This statement can be generalised: despite a judgment of the Federal Administrative Court, liability remains with the [first-instance authority] for actions or omissions which are not covered by the finality (Rechtskraft) of that judgment.”