The case originated in an application (no. 55408/07) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Mr Gheorghe Ipati (“the applicant”), on 22 August 2007.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr R. Zadoinov, a lawyer practising in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V. Grosu.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been ill-treated by the police and deprived of medical assistance, that there had been no effective investigation of his ill-treatment and that his correspondence had been censored.
On 10 January 2011 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1954 and is detained in prison no. 9 in Pruncul, .
On 22 September 2006 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of theft and taken to the Centru police station in Chişinău. He was healthy and did not have any injuries.
According to the applicant, he was beaten up at the police station to make him confess to a crime which he had not committed. He was then placed in a cell and denied medical assistance.
At midnight on the same date the applicant was again beaten by a police officer and the investigator in charge of his case. He was thrown to the ground and the officers kicked and punched him all over the body, while demanding a confession. The applicant was left in the cell unconscious and bleeding from the nose, mouth and ears.
The cell in which he was initially held had no furniture and there was no toilet. The applicant did not receive any food or water during his detention at the police station.
According to the applicant, on 23 September 2006 the applicant was to be transferred to the General Police Headquarters (“the GPH”). However, when the GPH officers discovered the extent of the applicant’s injuries they refused to accept the transfer. Police officers from the Centru police station then escorted him to a hospital where they spoke to doctors and obtained a certificate from them. The applicant did not see the certificate and was not seen by the doctors before it was issued.
According to the Government, the applicant was seen by a doctor at the emergency hospital on 23 September 2006. The doctor found bruises on the applicant’s body, as follows: contusion of tissue on his left elbow, contusion of soft tissue on the head and the cervical region and contusion of soft tissue of the thorax. The applicant underwent an X-ray examination. A traumatology doctor, a surgeon and a neurosurgeon examined the applicant, who was prescribed outpatient treatment.
After being seen by the emergency doctor on 23 September 2006, the applicant was transported back to the GPH and admitted. He claims that he did not even receive a slice of bread until 24 September 2006. Also on 24 September 2006 the applicant was brought before prosecutor C. and complained to him that he had been ill-treated. According to the applicant, the investigator asked C. to request a court order for the applicant’s detention for thirty days. However, C. considered that were the applicant to be brought before an investigating judge, the latter would inquire about the applicant’s injuries and insist on the prosecution of those responsible. That is why he decided to release the applicant, in the hope that he would not complain of ill-treatment.
After his release the applicant went directly to the Centru district prosecutor’s office and waited for C. to return. The applicant asked to be examined by a forensic doctor to confirm the existence and seriousness of the injuries on his body. C. refused to issue such an order until 26 September 2006. On that day the applicant visited a forensic doctor, who found injuries on the applicant’s body, as follows: two haematomas on the nose covered with a red crust measuring 0.3 x 0.1 cm and 0.5 x 0.3 cm respectively and a cyan-red haematoma measuring 1.3 x 0.4 cm; haemorrhage in the tissue of both lips with raw skin covered with a white substance; pronounced oedema of the left elbow, limited movement due to pain; cyan-violet-yellow haematomas on various parts of the left arm and elbow measuring 2.7 x 2 to 14 x 6.5 cm; two areas of raw skin covered with brown crust in the lumbar region of the back at rib level measuring 3 x 0.1 cm and 2.8 x 1.5 cm; on the right side of the spine at the level of vertebrae 6-7 a cyan-green haematoma measuring 4 x 2 cm.
The doctor also noted that the applicant had had radiography. From the results obtained on 26 September 2006 the forensic doctor concluded that a bone had been broken in the applicant’s left elbow. In addition, left ribs nine and ten had been broken. The medical report was submitted to the prosecutor.
On 12 June 2007 another specialised doctor (A.V.) examined the medical reports of 23 and 26 September 2006. In his opinion of 9 August 2007 A.V. concluded that the applicant had sustained his injuries on 2526 September 2006, judging by the absence of any signs of broken bones in the X-ray exam of 23 September 2006 and their presence in the X-ray exam of 26 September 2006 and in view of the colour of the haematomas on the applicant’s body as described in the report of 26 September 2006.
According to the applicant, at his request on 13 October 2006 the prosecutor initiated a criminal investigation of his alleged ill-treatment, but then discontinued it. Following his complaints to the investigating judge, the investigation was reopened. Subsequently it was discontinued again, only to be reopened following another court order.
During the investigation a number of police officers involved in apprehending and detaining the applicant on 22-24 September 2006 were interviewed. All of them denied having seen any injuries on the applicant’s body. One of them (C. V., the officer charged with the applicant’s case) declared that the applicant could not have been beaten up by unknown persons prior to his arrest since at the relevant time he had already been arrested. Moreover, he had not seen any injuries on the applicant’s body and he did not know who had taken the applicant to the hospital on 23 September 2006. Another officer (I. M.) was interviewed as a suspect, since the applicant remembered that one of his alleged torturers was called “Iurie”. I. M. stated that between the applicant’s arrest on 26 September 2006 at 9.35 p.m. and the next morning at 9 a.m. when he went home he had not seen any injuries on the applicant’s body. He found out later that on 23 September 2006 at 2.30 p.m. the applicant had been taken to a hospital. Other officers denied having seen any injuries on the applicant’s body at the time of his arrest or release. The applicant was officially declared a victim (partea vătămată) on 9 November 2006 and was heard on that day by the prosecutor. A number of the police officers were interviewed by C., the prosecutor in charge of the theft case against the applicant.
On 28 June 2007 the applicant hired a lawyer to represent him. On the same day the lawyer asked the Chişinău prosecutor to send him copies of all the complaints made by the applicant to law-enforcement authorities in connection with his alleged ill-treatment, as well as copies of all the materials of the investigation initiated at his request. The lawyer informed the prosecutor that the applicant intended to lodge an application with the Court and noted that any refusal by the State authorities to make available documents concerning the applicant’s complaint could lead to a violation of Article 34 of the Convention.
On 18 July 2007 the Chişinău prosecutor informed the applicant’s lawyer that his request had been rejected on 16 July 2007 in the part concerning supply of copies of the complaints made by the applicant and documents in the file. The prosecutor added that the Code of Criminal Procedure did not provide for the right of a victim (partea vătămată) to examine the materials obtained within the framework of a criminal investigation before the end of that investigation, except for reports concerning investigative acts in which the victim had participated. The investigation into the applicant’s complaint was still ongoing and no decision had been taken. The prosecutor added that his decision could be appealed against to a superior prosecutor. According to the Government, and not contradicted by the applicant, no challenge to that decision had been made before the investigating judge.
On 31 July 2007 the applicant’s lawyer lodged a complaint with the Centru District Court in which he asked the court to find that the applicant had been detained in inhuman conditions of detention, contrary to Article 3 of the Convention, that he had been ill-treated by police and that no effective investigation of the ill-treatment had been carried out. He also sought a finding of a violation of Article 8 because of interference with the applicant’s correspondence. He finally asked the court to order the prosecution to fully investigate the alleged ill-treatment and to suspend the police officers accused of ill-treatment pending the investigation. The applicant’s lawyer also asked for damages to be paid to his client.
On 14 August 2007 the Centru District Court rejected the applicant’s lawyer’s complaint, finding that he had not challenged any specific decision of the prosecutor before the court. As for the damages claimed, these could be sought in a civil court action. Moreover, the applicant had not specifically authorised his lawyer to lodge such a court action. That decision was final.
The Government submitted, without annexing any documents, that on 5 June 2008 the prosecutor had decided to stay the criminal investigation of the applicant’s complaint if ill-treatment. The applicant’s lawyer challenged that decision before the investigating judge, who revoked it on 18 November 2008. The prosecutor adopted another decision to discontinue the investigation on 21 July 2009. At the applicant’s lawyer’s request that decision was revoked by the investigating judge on 23 October 2009.
On 26 January 2010 the prosecutor again decided to stay the investigation. On 20 July 2011 the applicant’s lawyer challenged that decision before the hierarchically superior prosecutor. The latter rejected the complaint as unfounded on the same day. The applicant and his lawyer did not challenge that decision before the investigating judge.
On 25 January 2007 the applicant was arrested again and was detained in Pruncul Prison no. 9 until 15 February 2007. He was then transferred to Chisinau Prison no. 13, where he was detained until 10 May 2007, before his transfer back to prison no. 9.
According to the Government, in prison no. 13 the applicant was placed in cell no. 97, measuring 41.65 sq. m, and subsequently in cell no. 18, measuring 17.25 q. m.
According to the applicant, cell no. 97 accommodated thirty-five to forty detainees at a time. There was a single toilet, not separated from the rest of the cell. There were only twelve bunk beds, and detainees had to take turns to sleep, even then sharing beds. The food was of very poor quality. Detainees were not issued with bed linen or hygiene products, there was no ventilation or heating, and the window was almost completely covered. The applicant was subjected to passive smoking and suffered from the presence of parasitic insects and rats. Detainees who had tuberculosis and other infectious diseases were detained together with healthy detainees. The applicant was allowed to have a shower only every ten days.
In January and February 2007 the applicant sent numerous complaints to the Centru District Court concerning inefficient investigation of his ill-treatment. On 3 March 2007 the Centru District Court forwarded one of his complaints to the prosecutor and sent a reply to the applicant. He received the letter from the court opened and with a prison stamp on it. The same happened in the case of several other letters sent to the applicant by the investigating judge (letter of 15 June 2007) and the prosecutor’s office (letter of 6 April 2007).
On 30 July 2007 the applicant met his lawyer in Pruncul Prison no. 9. The meeting took place in a visiting room. According to the applicant, other detainees and their visitors were present in the same room and could hear his conversation with his lawyer. At that meeting they discussed the details of the applicant’s complaints, which the lawyer formulated in a complaint to the Centru District Court submitted the next day.
In Drugalev v. the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Finance (final judgment of the Chişinău Court of Appeal of 26 October 2004), the applicant claimed and obtained compensation of 15,000 Moldovan lei (MDL, approximately 950 euros (EUR)) for having been held in inhuman and degrading conditions for approximately six months. The courts found that domestic law did not supply legal grounds to award compensation, and relied directly on the Convention and the Court’s case-law.
In Ciorap v. the Ministry of Finance (final judgment of the Chişinău Court of Appeal of 21 June 2007) the applicant initiated court proceedings claiming compensation for damage caused to him as a result of his illtreatment upon his arrest, failure to investigate his complaint of illtreatment, failure to give him medical treatment while in detention, and inhuman conditions of detention. He was awarded MDL 3,000 in compensation for the damage caused to him. The courts found that domestic law did not provide for a legal ground to award compensation and relied directly on the Convention and the Court’s case-law.
In Ipate v. the Ministry of Finance, the applicant initiated court proceedings claiming compensation for inhuman and degrading conditions of detention in prison no. 13 in 2006 and for the prison administration’s failure to register his hunger strike declaration. On 16 December 2008 the Centru District Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint of poor conditions of detention but upheld the other complaint. The applicant was awarded MDL 350 in compensation for non-pecuniary damage. The court relied on Article 1398 of the Civil Code.
In Gristiuc v. the Ministry of Finance, the applicant initiated civil proceedings claiming compensation for inhuman and degrading conditions of detention in prison no. 13 between 2000 and 2003. On 19 November 2008 the action was finally upheld by the Supreme Court of Justice and the applicant was awarded MDL 10,000 for non-pecuniary damage. The courts relied on the Health Care Act of 28 March 1995 and Article 1422 of the Civil Code.
In its report for 2010 (page 142 et seq., “Conditions of detention” chapter), the Centre for Human Rights in the Republic of Moldova (“the Centre”, which is the Moldovan Ombudsman institution) found, inter alia, that:
“Observance of the statutory living space (4 square metres)... has become a systemic deficiency of prisons throughout the country. ...
The same situation was attested to during a visit to Chisinau Prison no. 13 on 9 September 2010. In some cells the living space was not proportionate to the number of detainees. At the time of the visit there were eight inmates in cell no. 38, which measures twenty-four square metres. This situation has been attested to repeatedly during visits by the Centre’s staff to the preventive detention centre in Chişinău. ...
Overcrowding is a matter of direct relevance to the Ombudsman’s mandate as it is covered by the National Mechanism for the Prevention of Torture, which has established overcrowding in the country’s prisons on many occasions. ...
...The Department of Prisons has informed the ombudsman that meat and fish products are provided [to detainees] whenever that is possible. However, that authority stated that, owing to the difficult financial situation, during 2010 detainees in prison no. 17 in Rezina received only 75% of the necessary meat products and 80% of the necessary fish products. In this regard, the Minister of Justice submitted information on its expenditure on feeding detainees in 2010. This expenditure amounted to MDL 24,050,000, while the amount required for that period of time was, according to Ministry of Finance when presenting the draft Budget law, MDL 29,050,000. The daily cost of feeding a detainee in 2010 was MDL 10.24, while the daily requirement was MDL 12.35. This fact was often cited by prison authorities as the reason for their inability to provide detainees with meat and fish...
In respect of sanitary conditions, lighting and ventilation problems continue to exist in the majority of prison cell blocks in the Republic of Moldova’s prisons, with the exception of Taraclia no. 1 and Rusca no.7 prisons.
The  inherited old gulag-type prisons with run-down buildings, which corresponded to Soviet standards. These prisons do not satisfy the requirements of national and international standards, but the reduced financial means of the State do not allow for their reconstruction or renovation.
In the Republic of Moldova’s prisons, with the exception of Taraclia no. 1 Prison, detainees are held in large-capacity cells insufficiently equipped to meet the daily needs of detainees: space for sleeping, for daily life and for sanitary installations. Detainees are held in extremely cramped, dark, damp, non-ventilated spaces filled with cigarette smoke. In certain prisons the bunk beds essentially prevent daylight from reaching the living space.”
The relevant parts of the report by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) on its visit to the Republic of Moldova between 14 and 24 September 2007 (CPT/Inf (2008) 39) read as follows (unofficial translation):
“46.  At the outset of the 2007 visit, the Director of the Department of Prisons of the Ministry of Justice provided the delegation with detailed information on measures already taken or planned with a view to reforming the Moldovan prison system and implementing the CPT’s recommendations. One particularly welcome outcome of these measures is the reduction of the country’s prison population. At the time of the 2007 visit, the total number of prisoners stood at 8,033 (including 1,290 on remand), compared to 10,591 in 2004. This positive trend can be attributed to legislative changes in recent years, including the entry into force of a new Code of Execution of Sentences in July 2005 and the adoption of amendments to the Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure. As a result, there has been an increase in the number of conditional early releases, as well as a wider use of alternatives to imprisonment and a more selective application of remand in custody by the courts.
	Further, the implementation of the “Concept for reforming the prison system in the period 2004-13” has been supported by an increase in the budgetary allocation (from MDL 75,800,000 in 2004 to 166,100,000 in 2007), as well as by a growing input of foreign aid. This has enabled, inter alia, improvement of the food provided to prisoners, an improvement in health care, and refurbishment works at several prisons (for example, Taraclia no. 1, Rusca no. 7 and Rezina no. 17.).
	Last but not least, there has been an important shift in attitudes through improved staff recruitment and training procedures. The delegation was informed that the directors of many prisons had been replaced in the past year, following a recruitment competition and a probation period. Further, new training programmes for staff had been developed, placing particular emphasis on human rights issues ...
The CPT can only welcome the above-mentioned measures taken by the Moldovan authorities. Nevertheless, the information gathered by the Committee’s delegation during the 2007 visit shows that much remains to be done. In particular, overcrowding continues to be a problem; despite the fact that all establishments visited were operating at well under their official capacities, there was on average only two square metres of living space per prisoner, rather than the standard of four square metres provided for in Moldovan legislation.
	The CPT is convinced that the only viable way to control overcrowding and achieve the standard of at least four square metres of living space per prisoner is to adopt policies designed to limit or modulate the number of people sent to prison. In this connection, the Committee must stress the need for a strategy covering both admission to and release from prison, to ensure that imprisonment really is the last resort. This implies, in the first place, an emphasis on non-custodial measures in the period before the imposition of a sentence and, in the second place, the adoption of measures which facilitate the reintegration into society of individuals who have been deprived of their liberty.
	The CPT trusts that the Moldovan authorities will continue their efforts to combat prison overcrowding and, in so doing, will be guided by Recommendation Rec(99)22 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe concerning prison overcrowding and prison population inflation, as well as Recommendation Rec(2003)22 on conditional release (parole).”