The case originated in an application (no. 43095/05) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksandr Leonidovich Dementyev (“the applicant”), on 14 September 2005.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms O.V. Preobrazhenskaya, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been unable to attend a sentencing hearing.
On 29 June 2009 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1978 and is serving a prison sentence in Kotlas, Arkhangelsk region.
On 23 September 2003 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of murder. He remained in custody pending investigation and trial.
On 9 April 2004 the Solombalskiy District Court of Arkhangelsk found the applicant guilty of battery and sentenced him to six months’ community work. The applicant was represented by a State-appointed lawyer. On 28 May 2004 the Arkhangelsk Regional Court upheld the applicant’s conviction on appeal. It is apparent from the text of the appeal judgment that the applicant was not represented before the appeal court.
On 8 July 2004 the Regional Court found the applicant guilty of murder and sentenced him to 13 years’ imprisonment. The applicant was again represented by a State-appointed lawyer. The applicant appealed against his conviction, alleging that the trial court had erred in its assessment of the evidence. On 20 October 2004 the Supreme Court of Russia upheld the applicant’s conviction on appeal. It is apparent from the text of the appeal judgment that the applicant was not represented before the appeal court.
On an unspecified date, the correctional facility where the applicant was serving the prison sentence asked the Regional Court to advise as to the execution of the sentence for battery of 9 April 2004. The court fixed the hearing for 18 March 2005.
On 5 March 2005 the Regional Court forwarded to the correctional facility a request to inform the applicant of the date, time and place of the hearing. The applicant signed a statement acknowledging receipt of the notice on 17 March 2005. The relevant part of his statement read as follows:
“I, Aleksandr Leonidovich Dementyev, hereby acknowledge that I have been notified about the hearing to be held at the Arkhangelsk Regional Court concerning the execution of the sentence imposed by the Solombalskiy District Court on 9 April 2004. I have been informed that my attendance at the hearing is not mandatory and that I have a right to participate through a legal representative.”
On 18 March 2005 at 11 a.m. the administrative office of the correctional facility where the applicant was serving a prison sentence informed the Regional Court by phone that the applicant had chosen not to be represented at the hearing. The message was worded as follows:
“[The applicant] has chosen not to be represented by a lawyer at the hearing on 18 March 2005 concerning the execution of the sentence imposed by the Solombalskiy District Court on 9 April 2004.”
On 18 March 2005 at 2 p.m. the Regional Court reconsidered the term imposed on the applicant sentence by the verdict of 9 April 2004. The court converted it into a prison sentence and added it, in part, to the term of imprisonment imposed on the applicant by the murder verdict. As a result, the applicant’s overall prison sentence was increased by one month to take into account his conviction for battery of 9 April 2004. After having examined the applicant’s statement - confirming that he had been apprised of the hearing and his right to attend - and the transcript of the telephone message from the correctional facility stating that the applicant had chosen not to be represented at the hearing by a lawyer, the court decided to hold the hearing in the applicant’s absence. The prosecutor and a representative of the regional department of corrections who attended the hearing considered it acceptable to proceed in the applicant’s absence.
On 31 March 2005 the applicant received a copy of the decision of 18 March 2005 whereby he was also advised of his right to lodge an application for supervisory review of the said decision. No possibility of lodging an appeal was mentioned.
When determining an aggregate sentence, the court takes into account the terms of all sentences imposed and adds them up in full or in part (Article 69 § 3 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation, hereinafter the “CC”). When so doing, the court takes into account the nature and degree of the danger each of the crimes committed pose to the public, the offender’s character, and any mitigating or aggravating circumstances surrounding each of the crimes committed, as well as any cumulative aggravating effect resulting from the repeated crimes (Ruling no. 40 adopted by the Plenary of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation on 11 June 1999, § 14, in force at the relevant time).
For the purposes of calculating an aggregate sentence, three days of community work correspond to one day of a prison sentence (Article 71 of the CC). The CC does not provide for any possibility of performing the community work either before or after serving a prison sentence.
The offender has the right to attend the hearing concerning the execution of the sentence imposed on him (Article 47 § 4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation in force at the relevant time, hereinafter the “CCP”). The provisions of the CCP (Article 399) left it to the court’s discretion to decide whether the offender’s attendance at the hearing was necessary. They further provided for the convict’s right to be represented by a lawyer at the hearing.
It was open to the parties to the proceedings, including the offender, to lodge an appeal against the court’s decision on aggregate sentencing (Article 410 of the CCP).