The case originated in ten applications (nos. 47017/06, 23797/07, 10723/08, 24617/09, 28490/09, 30762/09, 58626/09, 65993/10, 45047/11 and 40844/12) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by nine Russian and one Georgian national, whose names and dates of application to the Court are set out in Appendix I.
The Georgian Government exercised their right to intervene (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention) but did not make any comments on the case no. 30762/09.
Some of the applicants were represented by lawyers, whose names are listed in Appendix I. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants complained, in particular, that they had been denied an opportunity to appear in person before appeal courts in criminal proceedings against them or that they had not been represented at the hearings. Mr Ryzhenkov complained that he had not been able to attend the supervisory review court hearing which had amended the legal classification of his crime.
The applicants were convicted in Russia of various crimes. All the applicants, except Mr Ryzhenkov, lodged appeals against their convictions. Mr Prasalov raised the question of appearing in person in court in a separate request but the court found that it had been submitted belatedly. Mr Ryzhenkov and Mr Rakovskiy were not duly informed of their hearings and were not present or represented at them. The other applicants were informed of their hearings but none of them was able to attend.
Detailed information about the applicants’ attendance at the hearings and the dates of the hearings are set out in Appendix II.
If a convicted person wishes to take part in an appeal hearing, he or she must make a request in his or her statement of appeal (Article 375 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation).
Failure by a party to attend an appeal hearing when he or she has been duly notified of the date, time and place of it should not prevent the court from proceeding with its examination of the case (Article 376 § 4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure).
If a court is unable to proceed owing to the absence of a party summoned to court, it must adjourn the hearing (Article 253 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure).
A convicted person and his counsel are to be notified of the date, time and place of hearings before the supervisory review court. They may participate in a hearing if they have made a specific request to do so (Article 407 of the Code of Criminal Procedure).
Participation by defence counsel in criminal proceedings is mandatory if, inter alia, a suspect or accused has not waived his or her right to counsel. If no defence counsel has been retained by a suspect or defendant, his representative, or by others acting on instructions from or subject to the consent of the suspect or accused in criminal proceedings, it is for the enquiry officer, investigator, prosecutor, or court to ensure the participation of defence counsel (Article 51 of the Code of Criminal Procedure).
A suspect or defendant has the right to waive their right to counsel at any point during the proceedings in a criminal case. Such a waiver is only permitted when it is on the initiative of the suspect or defendant. A waiver of the right to counsel must be made in writing and entered into the record of the procedural action in question (Article 52 of the Code of Criminal Procedure).