The case originated in an application (no. 45776/16) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Mr Stelian Jidic (“the applicant”), on 25 July 2016.
The applicant was represented by Ms E. Tudosan, a lawyer practising in Bucharest. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Relying on Articles 6 and 13 of the Convention, the applicant alleged, in particular, that the criminal proceedings opened against him had been excessively lengthy and that he had had no effective domestic remedy in that regard. He also alleged, under Article 7 of the Convention, that by applying the old criminal law to his case, the last-instance court had breached the principle of retrospective application of the more lenient criminal law.
On 27 April 2017 notice of the above-mentioned complaints was given to the Government and part of the remaining complaints under Article 6 of the Convention, namely the alleged failure of the last-instance court to provide reasons as to why it had opted for such a severe sentence and the additional measures attached to it in the applicant’s case, was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1964 and lives in Bucharest.
The applicant was a professional driver and since 1984 had worked for several organisations.
On 16 July 2012 the applicant was driving his company car on a public road, accompanied by a friend. They were involved in a heated verbal dispute with individuals travelling in another car. During the incident, the applicant’s friend stepped out of the car with the aim of stopping the argument. When his friend was out of the car, the applicant shifted his car into gear. The car started moving, bumping into his friend and injuring him slightly.
Police officers were called to the scene and tested the applicant with a breathalyser. The test showed that he had been driving his car with a blood alcohol level over the legal limit of 0.8 grams per litre. They withheld his driving licence, suspended him from driving and took him to the National Institute of Forensic Medicine to have his blood tested.
On the same date the police officers carried out a preliminary investigation at the scene, collected evidence and produced reports about the circumstances of the incident and its consequences. In addition, they informed the applicant’s friend that he could lodge a criminal complaint against the applicant within two months.
On 28 December 2012 the National Institute of Forensic Medicine produced a toxicology report which confirmed that the level of alcohol in the applicant’s blood had been over the legal limit of 0.8 grams per litre on the day of the incident.
On 22 November 2013 the traffic accidents department attached to the Bucharest Police (hereinafter “the TAD”) instituted criminal proceedings against the applicant of its own motion under Article 87 § 1 of Government Ordinance no. 195/2002 on the grounds that he had been driving his car on a public road with a blood alcohol level over the legal limit of 0.8 grams per litre. Later that day the Bucharest prosecutor’s office (hereinafter “the prosecutor’s office”) confirmed the TAD’s decision.
On the same date the TAD asked the National Institute of Forensic Medicine to produce a forensic report within thirty days to determine the exact level of alcohol in the applicant’s blood at the time of the incident. The TAD noted, in particular, that he denied having drunk alcohol that day.
On 23 and 25 November 2013 the TAD took statements from the applicant regarding the circumstances of the incident. He admitted to having drunk alcohol, to sitting behind the wheel of his car and to hitting his friend with the car on the day of the incident, all the while stating that the car had actually been parked and that he had hit his friend when he had moved the car by accident.
On 30 April 2014 the TAD changed the legal classification of the acts for which the applicant was being investigated from Article 87 § 1 of Government Ordinance no. 195/2002 to Article 336 § 1 of the new Criminal Code. It held that the new Criminal Code had entered into force on 1 February 2014 and that, unlike the aforementioned Government Ordinance, which provided that the offence under investigation was only punishable by imprisonment, under the new Criminal Code, he could be punished either by imprisonment or a fine. Article 5 of the new Criminal Code also provided that if several criminal laws were in force between the moment an act was committed and the moment the final court judgment was delivered in a case, the more lenient criminal law had to be applied.
On 2 July 2014 the National Institute of Forensic Medicine produced the forensic report requested by the TAD on 22 November 2013. It confirmed that the level of alcohol in the applicant’s blood had been over the legal limit of 0.8 grams per litre at the time of the incident.
On 5 August 2014 the prosecutor’s office charged the applicant under Article 336 § 1 of the new Criminal Code.
On 29 August 2014 the TAD informed him of the charges brought against him and his procedural rights and took a statement from him. He reiterated his statements of 23 and 25 November 2013 (see paragraph 13 above).
On 19 March 2015 the applicant asked the prosecutor’s office to expedite the proceedings and to send the case to trial as soon as possible. He argued, in particular, that he had been unable to work since 16 July 2012 because he had been suspended from driving. Given his age, he was not in a position to retrain in a different profession and he had almost run out of financial resources. Furthermore, he had done all that he could to expedite the investigation in the case by, amongst other things, admitting from the very beginning to committing the offence for which he had been investigated.
On 28 April 2015 the prosecutor’s office sent the case to trial.
On 28 July 2015 the Bucharest District Court (hereinafter “the District Court”), sitting as a preliminary chamber judge, held that the applicant’s indictment was lawful and set the date for the first hearing on the merits of the case for 24 September 2015.
On 24 September 2015 the District Court heard evidence from the applicant surrounding the circumstances of the incident and allowed a request by him to be tried under a summary procedure, on the grounds that he had admitted the offence he had been charged with.
On the same date the court noted that the prosecutor’s office had asked to change the legal classification of the offence from Article 336 § 1 of the new Criminal Code to Article 87 § 1 of Government Ordinance no. 195/2002 because the latter provision was the more lenient criminal law for him in so far as adapting the applicant’s sentence to his individual circumstances was concerned. Moreover, the prosecutor’s office asked the court to convict the applicant and urged it to suspend the serving of his sentence for the duration of a supervision period, irrespective of whether the court eventually deemed the new or old criminal law more lenient in his case. In this connection, the prosecutor’s office argued that the outcome of the offence had been very serious and could have influenced the applicant’s future behaviour given that the alcohol level in his blood had been very high and that a person had been injured.
The court also noted that the applicant disagreed with the prosecutor’s office’s argument concerning the legal classification of the offence. He contended that Article 336 § 1 was the more lenient criminal law in his case in terms of the manner in which the sentence which could be applied to him was to be served because, under that provision, the court had discretion to postpone or waive the imposition of a sentence, which in turn would render the revocation of his driving licence unnecessary. He argued that the conditions for postponing or waiving the imposition of a sentence had been met because, inter alia, he had not committed any other unlawful acts either before or after the incident, had admitted his guilt, had regretted his actions and had done everything he could for the proceedings to end expeditiously. Furthermore, he had not been driving his car on a busy street, was a person who was integrated in society and had been employed prior to the incident. Moreover, the criminal investigation had been excessively lengthy even though the case was not complex. Furthermore, he had been unable to work because he had been suspended from driving, and had been forced to sell his apartment in order to be able to live.
Lastly, the court adjourned the proceedings for deliberations.
On 29 September 2015 the applicant submitted written observations to the court. He argued, inter alia, that Article 336 § 1 was the most lenient criminal law in his case because, under that provision, the offence committed by him was punishable either by imprisonment or a fine. Moreover, the court had discretion to postpone or waive the imposition of a sentence. As a result, Article 114 of Government Ordinance no. 195/2002 would not apply in his case and his driving licence would not be revoked. Under Article 87 § 1 of Government Ordinance no. 195/2002, the only form of punishment for the offence was imprisonment. Under the latter criminallaw provision, the court would be forced to convict him, given that he had admitted his guilt. As a result, Article 114 of Government Ordinance no. 195/2002 would become applicable to his case and his driving licence would be revoked, regardless of what sentence he was given, leaving him unable to earn a living for an even longer period of time.
The applicant also argued that the educational and punitive purpose of a potential criminal conviction had already been achieved in his case because since his suspension from driving, he had been unable to work during the entire course of the excessively lengthy proceedings. As a result he had lost his job, had had to sell his apartment in order to be able to live and had developed health problems.
The applicant also asked the court not to suspend him from driving during the possible period of probation if it decided to postpone the imposition of his sentence, because driving was his livelihood and at his age it would be impossible to retrain in a new profession.
On 1 October 2015 the District Court adjourned the proceedings for further deliberations.
On 8 October 2015 the court held that the elements of the offence the applicant had been charged with were made out and found him guilty. It also held that Article 336 § 1 of the new Criminal Code was applicable because in the applicant’s case it was necessary to postpone the imposition of the sentence for the act committed by him. Consequently, it concluded that the new legal provisions were the more lenient and decided to dismiss the prosecutor’s office’s request to change the legal classification of the offence. In sentencing the applicant, the court took into account the general sentencing criteria set out in the new criminal law and the general purpose of penalties. In addition, it held that the limits of the penalty provided for by law had to be reduced by a third in accordance with the new criminal procedure rules concerning admission of guilt. Taking into account the circumstances of the case and the applicant’s behaviour, the court held that, as far as the seriousness of his actions was concerned, he had not been driving on a busy road. It further held that, as far as he himself was concerned, he had no previous convictions, had admitted and regretted his actions, had been employed, and was responsible and fully integrated into society. On that basis, the court considered that setting a penalty for the applicant would be sufficient to make him realise the consequences of his behaviour and deter him from repeating it. Consequently, it decided that the immediate imposition of a sentence was unnecessary, but that a period of probation was required. It therefore concluded that the most appropriate manner of dealing with the case was to give the applicant a ten-month prison sentence and postpone its imposition for two years. Lastly, it ordered him to comply with certain conditions during the period of probation, but they did not include a ban on driving a vehicle.
On 14 November 2015 the applicant asked the District Court to expedite service of the judgment on the parties. He reiterated, inter alia, his arguments about the length of the proceedings and the fact that he had been unable to work because he had been suspended from driving.
On an unspecified date the prosecutor’s office appealed against the first-instance court’s judgment, arguing that the decision to consider the applicant’s actions less serious and then to give him a ten-month prison sentence and postpone its imposition had been inappropriate, given the seriousness of the offence. The applicant had had a very high alcohol level in his blood and had consented to driving a vehicle occupied by another person who had eventually been injured. He had not justified in any way why he had committed the offence. The fact that he had committed the offence on a less busy road or that the injured person had not lodged a criminal complaint against him was irrelevant and could not diminish the serious nature of the offence. On the contrary, his actions had made the offence even more serious because the consequences could have been even more severe as far as road safety and the person’s life and physical integrity were concerned. Furthermore, the applicant had initially denied having committed the offence and had entered into a heated dispute with individuals travelling in the other car. The fact that he had admitted to having committed the offence in circumstances where the evidence against him was indisputable could not be viewed as mitigating circumstances sufficient to justify postponing the imposition of a sentence. The same could also be said about the absence of previous convictions, as the applicant deserved no particular credit for being in a normal situation specific to most members of society. The fact that he was well integrated in society should have made him foresee the serious consequences that driving a vehicle under the influence might have had. Moreover, the prosecutor’s office reiterated its arguments concerning the need to change the legal classification of the offence. It urged the appellate court to give the applicant a sentence which could be suspended for the duration of a supervision period in accordance with the provisions of the old criminal law. It argued that the old criminal law contained more favourable terms for the applicant than the new criminal law in so far as suspending the serving of his sentence for the duration of a supervision period was concerned, because the old criminal law allowed for his automatic legal rehabilitation if he did not reoffend during that period.
On 29 January 2016 the applicant presented oral arguments and submitted written observations to the appellate court. He contested the prosecutor’s office’s arguments and reiterated the arguments he had raised before the first-instance court.
By a final judgment of 2 February 2016 the Bucharest Court of Appeal allowed the prosecutor’s office’s appeal and quashed the firstinstance court’s judgment. Referring to the general sentencing criteria set out in both the new and old criminal law and applying them to the applicant’s case, the court held that the prosecutor’s office’s arguments were well-founded and that the punishment imposed on the applicant had not been appropriate to ensure his rehabilitation in the sense of respect for the values protected by criminal law, namely general and special prevention. In this connection, the court took into account the particular circumstances in which the applicant had committed the offence, the level of alcohol in his blood at the time of the incident and his conduct thereafter, namely his involvement in a verbal dispute with one of the witnesses and other individuals. As far as his admission of guilt was concerned, the court held that he would be rewarded with a one-third reduction of his penalty, as provided for by the new domestic criminal procedure rules. As a result, the court decided to impose a penalty on the applicant within the specific limits provided for by law for the offence and reduce it accordingly. For the above-mentioned reasons, the court held that the old criminal law was the more lenient in the applicant’s case, given the conditions to be met for suspending the serving of the sentence for the duration of a supervision period.
Citing the provisions of the old criminal law and new criminal procedure law only in so far as they concerned the one-third reduction of penalties where there was an admission of guilt, the court convicted the applicant and sentenced him to three years and four months in prison. It also imposed additional penalties, such as the removal of his right to vote or be elected for public office or in public institutions and a ban on him occupying a position involving the exercise of State power. The court subsequently decided to suspend the serving of both his prison sentence and enforcement of the additional penalties for seven years. Moreover, it ordered him to comply with certain conditions, which included a ban on driving a vehicle during the supervision period.
Article 87 of Government Ordinance no. 195/2002 regarding road traffic, one of a number of provisions of the Ordinance abolished following the entry into force of the new criminal law (see paragraphs 38 and 41 below), provided, inter alia, that driving a vehicle on a public road with a pure blood alcohol level over 0.8 grams per litre was punishable by imprisonment of between one and five years.
Articles 72 to 866 of the old Criminal Code provided, inter alia, that courts had to consider several criteria before establishing and imposing a penalty, including the seriousness of the offence, the offender’s character, any mitigating or aggravating circumstances, and the limits of the penalty provided for by law. In addition, the court also had to consider all the aforementioned criteria in circumstances where the law provided for alternative penalties for the same offence, before choosing one of the alternative penalties and determining its limits. Furthermore, a court could decide to suspend the serving of a sentence for the duration of a supervision period if several conditions were met, including where the main penalty was imprisonment of less than four years. The supervision period was calculated by adding an additional period of time to the prison sentence set by the court of between two to five years. A court could impose one or more conditions during the supervision period including a ban on driving a vehicle. If the person convicted did not reoffend and complied with conditions imposed on him or her by the court during the supervision period, he or she was automatically legally rehabilitated.
Article 3201 §§ 1 and 7 of the old Criminal Procedure Code provided that the limits of the penalty provided for by law were to be reduced by a third in cases examined under a summary procedure where the penalty was imprisonment and the person charged with the offence had admitted his or her guilt.
On 1 February 2014 the new Criminal Code and new Criminal Procedure Code entered into force.
Articles 74 to 91 of the new Criminal Code provide, inter alia, that a court has to consider several criteria before establishing and imposing a penalty, including the circumstances of the case, the nature, seriousness and consequences of the offence, the reason and scope for committing the offence, the nature and frequency of previous offences, the offender’s conduct after committing the offence and during the proceedings, and his or her education, age, sex, health, family and social situation. In addition, the court also has to consider the aforementioned criteria in circumstances where the law provides for alternative penalties for the same offence, before choosing one of the alternative penalties. Also, a court has discretion to waive the imposition of a sentence if two conditions are met, including whether the offence is minor. In addition, a court has the discretion to postpone the imposition of a penalty for the duration of a supervision period if several conditions are met, including where the main penalty is a fine or imprisonment of less than two years. The penalty can no longer be imposed on the person for whom the imposition of the penalty has been postponed and he or she is not subject to any ban or limitation flowing from the offence he or she has committed, if he or she does not reoffend during the supervision period, or if the postponement is not revoked or annulled. The supervision period is two years. In the event the imposition of a penalty is postponed, a court may impose one or more conditions during the supervision period, including a ban on driving certain vehicles as specified by the court. Postponement of the imposition of a penalty does not have any effect on the implementation of safety measures or civil obligations set out in the judgment.
A court can also decide to suspend the serving of a sentence for the duration of a supervision period if several conditions are met, including where the main penalty is imprisonment of less than three years. The supervision period can be anywhere between two to four years, but cannot be shorter than the length of the prison sentence. If the person convicted does not reoffend during the supervision period, his or her sentence is considered spent once that period expires.
Article 336 § 1 provides that driving a vehicle on a public road with a blood alcohol level over 0.8 grams per litre is punishable either by imprisonment of one to five years or a fine.
Article 396 § 10 of the new Criminal Procedure Code provides that the limits of the penalty provided for by law are to be reduced by a third in cases examined under a summary procedure where the penalty is imprisonment and the person charged with the offence has admitted his or her guilt.
Articles 111 to 116 of Government Ordinance no. 195/2002 (see paragraph 35 above), some of the provisions of the Ordinance still in force even after the entry into force of the new criminal legislation, provide that in circumstances where a person drives a vehicle on a public road with a pure blood alcohol level over 0.8 grams per litre, his or her driving licence must be withheld and a document replacing it issued, but he or she will not be permitted to drive. Once a driver is acquitted of the above-mentioned offence by a final court judgment the driving licence will be returned. If a driver is convicted by a final court judgment of the above-mentioned offence, his or her driving licence will be revoked by the traffic police. A person whose driving licence is revoked may retake a driving test one year after the judgment suspending the serving of the sentence for the duration of a supervision period becomes final.
In decision no. 265/2014 of 6 May 2014 published in the Official Gazette no. 372 of 20 May 2014, the Constitutional Court held that a court acted unconstitutionally if, in its attempt to determine the more lenient criminal law, it combined the provisions of successive laws. The Constitutional Court took the view that such an approach would create a third law, which did not fall within a domestic court’s competencies.
The Government submitted several judgments and interlocutory judgments delivered by the domestic courts concerning complaints raised by applicants about the length of domestic proceedings.
They submitted three final judgments delivered by the Iași Court of Appeal on 18 March and 19 July 2016 and one judgment delivered by the Bucharest District Court on 25 April 2016 allowing in part proceedings brought by plaintiffs against the State relying on the general civil law provisions and/or directly on Articles 6 and 13 of the Convention to seek damages for the excessive length of the criminal proceedings in which they had been involved.
They also submitted nine interlocutory judgments not subject to appeal, delivered between 17 May 2016 and 17 July 2017 by the Bucharest District Court, Bucharest County Court, Cornetu District Court, Bacău District Court, Curtea de Argeș District Court and Bucharest Court of Appeal. In seven of these judgments the courts allowed complaints lodged under Article 4881 of the Criminal Procedure Code by parties to criminal proceedings concerning the length of the criminal investigation carried out in their cases and set a deadline for the prosecution authorities to conclude the criminal investigation in those cases. In the remaining two interlocutory judgments the courts dismissed the complaints after an examination on the merits.