The case originated in an application (no. 33783/09) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Italian national, Ms Anita Godelli (“the applicant”), on 16 June 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr C. Pullano, a lawyer practising in . The Italian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs E. Spatafora.
The applicant alleged that the fact that her birth had been kept secret with the result that it was impossible for her to find out her origins amounted to a violation of her right to respect for her private and family life guaranteed by Article 8 of the Convention.
On 9 November 2010 notice of the application was given to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1 of the Convention).
The applicant, who was born on 28 March 1943 in , was abandoned by her mother at birth.
Her birth certificate records the following information:
“Today, 28 March 1943, at 7.30 a.m., a woman, who did not consent to being named, gave birth to a baby girl.”
The applicant was placed first in an orphanage and subsequently with the Godelli family. When she was six years old she was adopted by Mr and Mrs Godelli under the simple adoption (affiliazione) procedure, by a decision of the Trieste Guardianship Judge of 10 October 1949.
At the age of ten, after learning that she had been adopted, the applicant asked her adoptive parents to tell her who her birth parents were, but did not receive an answer. On an unspecified date she discovered that a young girl living in her village, who had been born on the same day as her, had been abandoned and subsequently adopted by another family under the simple adoption procedure. The applicant suspected that she was her twin sister. The adoptive parents of the two girls prohibited any contact between them.
The applicant stated that she had had a very difficult childhood because she had been unable to find out her origins.
In 2006 the applicant requested information about her origins from the Trieste Register Office, in accordance with section 28 of Law no. 184 of 4 May 1983 (Adoption Act: “Law no. 184/1993”), the regulations governing simple adoption having been repealed by that Law. The Register Office gave the applicant her birth certificate, on which her birth mother’s name did not appear because she had not agreed to have her identity disclosed.
On 19 March 2007 the applicant lodged an application with the Trieste City Court, under Article 96 of Presidential Decree no. 396/2000, seeking rectification of her birth certificate. On 4 May 2007 the court declined jurisdiction and dismissed the application on the ground that section 28(5) of Law no. 184/1983 provided that where persons aged over twenty-five were seeking access to information about their birth parents the court with the appropriate jurisdiction was the Family Court.
On 5 June 2007 the applicant lodged an application with the Trieste Family Court. On 11 June 2008 the court dismissed her application on the ground that, under section 28(7) of Law no. 184/983, she was prohibited from gaining access to information about her origins because her mother, at the time of the applicant’s birth, had not agreed to have her identity disclosed.
The applicant appealed to the Court of Appeal, which dismissed her appeal by a decision of 23 December 2008.
The court observed, in particular, that the Family Court had stressed the fact that the applicant’s birth mother had requested to keep her identity secret and that it had therefore correctly applied section 28(7) of Law no. 184 of 1983, even though the applicant had been adopted under a simple adoption order, as simple adoption did nevertheless create a family status. The Court of Appeal found that section 28(7) was designed to guarantee respect for the mother’s wishes. The prohibition on allowing the applicant access to information about her origins also served a public interest.
The applicant did not lodge an appeal on points of law.
Under Article 250 of the Civil Code, one of the parents may decide not to recognise his or her child. In order to exercise that right, the mother must, at the time of the birth, request the hospital to keep her identity secret. In such a case a medical file containing medical information about the mother and child is drawn up. Only the child’s general practitioner may have access to the file, with the permission of the child’s guardian.
Simple adoption (affiliazione) was created in 1942 in order to provide assistance to abandoned or parentless children aged under eighteen. Unlike full adoption, this did not create an effective family relationship and the person being adopted did not have to be childless; however, he or she did have to be aged under eighteen. A simple adoption order could be requested by: the person with whom the child had been placed, the Health and Social Security Department, or the person who had been raising the child on their own initiative.
The Articles of the Civil Code providing for simple adoption were repealed as a result of the entry into force of Law no. 184 of 4 May 1983 (subsequently revised by Law no. 149 of 2001 and by Legislative Decree no. 196 of 30 June 2003).
Section 27 of Law no. 184/1983 guarantees the right to keep a child’s origins secret in the absence of express authorisation by the judicial authority.
Under section 28(7) of Law no. 184/1983, a mother who decides not to keep her child can give birth in a hospital and at the same time remain anonymous on the declaration of birth. That anonymity lasts one hundred years, after which access to the birth certificate becomes possible.
An adoption order, once issued by the court, is sent to the register office so that a note can be made in the margin of the birth certificate. Any copies of the adopted child’s civil-status certificates must be issued with only the new family name shown and must bear no mention of the biological father or mother or any annotation regarding the adoption. However, where the registrar is expressly so authorised by the court, he or she may disclose this information.
Adopted children may have access to information about their origins and the identity of their birth parents on reaching the age of twenty-five. Where there are compelling and proven reasons relating to their physical and mental health, they may obtain that information on their majority. An application is lodged with the family court of their place of residence, which gives its decision after assessing the particular situation and hearing any persons whom it deems it necessary to hear.
Access to the information is refused where the birth mother has not recognised the child at birth and where one of the birth parents has declared their wish not to be named on the birth certificate or has given their consent to the adoption subject to remaining anonymous.
In a judgment of 16 November 2005, the  held that withholding information about a child’s origins without first verifying whether the mother still did not wish to be identified was compatible with Articles 2, 3 and 32 of the Constitution.
The  observed, in particular, that section 28(7) of Law no. 184/1983 aimed to protect mothers who – in difficult circumstances – decided not to keep their child, by allowing them the possibility of giving birth in a hospital and at the same time remaining anonymous on the declaration of birth. In the court’s view, the mother could thus give birth in good conditions and was prevented from taking an irreversible decision. That possibility would be jeopardised if, under that provision, the mother were also to know that she might one day be called upon by the judicial authority to confirm or waive her decision.
Article 111 § 7 of the Italian Constitution provides: “Appeals to the Court of Cassation in cases of violations of the law are always admissible against judgments or measures affecting personal freedom pronounced by the ordinary or special courts”.
A government bill on access to personal origins has been before the Italian Parliament since 2008. The bill has two main objectives:
	i) to permit and make provision for a procedure whereby confidentiality can be waived without calling into question the legal consequences of the decision initially taken by the mother;
	ii) to make a waiver of confidentiality subject to the express agreement of the mother and child.
Under the provisions of the bill, anyone aged twenty-five or over who has been adopted and not recognised at birth may apply to the family court for access to information about their origins, subject to the mother’s agreement. Where the child seeks to discover his or her origins, the family court will take steps to find the mother and obtain her consent to waive confidentiality while respecting her private life. Where the mother has died and where the father has died or cannot be identified, the court will obtain information about their identity and any medical data that may disclose the existence of any transmissible hereditary diseases.
Whilst the system of anonymous or secret births would appear to exist in a minority of countries in Europe, it is not exceptional. In addition to France, where for many years the positive law has provided for a system of anonymous births, other national legislations, which are relatively recent as they have been drafted during the past decade, also provide for births in such conditions (Austria, Luxembourg, Russia, ).
In France the system of anonymous births tends to resemble that of secret births, like the practice in the  where the secrecy of the birth mother’s identity is temporary, rather than definitive, as access to the relevant information is delayed.
The situation of children born anonymously or secretly is comparable to that of children who find it difficult, or even impossible, to gain access to their biological origins. The omission of the name of one or other or of both parents may sometimes be provided for by law, but this is very rare (Italy, Luxembourg, ). Usually factual circumstances will prevent the registrar from fully completing the child’s birth certificate; court proceedings are brought to determine paternity/maternity and may be available to persons other than the child alone. Notwithstanding the fact that such actions may not necessarily be effective in the particular circumstances, their very existence, allowing research to be done into personal ties maintained by a child with his birth family, provides a safeguard for the interested persons.
It should further be pointed out that the practice of abandoning children continues in modern forms: there is an undeniable increase in the number of “windows” or “baby hatches” reminiscent of foundling wheels in the Middle Ages. It is practically and materially impossible for the child to gain access to information about his or her birth family; the register of births will give a “fictitious” name to the child that bears no connection to that of its birth parents. The circumstances of the birth may be only partially secret (Spain, ), but this will then necessarily mean that some data is available. Legal proceedings are generally available for children searching for their birth mother (Bulgaria, Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) or mothers who may be searching for their child ().
In the case of full adoption, the child will often lose all contact with its birth family; the new parent-child relationship will totally erase any ties that may have existed during the child’s previous life with other adults (Austria, France, Monaco, Bulgaria, Russia and the ). Access to the birth certificate is sometimes possible from a minimum age (Germany, Croatia, Hungary, Latvia, ). The child may be authorised to gain access to a wider range of information (Bulgaria, Estonia, Lithuania, Switzerland, ), which often presupposes bringing legal proceedings whereby the competing interests may be examined.
The United Kingdom and  have set up a mechanism making it easier for adopted persons to gain access to records about their adoption that goes a long way towards reconciling the right to information of the adopted child and respect for the private and family life of the mother or, more broadly, the birth family.