The case originated in an application (no. 21482/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Zekeriye Yıldırır (“the applicant”), on 21 May 2003.
The applicant was represented by Mr E. Yücel, a lawyer practising in . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the demolition of his house constituted a violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
On 3 June 2006 the President of the Second Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1939 and lives in .
On the basis of a construction permit obtained on 10 August 1976, Mr M.A. built a house in Boğazkurt, . The construction of the house and its annexes was completed in 1978. Mr M.A. planted trees around the house and regularly paid property tax to the authorities. The property in question was subsequently purchased by the applicant in 1996 (see paragraph 11 below).
In the meantime, on 21 January 1981 the Ministry of Public Works and Settlement notified Mr M.A. that his construction permit had expired on 10 August 1980 and that he had not yet applied for a property utilisation permit. In this context, he was requested to provide a report proving that the utilisation of the property did not pose any threat to public health or to the environment.
On 30 January 1981 the Kızılcahamam district government doctor issued a report stating that the utilisation of the property in question did not pose any threat to public health and that its construction had been completed in compliance with the environmental regulations.
On 11 February 1981 that report was submitted to the Ministry.
On 10 May 1981 Mr M.A. filed an application with the Ankara Provincial Construction Directorate for the renewal of the construction permit. In response, the administration notified him on 21 May 1982 that his application was currently being dealt with.
On 18 July 1996 the applicant bought the property from Mr M.A. On the same day, the land registry office issued him a title deed attesting his ownership of the property. Furthermore, the village mayor (muhtar) certified in writing that the previous owner had been residing in the property in question since 11 August 1976.
On 11 November 1998 the Directorate of Public Works and Settlement of the Ankara Governorship notified the applicant that the construction on his land must be demolished as it had been completed in the absence of the required construction permit.
On 20 November 1998 the same directorate notified the following to the applicant:
“The construction permit for the property was issued on 10 August 1976 and expired on 10 August 1980. An application for the renewal of the construction permit was not filed in time. The required property utilisation permit was not obtained either. The property is located in the absolute protection zone, which is the immediate zone within 300 metres of sources of drinkable water. According to the Law on Hygiene and the Regulation on the Prevention of Water Pollution, construction within 300 metres of sources of drinking water and their basin is prohibited. On 11 November 1998, for these reasons, an order for the cessation of construction was issued regarding the house. As the issue of a new construction permit is not legally possible in these circumstances, it is requested that the construction on your land be demolished; otherwise it shall be demolished following the adoption of a decision by the Ankara Administrative Council.”
On 5 January 1999 the Ankara Administrative Council issued a demolition order based on the reasons specified in the notification of the Directorate of Public Works and Settlement of the Ankara Governorship.
“The administration failed to prove the exact date of the beginning and completion of the construction in question. As it was not definite that the construction of the property still continued after the expiry of the relevant construction permit, it was not possible to decide on the legal status of the construction. In the action brought by the applicant for the determination of the legal status of the property, it was held that the house was constructed twenty years ago. Furthermore, in a notification issued by the Ankara Provincial Directorate it was stated that the applicant had applied for the renewal of the construction permit on 5 May 1981. Finally, the Law on Hygiene and Regulation on the Prevention of Water Pollution provides that constructions that are not in compliance with its provisions shall be discontinued, not demolished.”
On 29 March 2001, upon the administration's appeal, the  quashed that judgment on the grounds that the applicant's house had been constructed after the relevant permit had expired.
On 6 March 2003 the  followed the 's decision and dismissed the applicant's action for the annulment of the demolition order.
On 21 April 2003 the Directorate of Public Works and Settlement of the Ankara Governorship notified the applicant that, pursuant to the 's judgment of 6 March 2003, he must have his house demolished within thirty days of his receipt of the notification.
On 26 May 2004 the applicant's house was demolished by the administration.
Section 10 of the now defunct Zoning Law No. 6785 (6785 Sayılı İmar Kanunu, “Zoning Law”) provided that the period for beginning construction was one year from the date on which a permit was issued. In the event that construction had not started or had not been completed within four years, a new permit needed to be obtained.
Under section 16 of the Zoning Law the construction owner was required to obtain permission from the Municipality in order to use the building. A further approval was needed from the Medical Department, confirming that there was no obstacle to the building being used. The administration (governorship) was required to issue a permit to use the building within thirty days of the date of the application. The administration was deemed to have authorised the use of the completed or partly completed building in the event that it failed to reply within that time-limit.
The Turkish Civil Code contains the following provisions concerning the registration of immovable property and the rights upon it:
Article 1007 § 1
“The State is responsible for any damage resulting from the keeping of land registry records...
Cases involving the responsibility of the State are dealt with by the courts where the [property] was registered.”
Article 1023
“The rights of third persons who acquire a property or right in rem, relying on the records of the land registry log book and in good faith, shall be protected.”
Section 12 of the Administrative Procedure Law (Law no. 2577) reads as follows:
“Any person who sustains damage as a result of an administrative act may directly bring an action for a full remedy or a joint action for annulment and full remedy before the  or Administrative and Tax Courts. They may also first bring an action for annulment and then, upon its conclusion, bring an action for a full remedy for the damage resulting from the notification of the judgment or the execution of an act within the required time-limits...”