The case was referred to the Court, as established under former Article 19 of the Convention3, by Mr Cristoforo Buscarini on 10 March 1998, by the Government of San Marino (“the Government”) on 16 March 1998 and by the second applicant, Mr Emilio Della Balda, on 3 April 1998, in each instance within the three-month period laid down by former Articles 32 § 1 and 47 of the Convention. It originated in an application (no. 24645/94) against the Republic of San Marino lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) by three San Marinese nationals, Mr Cristoforo Buscarini, Mr Emilio Della Balda and Mr Dario Manzaroli, under former Article 25 on 17 November 1993.
The Government’s application referred to former Articles 44 and 48 and to the declaration whereby San Marino recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (former Article 46); the applicants’ applications referred to former Articles 44 and 48 as amended by Protocol No. 9, which San Marino had ratified. The object of the applications was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 9 of the Convention.
On 12 October 1998 Mr Manzaroli stated that he did not wish to take part in the proceedings.
As President of the Chamber which had originally been constituted (former Article 43 of the Convention and Rule 21 of former Rules of Court B) in order to deal, in particular, with procedural matters that might arise before the entry into force of Protocol No. 11, Mr R. Bernhardt, the President of the Court at the time, acting through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Government, Mr Buscarini, Mr Della Balda and the Delegate of the Commission on the organisation of the written procedure. Pursuant to the order made in consequence, the Registrar received Mr Buscarini’s memorial on 2 September 1998 and the Government’s memorial on 16 October 1998. On 16 October 1998 Mr Della Balda stated that he wished to rely on the first applicant’s memorial.
After the entry into force of Protocol No. 11 on 1 November 1998 and in accordance with the provisions of Article 5 § 5 thereof, the case was referred to the Grand Chamber of the Court. The Grand Chamber included ex officio Mr L. Ferrari Bravo, the judge elected in respect of San Marino (Article 27 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 24 § 4 of the Rules of Court), Mr. L. Wildhaber, the President of the Court, Mrs E. Palm, Vice-President of the Court, and Mr J.P. Costa and Mr M. Fischbach, Vice-Presidents of Sections (Article 27 § 3 of the Convention and Rule 24 §§ 3 and 5(a)). The other members appointed to complete the Grand Chamber were Mr L. Caflisch, Mr P. Kūris, Mr W. Fuhrmann, Mr K. Jungwiert, Mr B. Zupančič, Mrs N. Vajić, Mrs W. Thomassen, Mrs M. Tsatsa-Nikolovska, Mr T. Panţîru, Mr E. Levits, Mr K. Traja and Mrs S. Botoucharova (Rule 24 § 3 and Rule 100 § 4).

5.  At the Court’s invitation (Rule 99), the Commission delegated one of its members, Mr R. Nicolini, to take part in the proceedings before the Grand Chamber.
In accordance with the President’s decision, a hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 10 December 1998.
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Mr Nicolini and Mr Daniele.
The applicants were elected to the General Grand Council (the parliament of the Republic of San Marino) in elections held on 30 May 1993.
Shortly afterwards, they requested permission from the Captains-Regent, who act as the heads of government in San Marino, to take the oath required by section 55 of the Elections Act (Law no. 36 of 1958) without making reference to any religious text. The Act in question referred to a decree of 27 June 1909, which laid down the wording of the oath to be taken by members of the Republic’s parliament as follows:
“I, …, swear on the Holy Gospels ever to be faithful to and obey the Constitution of the Republic, to uphold and defend freedom with all my might, ever to observe the Laws and Decrees, whether ancient, modern or yet to be enacted or issued and to nominate and vote for as candidates to the Judiciary and other Public Office only those whom I consider apt, loyal and fit to serve the Republic, without allowing myself to be swayed by any feelings of hatred or love or by any other consideration.”
In support of their request the applicants referred to Article 4 of the Declaration of Rights of 1974, which guarantees the right to freedom of religion, and Article 9 of the Convention.

10.  At the General Grand Council session of 18 June 1993 the applicants took the oath in writing, in the form of words laid down in the decree of 27 June 1909 save for the reference to the Gospels, which they omitted. At the same time, the first applicant drew attention to the obligations undertaken by the Republic of San Marino when it became a party to the European Convention on Human Rights.
On 12 July 1993 the Secretariat of the General Grand Council gave an opinion, at the request of the Captains-Regent, on the form of the oath sworn by the applicants, to the effect that it was invalid, and referred the matter to the Council.
At its session of 26 July 1993 the General Grand Council adopted a resolution proposed by the Captains-Regent ordering the applicants to retake the oath, this time on the Gospels, on pain of forfeiting their parliamentary seats.
The applicants complied with the Council’s order and took the oath on the Gospels, albeit complaining that their right to freedom of religion and conscience had been infringed.
Subsequently – before ever the applicants applied to the Commission – Law no. 115 of 29 October 1993 (“Law no. 115/1993”) introduced a choice for newly elected members of the General Grand Council between the traditional oath and one in which the reference to the Gospels was replaced by the words “on my honour”. The traditional wording is still mandatory for other offices, such as that of Captain-Regent or of a member of the government.
Mr Buscarini, Mr Della Balda and Mr Manzaroli applied to the Commission on 17 November 1995. Relying on Article 9 of the Convention, they complained of an infringement of their right to freedom of religion and conscience.
The Commission declared the application (no. 24645/94) admissible on 7 April 1997. In its report of 2 December 1997 (former Article 31 of the Convention), it concluded unanimously that there had been a violation of Article 9. The full text of the Commission’s opinion is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.
The Government raised three preliminary objections and asked the Court to declare the application inadmissible or, in the alternative, to dismiss it as ill-founded and devoid of purpose.
Mr Buscarini and Mr Della Balda requested the Court to dismiss the Government’s objections to admissibility and to find that there had been a breach of Article 9 of the Convention.