The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission") on 9 December 1993, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 para. 1 and Article 47 (art. 32-1, art. 47) of the Convention. It originated in an application (no. 19823/92) against the  lodged with the Commission under Article 25 (art. 25) by Mr Teuvo Hokkanen, a Finnish national, on his own behalf and on that of his daughter, Ms Sini Hokkanen, also a Finnish national, on 10 April 1992. The application was however declared inadmissible in respect of Sini (see paragraph 50 below).
The Commission’s request referred to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48) and to the declaration whereby  recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46) (art. 46). The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Articles 6 para. 1, 8 and 13 (art. 6-1, art. 8, art. 13) of the Convention as well as Article 5 of Protocol No. 7 (P7-5).
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 para. 3 (d) of the Rules of Court, the applicant stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings and designated the lawyer who would represent him (Rule 30).
The Chamber to be constituted included ex officio Mr R. Pekkanen, the elected judge of Finnish nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr R. Ryssdal, the President of the Court (Rule 21 para. 3 (b)). On 7 January 1994, in the presence of the Registrar, the President drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr Thór Vilhjálmsson, Mr C. Russo, Mr J. De Meyer, Mr I. Foighel, Mr J.M. Morenilla, Mr J. Makarczyk and Mr K. Jungwiert (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 para. 4) (art. 43).
As President of the Chamber (Rule 21 para. 5), Mr Ryssdal, acting through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Finnish Government ("the Government"), the applicant’s lawyer and the Delegate of the Commission on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 37 para. 1 and 38). Pursuant to the order made in consequence on 26 January 1994, the Registrar received the applicant’s and the Government’s memorials on 21 February 1994. On 18 March the Secretary to the Commission indicated that the Delegate did not wish to file a memorial in reply.
On 22 February 1994, following a request from Sini Hokkanen and her maternal grandparents, Mr Reino and Mrs Sinikka Nick, the President, having consulted the Chamber on the same date, granted Mr and Mrs Nick, but not Sini Hokkanen, leave to submit written observations (Rule 37 para. 2) on any facts which they considered had been dealt with inaccurately in the Commission’s report of 22 October 1993. On 8 March the Registrar received their observations.
 6.   On various dates between 17 February and 16 March 1994 the Commission produced a number of documents, which the Registrar had requested from it on the President’s instructions.
In accordance with the President’s decision, the hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, , on 21 March 1994. The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:
- for the Government
- for the Commission
- for the applicant
The Court heard addresses by Mrs Liddy, Mr Salo, Mr Rosas and Mr Grönberg, and also replies to its questions.
Mr Hokkanen, a Finnish citizen, was born in 1953. He lives at Tuusula.
He has a daughter, Sini, who was born in September 1983. Following the death in April 1985 of Mrs Tuula Hokkanen (the child’s mother, to whom the applicant had been married since 11 June 1983), Sini was looked after by her maternal grandparents, Mr Reino and Mrs Sinikka Nick (hereinafter referred to as "the grandparents"). According to the applicant, he had agreed to this as a provisional arrangement so that he could deal with various problems caused by his wife’s death, including the reorganisation of his farming activities.
In late 1985 the grandparents informed the applicant that they did not intend to restore Sini to him. Efforts, involving the Social Welfare Board (sosiaalilautakunta, socialnämnden) of Tuusula, were made to achieve reconciliation between the applicant and the grandparents, but to no avail.
On 2 May 1986 the County Administrative Board (lääninhallitus, länsstyrelsen) of Uusimaa as the competent Chief Bailiff (ulosotonhaltija, överexekutor; see paragraph 44 below) rejected a request by the applicant to have Sini returned in accordance with section 8(2) of the 1975 Act on the Enforcement of Decisions concerning Custody of and the Right of Access to Children (laki 523/75 lapsen huollosta ja tapaamisoikeudesta annetun päätöksen täytäntöönpanosta, lag 523/75 om verkställighet av beslut som gäller vårdnad om barn och umgängesrätt - "the 1975 Act"). It observed that the applicant had consented to the arrangement leaving Sini in the care of the grandparents. In view of the time which had elapsed since she had moved to them and of the little contact Sini had had with the applicant, returning her could be contrary to her own interests; both parties should therefore institute custody proceedings before the District Court (kihlakunnanoikeus, häradsrätten) of Tuusula. They did so.
Following a hearing on 16 July 1986, the District Court ordered provisionally that Sini should remain with her grandparents; at the same time it granted the applicant access rights, according to which Sini was to stay with him every fourth weekend and, from 8 August 1986, every fourth week.
On 30 September 1986 the County Administrative Board ordered the grandparents to respect the applicant’s visiting rights on pain of an administrative fine (uhkasakko, vite) of 2,000 Finnish marks each. However, they did not comply.
On 31 October 1986 the District Court held a further hearing. It adjourned the case and again provisionally granted the applicant access rights: as from 5 November he could visit his daughter at her grandparents’ home for two hours every Wednesday and six hours every Sunday and, as from 1 December, she was to visit him at the same times and for the same periods at his home. The grandparents refused to comply with these arrangements.
On 21 January 1987 the County Administrative Board rejected a request from the applicant asking it to enforce the right of access granted to him by the District Court on 16 July 1986. It observed that the District Court, in its decision of 31 October 1986, had varied his right of access. The County Administrative Board was therefore of the view that its decision of 30 September 1986 that the grandparents would be liable to pay fines should they fail to comply with the access order (see paragraph 11 above) no longer applied.
By judgment of 26 January 1987, the District Court confirmed the applicant’s custody and ordered that Sini be handed over to him. It took into account, among other things, a report of 22 January 1987 by the Child Guidance Centre (kasvatusneuvola, uppfostrings- rådgivningen - "the Centre") of Central Uusimaa.
On 10 March 1987 the County Administrative Board ordered the grandparents to comply with the District Court’s judgment of 26 January on pain of a fine of 8,000 marks each should they fail to do so. The grandparents persisted in not complying.
On 6 May 1987, on an appeal by the grandparents, the Court of Appeal (hovioikeus, hovrätten) of  upheld the District Court’s judgment of 26 January. On 23 June it dismissed their appeal against the County Administrative Board’s decision of 10 March.
On 7 May 1987 the County Administrative Board had again ordered the grandparents to return Sini to the applicant within a week and to pay 2,000 marks each of the fines imposed on them previously. The Board further ordered that, in the event of the grandparents’ failure to return her, the Bailiff should use coercion to ensure that she was so returned.
On 30 July 1987 the Supreme Court (korkein oikeus, högsta domstolen) granted the grandparents leave to appeal against the Court of Appeal’s judgments of 6 May and 23 June 1987. It ordered a stay, or alternatively suspension, of both judgments (see paragraph 16 above).
The Supreme Court, in two separate judgments of 17 May 1988, dismissed the appeal and lifted the two decisions staying execution.
The grandparents asked the local Social Welfare Board to investigate whether execution of the Supreme Court’s judgments would be in Sini’s interests. The Board referred the matter to the National Social Welfare Board (sosiaalihallitus, socialstyrelsen).
At the same time, the grandparents requested the Supreme Court to stay the execution of, and annul, its judgments of 17 May 1988, which it refused to do on 13 September.
In the meantime, on 13 and 18 May 1987, the applicant had asked the District Chief of Police of Järvenpää to execute the County Administrative Board’s decision of 7 May (see paragraph 17 above). On 28 May the authorities discovered that the grandparents had moved Sini and that her whereabouts were unknown. The Järvenpää police then contacted their counterpart in Mäntyharju, where the grandparents had a summer home. Subsequently Sini was found to be with her grandparents at their summer home. On 10 June the applicant requested the Chief of Police of Mäntyharju to return her, but the latter official refused to do so, finding it contrary to the child’s interests to interrupt her summer vacation.
On 29 May 1987 the applicant complained to the Chancellor of Justice (oikeuskansleri, justitiekanslern), alleging that the authorities had failed to take sufficient action to find and return Sini. The Chancellor replied on 6 July 1988 that he did not consider that any measures were called for in view of, firstly, the steps taken to execute the County Administrative Board’s decision of 7 May 1987; secondly, the Supreme Court’s subsequent decision to stay the execution of the Court of Appeal’s judgments of 6 May and 23 June 1987 (see paragraphs 16 and 18 above) and, thirdly, the grandparents’ request for a stay and annulment in respect of the Supreme Court’s judgments of 17 May 1988 (see paragraph 19 above).
On 30 May 1990 the National Social Welfare Board recommended that the Social Welfare Board in Tuusula take steps to have custody of Sini transferred from Mr Hokkanen to the grandparents, to obtain access for the applicant and to have a person other than him appointed Sini’s guardian.
On 25 July 1990, at the Social Welfare Board’s request, the Guardianship Board (holhouslautakunta, förmyndarenämnden) of Tuusula submitted an opinion on the above matter, stating that the applicant had performed his duties as a guardian in a satisfactory manner. It did not consider the transfer of custody and guardianship advisable and concluded that he should continue as Sini’s custodian and guardian.
On 13 August 1990 the Social Welfare Board of Tuusula asked the District Court to transfer custody to the grandparents. The Board noted that the applicant was a fit person to bring Sini up and was able to offer her a good home environment. The Board placed emphasis on the fact that since 1985 she had been living with the grandparents, with whom she had close relations. In view of the fact that Sini had not met her father for many years it was necessary for their meetings in the autumn of 1990 to be well prepared and that they should take place in a neutral environment. It also recommended that the applicant remain Sini’s guardian.
On 19 September 1990 the District Court held a hearing but adjourned the case until 14 November after deciding to obtain an opinion from the Guardianship Board. The Board submitted a report on 31 October, recommending that the applicant cease to be the child’s guardian.
At the hearing scheduled for 14 November 1990 the District Court again adjourned the case, this time until 8 May 1991, pending an opinion from the Child Guidance Centre of Central Uusimaa. On 7 May 1991 the Child and Family Guidance Centre (perhe- ja kasvatusneuvola, familje - och uppfostringsrådgivningen) of Tuusula, which had taken over the former’s functions, confirmed the views expressed by that Centre in its opinion of 22 January 1987 (see paragraph 14 above). It observed that the grandparents had refused to allow Sini to be subjected to an examination (requested by the National Board of Social Welfare) and to participate in related interviews. It also referred to a statement of 13 December 1989 by a working group of the Lastenlinna Children’s Hospital that, although Sini related to the grandparents as her psychological parents, there were no psychological obstacles as far as she was concerned to her meeting the applicant; on the contrary, such meetings were in her interests.
During the proceedings before it the District Court had, on 14 November 1990, provisionally ordered that Sini remain with the grandparents and granted the applicant certain rights of access: in December 1990 and January 1991 he was to be permitted to meet his daughter for six hours on the first Sunday of the month at a place chosen by the Board and in the presence of one of its officials; as from January they were in addition to meet from Saturday noon to Sunday noon on the third weekend of the month and, as from February, also the first weekend.
However, the grandparents would not allow the applicant to meet the child outside their home. On 20 December 1990 he asked the County Administrative Board to take enforcement measures. He renewed this request on 31 January 1991.
On 28 March 1991 the Board ordered the grandparents to comply with the District Court’s provisional order of 14 November 1990 and decided that failure to do so would make them liable to pay an administrative fine of 5,000 marks each. The grandparents persisted in their refusal to comply. The applicant did not request the enforcement of the fines, such a request being a legal condition for their imposition.
The District Court, by judgment of 8 May 1991, rejected the Social Welfare Board’s request to transfer custody and guardianship. It moreover noted that its provisional access order of 14 November 1990 no longer applied.
On 24 July 1991, on separate appeals by the grandparents and the Social Welfare Board, the Court of Appeal ordered a stay of execution of the District Court’s judgment of 8 May 1991 (see paragraph 24 above).
By judgment of 25 September 1991 the Court of Appeal, by a majority, held that the applicant should remain Sini’s guardian but transferred custody to the grandparents, finding that the fact that she had lived with them since 30 April 1985 militated strongly in favour of her remaining in their care. It referred to the above-mentioned opinion of 13 December 1989 by the Children’s Hospital (see paragraph 24 above), according to which she had strong ties of security, confidence and affection with her grandparents and perceived their home as her own. No substantial changes should be made to this situation. She should be able to meet the applicant and develop a normal relationship with him. In view of her low age (eight at the time) and the fact that she had not been in a position to form her views independently, the Court of Appeal considered that no significant importance could be attached to Sini’s own wish not to see the applicant, mentioned in the Child and Family Guidance Centre’s opinion of 7 May 1991 (see paragraph 24 above).
The judgment prescribed the following access arrangements: during the first three months the applicant and his daughter were to meet for four hours one Saturday each month, at a place chosen by the Tuusula Social Welfare Office, in the presence of one of its officers and, after that, every other weekend between Saturday noon and Sunday noon. She was to spend Christmas with her grandparents and two weeks of the following summer with the applicant; subsequently her stays during holidays should alternate between the applicant and the grandparents.
On 19 December 1991 the Court of Appeal quashed the County Administrative Board’s order of 28 March 1991 requiring the grandparents to comply with the District Court’s provisional order of 14 November 1990 regarding access (see paragraph 25 above). The Court of Appeal had regard to the lower court’s decision of 8 May 1991 (see paragraph 27 above), which in effect revoked its decision of 14 November 1990.
On 21 January 1992 the Supreme Court refused the applicant leave to appeal.
On 25 June 1992 the Social Welfare Board of Järvenpää replied to an enforcement request by the applicant. It observed that the Child and Family Guidance Centre of Järvenpää had offered the grandparents "an opportunity to obtain assistance and to discuss the matter concerning visiting rights" but they had refused to contact the Centre. The latter had, in a letter to the Board of 16 June 1992, stated that in those circumstances "nothing else could be done by the Centre".
In the meantime, on 22 June 1992 the applicant asked the County Administrative Board to take steps to execute the Court of Appeal’s judgment of 25 September 1991 (see paragraph 29 above). He referred to the fact that in 1991 all three meetings planned between him and Sini had failed to take place, as the grandparents had refused to bring her. They had moreover declined to respond to attempts to arrange further meetings.
On 23 June 1992 the County Administrative Board gave an interim decision ordering the applicant to communicate the documents in the case to the grandparents in order to enable them to comment on his request to the Board. This they did on 21 July. The decision further indicated that the case would be struck off the list if the applicant did not renew his enforcement request within a year.
On 10 November 1992 the applicant renewed his request of 22 June to the County Administrative Board. Following this, the Board, as required by the relevant legislation, referred the matter to the conciliator for mediation (see paragraph 45 below). The latter submitted a report to the Board on 2 December and the applicant filed his comments on 7 December.
On 31 December 1992 the County Administrative Board ordered the grandparents to comply with the Court of Appeal’s decision of 25 September 1991, on pain of having to pay an administrative fine of 5,000 marks.
On the other hand, the Board dismissed a request by the applicant for Sini to be transferred to him; such a measure could only be taken in enforcement of a custody order. However, it noted that the grandparents had totally refused to co-operate in attempts to arrange for the applicant to meet his daughter. Bearing in mind her age and the grandparents’ strong influence over her, she could not be considered sufficiently mature for her views to be taken into account.
The County Administrative Board had regard also to the conciliator’s above-mentioned report (see paragraph 34 above), submitted by the Social Welfare Board of Järvenpää. According to that report the grandparents had agreed to allow the applicant to see Sini in their own home, whilst the applicant had categorically refused to have anything to do with them. The conciliator in question had met Sini only in the grandparents’ presence in their home on 27 November 1992. On being questioned about her father she had been very reserved but had said that she objected to seeing him. The conciliator was of the view that Sini’s wishes in this regard should be taken into consideration.
The grandparents refused to bring Sini to a meeting with the applicant which the Social Welfare Board of Järvenpää had arranged to take place on 3 April 1993.
By judgment of 21 October 1993 the Court of Appeal, referring to section 6 of the 1975 Act (see paragraph 47 below), upheld an appeal lodged by the grandparents against the County Administrative Board’s decision of 31 December 1992 (see paragraph 35 above). The Court of Appeal noted that, according to a medical report of 8 September 1992 by Dr Arajärvi, Sini was physically and mentally healthy and a psychological test had shown that she was clearly of above average intelligence for a twelve-year-old; she should not therefore be forced to meet the applicant but be allowed to decide for herself. Moreover, the conciliator’s report (see paragraphs 34 and 35 above) stated that she had clearly and consistently refused to meet the applicant and was sufficiently mature for her wishes to be taken into account. The judgment concluded that in view of the child’s maturity, access could not be enforced against her wishes and lifted the fines imposed on the grandparents.
On 4 February 1994 the Supreme Court refused the applicant leave to appeal.
The applicant visited Sini in the grandparents’ home on a few occasions until 1986. The last time he met her was on 14 January 1987.
Custody of children is governed by the 1983 Act on Custody and Access Rights with regard to Children (laki 361/83 lapsen huollosta ja tapaamisoikeudesta, lag 361/83 ang. vårdnad om barn och umgängesrätt - "the 1983 Act"). Section 1 provides that the aim of such custody is to ensure the child’s balanced development and well-being, regard being had to the latter’s special needs and wishes, as well as to encourage a close relationship between the child and the parents. The custodian represents the child in his or her personal matters, unless the law provides otherwise (section 4).
The parents, or any other person to whom care of the child has been entrusted, are his or her custodians (section 3). Parents who are married to each other at the time of the child’s birth are the latter’s custodians (section 6).
The District Court may order that custody of a child be entrusted to one or more persons together with, or instead of, the parents (section 9 para. 1). It may transfer custody from the parents to other persons only if, from the child’s point of view, there are particularly strong reasons for doing so (section 9 para. 2).
The District Court is moreover empowered to decide on access (section 9). The aim of access is to secure a child’s right to maintain contacts with a parent with whom he or she is not living (section 2).
In deciding on matters of custody and access the competent court must take into account the wishes and interests of the child in accordance with the following considerations: primary emphasis must be placed on the interests of the child and particular regard should be had to the most effective means of implementing custody and access rights in the future (section 9 para. 4 and section 10 para. 1); the child’s views and wishes must, if possible and depending on its age and maturity, be obtained if the parents are unable to agree on the matter or if the child is being cared for by a person other than its custodian or if it is otherwise deemed necessary in the latter’s interests; the consultation must be carried out in a tactful manner, taking into account the child’s maturity and without causing harm to its relations with the parents (section 11).
Pending court decisions on matters of custody and access, the competent court may issue an interim order as to where the child should live, access arrangements and, in special circumstances, custody (section 17 paras. 1 and 2).
A decision on custody, access or a child’s place of residence is, unless it states otherwise, immediately enforceable (section 19).
According to section 1 of the 1975 Act (for references, see paragraph 9 above), the Act applies to the enforcement of a court decision, including an interim order, regarding custody and access. It may also apply to the enforcement of an order that a child should live with a particular person or that it should be handed over to its custodian.
A request for enforcement may be submitted to the Chief Bailiff in the area where the child lives (section 2), which authority is vested in the County Administrative Board (section 1 of the 1895 Act on Enforcement - ulosotto laki 1895/37, utsökningslagen 1895/37).
Pursuant to section 4, as amended by Act no. 366/83, before ordering enforcement the Chief Bailiff must assign as a conciliator a person appointed by the Social Welfare Board or another suitable person to mediate between the parties with a view to enforcing the decision. Such mediation is aimed at persuading the person taking care of the child to comply voluntarily with his obligations under the relevant decision.
Conciliation may not be ordered if it is evident from previous attempts that it would be unsuccessful or, in the case of a custody decision, if immediate enforcement is in the child’s interests and dictated by strong reasons.
The Chief Bailiff may impose an administrative fine in connection with an enforcement decision or, when the matter relates to the custody of a child or the handing over of a child to its custodian, he may order the Bailiff to transfer the child (section 5).
A fine as mentioned above must be fixed on the basis of the means of the person concerned (chapter 2, section 4 (b) para. 2, of the 1889 Penal Code). If the fine cannot be collected, it must be converted into a prison sentence (section 5 para. 1, as amended by Act no. 650/86).
Enforcement must not take place against a child’s own wishes if he or she is twelve years of age or is sufficiently mature for her wishes to be taken into account (section 6 of the 1975 Act, as amended by Act no. 366/83).
A decision by the Chief Bailiff under the 1975 Act may, unless otherwise stated therein, be enforced immediately (section 13 para. 1).
In his application (no. 19823/92) of 10 April 1992 to the Commission, Mr Teuvo Hokkanen, on his own and Sini’s behalf, complained that, in breach of Article 8 (art. 8) of the Convention, the public authorities had failed to take appropriate measures to facilitate their speedy reunion. In this regard he also relied on Article 5 of Protocol No. 7 (P7-5) (right to equality of spouses in their relations with their children). He further complained that, contrary to Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) of the Convention, he had not been given a fair and oral hearing before the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court in 1991 to 1992. In addition he alleged a breach of this provision in that the custody proceedings had not been concluded within a reasonable time and that the Supreme Court had failed to give reasons for its refusal of 21 January 1992 to grant leave to appeal. Finally, he complained that he had not been afforded an effective remedy as required under Article 13 (art. 13), in respect of the failure to take measures to facilitate reunion, the excessive length of the proceedings and the ineffectiveness of the administrative fines imposed upon the grandparents in view of their financial circumstances.
By decision of 9 February 1993, the Commission declared admissible the complaints made by Mr Hokkanen on his own behalf under Article 8 (art. 8) of the Convention, Article 5 of Protocol No. 7 (P7-5) and, in so far as they concerned the length of the second set of custody proceedings, those relating to Article 6 para. 1 and Article 13 (art. 6-1, art. 13) of the Convention. It declared inadmissible the complaints lodged on Sini’s behalf on the ground that Mr Hokkanen could not file an application for her as he was no longer her custodian at that time.
In its report of 22 October 1993 (Article 31) (art. 31), the Commission expressed the following opinion:
(a) by nineteen votes to two that there had been a violation of Article 8 (art. 8);
(b) unanimously that no separate issue arose under Article 5 of Protocol No. 7 (P7-5);
(c) by sixteen votes to five that there had been no violation of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1);
(d) by twenty votes to one that it was not necessary to examine the complaints under Article 13 (art. 13).
The full text of the Commission’s opinion and of the concurring and dissenting opinions contained in the report is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.
At the hearing on 21 March 1994 the Government confirmed the final submission in their memorial inviting "the Court to hold that there have been no violations of the Convention in the present case".