The case originated in an application (no. 65391/09) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Georgian national, Mr Giorgi Ildani (“the applicant”), on 30 November 2009.
The applicant was represented by Ms Tsira Javakhishvili, a lawyer practising in . The Georgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Levan Meskhoradze, of the Ministry of Justice.
On 18 January 2011 the Court decided to communicate the applicant’s complaints under Articles 3 and 13 of the Convention concerning lack of adequate medical care in prison and poor conditions of detention, and lack of effective domestic remedies in this regard (Rule 54 § 2 (b) of the Rules of Court). It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The Government and the applicant each submitted, on 13 May and 30 June 2011 respectively, observations on the admissibility and merits of the communicated complaints (Rule 54 (a) of the Rules of Court). The Government submitted additional comments on the applicant’s submissions on 16 September 2011.
The applicant was born in 1986 and is currently serving a prison sentence in  no. 1 Prison.
The applicant was arrested on 4 October 2007 on suspicion of unlawful purchase and possession of firearms.
On 19 November 2007 the firearms case was merged with another criminal case which concerned the applicant’s alleged involvement in several incidents of armed robbery.
On 8 December 2007 the applicant was placed in Gldani no. 8 Prison. The applicant alleges that on an unspecified date he was beaten there by prison officers. He did not complain before the law-enforcement authorities about the alleged beating.
On 24 June 2008 the Bolnisi District Court found the applicant guilty of unlawful possession of firearms and two distinct incidents of aggravated armed robbery, and imposed on him a sentence of twenty years and seven months’ imprisonment and a fine. On 6 January 2009 the Tbilisi Court of Appeal slightly modified the classification of the offences committed, maintaining the applicant’s conviction but reducing his sentence, fixing it at seventeen years and seven months’ imprisonment, plus a fine. On 1 June 2009 the Supreme Court rejected an appeal by the applicant on points of law. The applicant failed to submit to the Court copies of the domestic court decisions.
As disclosed by his medical file, the applicant suffers from epilepsy, which condition he had developed prior to his arrest.
On 18 July 2008 the applicant was placed in Rustavi no. 6 Prison. A medical certificate dated 27 November 2008 issued by the head doctor of that prison further diagnosed the applicant with chronic bronchitis and neurocirculatory dystonia.
According to the applicant, at that time he was denied any medical care in prison; his family provided him with the required medication. In support of that assertion he provided two receipts from pharmacies indicating procurement of several drugs. Further, the applicant alleged that the conditions of his detention in Rustavi no. 6 Prison were poor: he was kept in conditions of inadequate sanitation and hygiene, without proper toilet facilities, and denied regular outdoor exercise.
On an unspecified date the applicant’s mother complained to the governor of Rustavi no. 6 Prison about a deterioration in her son’s medical condition and requested his transfer to the medical establishment of the prison authority (“the prison hospital”). The governor replied on 13 August 2009, claiming that the applicant’s medical condition was stable, that he had benefited from medical supervision and drugs in prison, and that no transfer to the prison hospital was envisaged.
On 30 January 2010 the applicant’s lawyer wrote to the Governor and the head doctor of Rustavi no. 6 Prison, drawing their attention to the deterioration in the medical condition of the applicant. The lawyer whilst referring to the applicant’s alleged ill-treatment in Gldani no. 8 Prison claimed that he had sustained a head injury and suffered from epileptic seizures and diminished hearing as a result. She also noted that according to the applicantm, he had not been administered with any medical care in prison and he had severely suffered from, inter alia, mobility and speech problems. The applicant’s lawyer requested the prison governor to arrange for a comprehensive medical examination of her client. She also sought access to his complete medical file.
On 10 and 12 February 2010 bacteriological sputum tests were performed on the applicant. Consequently, on 17 February 2010 the applicant was diagnosed with smear-positive focal pulmonary tuberculosis (“TB”) at the stage of infiltration and was classified as a moderately serious patient. On 23 February 2010 the applicant was placed on the DOTS programme (Directly Observed Treatment, Short-course – the treatment strategy for the detection and cure of TB recommended by the World Health Organisation) and started receiving conventional, first-line anti-tuberculosis agents. In addition, he was provided with vitamins.
On 4 March 2010 the applicant was transferred for the purpose of treatment to Ksani no. 8 Prison, where prisoners with TB were housed.
On 28 April 2010 the applicant’s lawyer requested from the head of the medical department at the Ministry of Prisons a copy of all the medical records concerning the applicant’s state of health from the very first day of his detention. On 19 May 2010 the applicant’s lawyer was provided with a copy of the applicant’s medical file, documenting the treatment administered to her client starting from February 2010.
On 21 May 2010 the applicant underwent another bacteriological sputum test, which was smear-negative, that is, showed no microbacterium tuberculosis. The first phase of the treatment had proved successful. Hence, on 23 July 2010 the applicant was transferred from Ksani no. 8 Prison to the medical unit of Rustavi no. 1 Prison, where the second phase of his anti-TB treatment was initiated. The applicant was continuing to receive the anti-TB drugs.
The latest medical records in the file relating to the applicant’s condition are dated April-May 2011. The results of blood and urine analyses, and also of bacterioscopic phlegm analysis, and various X-ray and other examinations, reveal that the applicant’s TB was then in a non-active phase. As regards the applicant’s other medical disorders, they had not evolved negatively. The applicant was being provided with drug-based treatment on an out-patient basis at Rustavi no. 1 Prison.
The relevant legal provisions concerning the protection of prisoners’ rights, as well as excerpts from the relevant national and international documents bearing on medical problems in the custodial institutions of Georgia at the material time are set out in the following judgments: Goginashvili v. , no. 47729/08, §§ 32-44, 4 October 2011; Makharadze and Sikharulidze v. , no. 35254/07, §§ 40-48, 22 November 2011, and Jeladze v. , no. 1871/08, §§ 28-32, 18 December 2012 with further references therein.