The case originated in an application (no. 26716/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Galina Mikhaylovna Barashkova (“the applicant”), on 17 July 2003.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were initially represented by Mr P. Laptev, the former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights, and subsequently by their Representative, Mrs V. Milinchuk.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the court that had given the judgment of 1 July 2002 had not been composed in accordance with the relevant domestic law.
By a decision of 29 March 2007 the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant, but not the Government, filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1944 and lives in .
The applicant was a party to a civil dispute with her former husband over a flat which they occupied under a tenancy agreement. The Nagatinskiy District Court of Moscow twice rendered judgments unfavourable to the applicant but the Moscow City Court quashed them on appeals and remitted the case for fresh examinations.
The new hearing of the case was set for 14 May 2002. The Nagatinskiy District Court was composed of Ms F. (presiding judge), Ms B. and Mr S. (lay assessors). Prior to that, on 6 March 2001 in accordance with Section 5 of the Lay Assessors Act the acting President of the Nagatinskiy District Court of Moscow assigned the above two lay assessors to sit with judge F.
Before the court started to examine the claims, the applicant challenged the composition of the bench. She alleged a breach of rules on the appointment of lay assessors in that the lay assessors Ms B. and Mr S. had not been drawn by lot contrary to the requirements of the Federal Law on the Lay Assessors of the Federal Courts of General Jurisdiction (Федеральный Закон «О народных заседателях федеральных судов общей юрисдикции в Российской Федерации»). However, the applicant’s motion of challenge was rejected. No breach of the rules governing the calling of lay assessors was established.
At the next hearing of the case on 18 June 2002 the lay assessors Ms B. and Mr S. were absent.
On 1 July 2002 the presiding judge F. in accordance with Section 9 of the Lay Assessors Act “drew lots” among the lay assessors Ms B. and Mr S. assigned to her on 6 March 2001 by the acting President of the Nagatinskiy District Court, and chose both of them for sitting at the hearing of the applicant’s case.
On 1 July 2002 the Nagatinskiy District Court of Moscow composed of Ms F. (presiding judge), Ms B. and Mr S. (lay assessors), dismissed the applicant’s action.
The applicant appealed against the judgment. In her grounds for appeal the applicant again raised the issue of the lay assessors being appointed in breach of rules set forth in the Lay Assessors Act. In particular, she submitted that the case file did not contain the record of selection of the lay assessors Mr S. and Ms B.
On 30 January 2003 the Moscow City Court upheld the judgment on appeal. The applicant’s argument about the lack of record of the selection of lay assessors in the case file was found in itself insufficient for quashing of the judgment on appeal. The court did not go into further examination of the applicant’s allegation.
The applicant subsequently produced documentary evidence showing that in the course of 2002 the lay assessor Mr S. sat in court in unrelated civil cases with the judge F. on 5 and 30 April, 14, 23 and 24 May, 5, 19 and 27 June, 1 July, 1, 11 and 12 November, 19 and 30 December. The applicant also produced documentary evidence showing that in the course of 2002 the lay assessor Ms B. sat on the bench with the judge F. in unrelated cases on 4 March, 14 May, 5 and 27 June, 1 July, 4 and 17 October.
According to Article 6 of the Code, in force at the material time, civil cases could be examined by a formation comprising two lay assessors and a professional judge. In the administration of justice lay assessors enjoyed the same rights as professional judges.
On 10 January 2000, the Federal Law on the Lay Assessors of the Federal Courts of General Jurisdiction in the  (“the Lay Assessors Act” or “the Act”) came into effect. Under Section 1 § 2 of the Act, lay assessors were persons authorised to sit in civil and criminal cases as non-professional judges.
Section 2 of the Act provided that lists of lay assessors had to be compiled for every district court by local self-government bodies, such lists being subject to validation by the regional legislature.
Section 5 of the Act determined the procedure for the selection of lay assessors. It provided that the president of a district court had to draw at random from the list a certain number of lay assessors to be called to the competent district court. The number of lay assessors assigned to every professional judge had to be at least three times the number of persons needed for a hearing.
In accordance with Section 9, lay assessors were to be called to serve in a district court for a period of fourteen days, or as long as the proceedings in a particular case lasted. Lay assessors could not be called more than once a year.
On 14 November 2002 the new Code of Civil Procedure of the  was enacted and replaced the RSFSR Code of Civil Procedure from 1 February 2003. It no longer provided for participation of non-professional judges in civil cases.
On 22 November 2000 the Moscow City Legislature validated the general lists of lay assessors assigned to the district courts of  and the Supreme Court of Russia. The addendum no. 1 to the above regulation contained the general list of 2810 lay assessors assigned to the Nagatinskiy District Court of Moscow.
The Presidium of the Supreme Court of the  issued on 14 January 2000 a regulation on the procedure for selection of lay assessors. The regulation provided that the President of a district court should draw at random from the general list of lay assessors 156 names for each judge. The lay assessors for a particular case were to be drawn by lot by the judge to whom the case had been assigned.