The case originated in an application (no. 54146/09) against the Czech Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Czech nationals, Mr Roman Bátěk, Mr Radek Blažej and Mr Karel Elsner (“the applicants”) on 2 October 2009.
The applicants were represented by Mr D. Strupek, a lawyer practising in Prague. The Czech Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V.A. Schorm, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the evidence of absent and anonymous witnesses, whose testimonies they could not effectively challenge, had been decisive in their conviction.
On 18 March 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicants were born in 1969, 1968 and 1972 respectively and live in Lanžhot (Messrs. Bátěk and Elsner) and Břeclav (Mr Blažej).
From September 2003 to January 2004 the applicants were employed by the Lanžhot Customs Office on the border with the Slovak Republic. On 1 December 2003, pursuant to Article 158e of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”) an undercover police agent infiltrated the team of customs officers. As a result of her observations over the following two months, the customs officers were suspected of corruption, namely taking bribes from truck drivers in exchange for granting priority or trouble-free customs clearance. The undercover agent left the Customs Office on 6 February 2004.
During March and April 2004 testimony was taken in the presence of a judge from twenty truck drivers from different countries in accordance with the provisions of Article 158a of the CCP, that is to say this step was taken as an urgent or non-repeatable measure (neodkladný nebo neopakovatelný úkon). The records show that the drivers’ testimonies were similar. According to the applicants, interviews with four of the drivers were of decisive significance. Three of them were of Romanian nationality and one of them was a Bulgarian citizen. The applicants, being not yet charged, were not present at these interviews.
Witness I.P.D. testified that it was common practice for the customs officers to ask drivers for documents and to check whether there was some money enclosed. If not, the drivers had to wait for hours to be cleared. He admitted that he had paid bribes on two or three occasions but he could not remember individual customs officers.
Witness C.D. testified that he had always had to pay 5 euros (EUR) in order to avoid inconvenience during customs clearance. He described one customs officer as a corpulent person with thinning brown hair. He did not remember any other officer.
Witness S.B. testified that he had paid 5 EUR on each of the ten trips he had made to pass the customs control. He was not able to describe any of the customs officers.
Witness A.A.U. confirmed the existence of corrupt practices at the customs office in question but could not specify any particular person.
On 22 April 2004 the applicants were charged, together with fifteen other individuals, with abuse of the authority of public official and accepting bribes. In February 2005 they were officially indicted.
On 14 December 2005 the Břeclav District Court (okresní soud) heard the police agent as an anonymous witness (utajený svědek) under the provisions of Article 55 § 2 and Article 209 of the CCP. She gave her testimony outside the courtroom using an audio streaming device. She did not recount any specific case of the acceptance of a bribe, stating only that her reports and the information therein were fully reliable. The third applicant was present at the hearing. He was represented by a defence counsel. The other two applicants were absent and were represented by a substitute defence counsel. Only the third applicant put a question to the anonymous witness.
In the course of the trial, the applicants argued that the agent would have been unable to see any other customs officers from her work-station, that none of the alleged acts had been filmed by the cameras installed at their workplace, and that the officers’ numbered rubber stamps could have been used by other people.
On 25 May 2006 the District Court found the applicants and other accused persons guilty as charged. They were sentenced to one year’s imprisonment suspended for two years’ probation and were fined. The court established the factual background to the body of evidence. The agent’s written report constituted directly incriminating evidence. The court further relied on customs documents stamped using the personal rubber stamps of specific customs officers, comparing these with the testimony of the truck drivers, the records of service rotations and the database linking the applicants to the times at which the interviewed truck drivers obtained their customs clearance. The District Court stated:
“As regards the defendant Roman Bátěk, he is incriminated by the relevant documentary evidence referring to counts 2 and 3 of the indictment and counts 4 and 5 of the indictment, from which it is apparent that he used a rubber stamp with the number 005 and that his personal number was 20627, these numbers appearing on the relevant documents. When it comes to counts 2 and 3 of the indictment, he is also incriminated by the witness statements of the Bulgarian driver [D.] and the Romanian driver [C.D.] who, according to their records, passed the border crossing point at the time in question, and their papers and travel documents bear the respective numbers of the defendant Bátěk. The above fully corresponds to the report from the defendant’s employer regarding the placement of the defendant, i.e. where ‒ that is to say at which work-station ‒ he was positioned at the time concerned. As to counts 4 and 5 of the indictment, the defendant Bátěk is also incriminated by a police officer of the Czech Republic who saw the defendant accepting a bribe and recorded this fact in the corresponding document, produced in evidence, which also corresponds with the testimony of the undercover agent given before the court.
As regards the defendant Radek Blažej, he is incriminated by the documentary evidence produced as regards counts 6 and 7 of the indictment, specifically the control sheets showing his personal number 16898 and rubber stamp number 090. He is also incriminated by the testimony of the Romanian driver [C.D.] and by a report from his former employer stating the defendant’s whereabouts at the time concerned. As to count 7 of the indictment, the defendant Radek Blažej is also incriminated by the undercover police agent of the Czech Republic who saw the defendant accepting a bribe.
As regards the defendant Karel Elsner, he is incriminated on counts 8, 9 and 10 of the indictment by the documentary evidence produced, especially by control sheets which were stamped with his personal number and also by other use made of his personal number, as is apparent in the corresponding computer records. He is also incriminated by the witness statement of [S.D.], who submitted details of his border crossing to the authorities and notes of bribes given at a specific time and place. As to count 9 of the indictment in relation to the defendant Karel Elsner, the witness stated that on 10 November 2003 he gave a bribe at a particular time and ‒ by checking the driver and the documentation relating to his border crossing ‒ it was established who had cleared him and who had stamped his documents, from which it is clearly apparent that it was the defendant Elsner who carried out the administrative measures concerned and hence received the bribe. As to count 10 of the indictment, Karel Elsner is also mentioned in the anonymous agent’s report.”
The District Court explained that the truck drivers’ statements were read out at the hearing pursuant to Article 211 § 2 b) of the CCP. The drivers had been interviewed in the presence of a judge during the pre-trial stage of the proceedings, because it had been deemed necessary to take the step of obtaining their testimonies as an urgent or non-repeatable measure since they were foreign nationals and it would have been almost impossible for the court to reach them at a later stage. The undercover police agent was heard as an anonymous witness pursuant to Article 209 of the CCP because of her potential future activities.
The applicants appealed against the judgment. They firstly argued that the truck drivers could have been questioned under the corresponding international treaties ‒ namely the European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters and bilateral treaties on mutual judicial assistance with Romania (treaty of 25 October 1958) and Bulgaria (treaty of 25 November 1976) ‒ and that they could have been granted immunity in exchange for testifying. They also contested the legal grounds and the necessity for the non-disclosure of the identity of the undercover police agent. According to them, she did not risk bodily harm or any other danger of interference with her fundamental rights as required by Article 55 § 2 of the CCP. The argument about her future activities was not sufficient justification. Moreover, the delays between the questions asked at trial and her replies implied that she had had with her some notes or someone whom she had consulted about her answers before replying.
On 22 March 2007 the Brno Regional Court (krajský soud) rejected the applicants’ appeal as unsubstantiated, arguing as follows:
“(...) the hearing of an undercover police agent as a witness is in practice exceptional, occurring only in the particular circumstances of a specific case and in the interests of proper clarification and vindication of particularly serious criminal actions and the conviction of the perpetrators thereof. In such circumstances, and when such an agent is heard as a witness, Article 55 § 2, Article 183a § 4, and Article 209 of the CCP would be applicable. In the instant case, the provisions of the CCP regulating the agent’s testimony were not violated and the allegations of some of the defendants that the agent had been heard as an anonymous witness in order to allow her to consult her notes or another person are unsubstantiated. The first-instance court had no doubts about the agent’s reliability as a witness. She reliably described how she had obtained the information about the criminal activity of the accused and how she had evaluated, recorded and processed it (...)
Under Article 160 § 4 of the CCP, a non-repeatable measure is a measure which cannot be repeated before the trial court. Questioning a witness who is a foreign national or stateless person without a permanent residence permit in the Czech Republic can be considered to be this kind of measure. None of the witnesses had a link to the Czech Republic of the kind which could have justified the conclusion that they would remain in the country or appear if summoned. The witnesses merely pass through the territory in the course of their work as truck drivers. The interviews with these witnesses were conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The allegations of the defendants that the witnesses did not even know the content of the records they had signed, and that they had been forced to testify and promised immunity if they stated particular facts, are not substantiated by the case file, and no other facts corroborating these allegations have been ascertained. It is apparent from the file that the truck drivers were questioned in the presence of an interpreter and in the presence of judges of the Břeclav District Court (...). Under Article 158a of the CCP, a judge who performs the urgent or nonrepeatable measure of examining a witness or in an identity parade also bears responsibility for the legality thereof."
The applicants filed a constitutional appeal alleging a violation of Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 d) of the Convention and complaining about the depositions of the truck drivers and the anonymous witness.
On 2 April 2009 the Constitutional Court (Ústavní soud) dismissed the constitutional appeal as manifestly ill-founded. It stated that the complaints raised at the previous instances had been properly addressed and that the courts had provided sufficient justification to show that the evidence had been obtained in accordance with the provisions of the CCP.
At the material time, the relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Act no. 141/1961), as amended, read:
“Where the circumstances indicate that, in testifying, a witness or a person close to a witness runs an obvious risk of bodily harm or other serious danger of interference with their fundamental rights, and if it is not possible to ensure the effective protection of the witness in any other way, the criminal justice authority is required to take measures to prevent identification of that witness, including their visual identification; the witness’s name, surname, and other particulars are not to be recorded in the statement, but kept separate from the criminal file and known only to the criminal justice authorities acting in that particular case. The witness shall be informed of the right to have his or her identity concealed and to sign the statement using a fictitious forename and surname by which he or she can subsequently be identified. Where necessary, the criminal justice authority shall take all necessary measures to ensure the protection of these persons. Special law provides for specific protection of witnesses and persons close to the witnesses. In cases where there are no longer reasons to protect the identity of a witness and to keep his or her personal data concealed, the authority conducting the criminal proceedings shall add this information to the criminal file so that the identity of the witness is no longer concealed.”
“1. To document the taking of such a measure, a stenographic record may be made, if necessary, which shall then be attached to the minutes together with its transcription into conventional text; or an audio or video recording or other appropriate means may be used.
If an audio or video record is made in addition to the minutes, this fact shall be noted in the minutes drafted about the measure, which shall indicate, in addition to the time, place and manner of its execution, the kind of device used. The technical recording medium shall be attached to the file, or there shall be an indication of where the medium is stored.”
“Where it is deemed necessary to question a witness as an urgent or non-repeatable measure during an investigation at a time before anybody has been charged, the interview must be requested by a prosecutor and shall be conducted in the presence of a judge; the judge shall be responsible for the legality of such questioning and for that purpose may intervene in the questioning. However, the judge shall not be authorised to review the prosecutor’s decision that an urgent and non-repeatable measure is required.”
“1. The presiding judge shall ensure that a witness who has not yet been questioned is not present during the questioning of the defendant and other witnesses. If there is a concern that a witness might not testify truthfully in the presence of the defendant, or if a witness or a person close to him or her is in danger of bodily harm, death or other serious threat, the presiding judge shall take appropriate measures to secure the safety and anonymity of that witness, or shall expel the defendant from the courtroom during the interrogation of such a witness. However, upon his return to the courtroom, the defendant must be informed about the content of the witness’s testimony, may make comments on it, and may ask the witness questions via the presiding judge without having met the witness. In the case of a witness whose identity is to be kept confidential (Article 55 § 2), the presiding judge shall take measures to make it impossible to determine the true identity of the witness.
If a witness whose identity is concealed (Article 55 § 2) is questioned during the trial, the court shall take all the necessary steps to verify his or her credibility, even without a corresponding request.”
“The statement of a witness given during pre-trial proceedings may be read out at the trial if the witness:
a)  has died or gone missing, is staying abroad and is thus unreachable, or has become ill and is therefore not in a position to be heard, or
b)  has been questioned as an urgent or non-repeatable measure under Article 158a.”
Amendment no. 274/2008 of the CCP introduced specific rules governing the testimony of police officers acting as undercover agents. It entered into force on 1 January 2009, when the criminal proceedings against the applicants were already complete. The new Article 102a reads:
“1.  If a person on active police duty or a police officer from another State
a)  who has been deployed in criminal proceedings as an undercover agent or has performed a simulated transaction, or
b)  who has recently participated in deploying an agent or performing a simulated transaction,
is to be questioned as a witness, he or she shall be questioned as a witness whose identity and appearance is concealed.
In exceptional situations and on condition that the questioning cannot endanger life, health or further service duties of persons referred to in sub-section (1) or endanger the life or health of a person close to such person, the questioning may be conducted without concealing the witness’s identity or appearance, but only at the request of a public prosecutor and on the basis of authorisation from the competent director of the security forces.”
The Rules for District, Regional and High Courts (Instruction of the Ministry of Justice no. 505/2001–Org of 3 December 2001), as in force at material time, read:
“1.  In cases where the criminal justice authorities have already adopted measures to conceal the identity of a witness at the pre-trial stage under Article 55 § 2 of the Criminal Procedure Code, the presiding judge (a single judge) shall summon that witness to the court through a police authority which has in its possession the file containing his or her genuine personal details. ...
In cases where it is necessary to prevent unauthorised persons, using other technical means if necessary, from identifying such a witness, the presiding judge (a single judge) shall take appropriate measures, with the help of members of a judicial guard if necessary, to make it impossible to identify a witness not only in the courtroom but also in all other parts of the court building.
If the investigation file does not contain the details necessary for assessing the credibility of a witness whose identity has been concealed at the pre-trial stage, the presiding judge (a single judge) shall request these details through the court employee who has been appointed by the president of the court to ensure the protection of confidential information. The same procedure shall apply in cases where the witness is heard for the first time during the trial. This information shall be stored separately from the criminal file. After the evidence has been taken by reading out its essential content, without endangering the concealed identity of the witness, the evidence shall be put in a sealed envelope together with the witness’s personal details.”
In judgment no. 9 Tz 85/2000 of 3 May 2000 the Supreme Court observed that neither the investigator nor the trial court had explained satisfactorily why the questioning as an anonymous witness of the police officer concerned had been deemed to meet the criteria laid down in Article 55 § 2 of the CCP, namely that the circumstances indicated that, in testifying, a witness or a person close to the witness would run an obvious risk of bodily harm or other serious danger of interference with his/her fundamental rights and that it was not possible to ensure the effective protection of the witness in any other way. The Supreme Court pointed out in this regard that the defendants had not been convicted of any previous offence, they all enjoyed a good reputation and the offences had been isolated ‒ albeit serious ‒ unlawful actions. The Supreme Court ordered the trial court to reconsider whether it was appropriate to hear testimony from the officer as an anonymous witness.
In decision no. III. ÚS 323/04 of 13 January 2005 the Constitutional Court addressed the lawfulness of police officers’ interviews as anonymous witnesses under Article 55 § 2 of the CCP. The Constitutional Court held that it was self-evident that revealing their identity would jeopardise their future professional work. Although the defendant had not uttered any threats, it was clear, given the nature of the criminal activity, that there was a danger of interference with the officers’ fundamental rights. The defendant knew the identity of the witnesses and who had testified against him and he might have reacted accordingly. Moreover, he had had a face-to-face confrontation with one of the witnesses pursuant to Article 104a of the Code of Criminal Procedure and the mere fact that he did not know the identity of the witnesses could not result in a violation of his defence rights or his other basic rights.
In decision no. III. ÚS 291/03 of 6 June 2006, the Constitutional Court found that questioning police officers anonymously could be justified if they or their families might be exposed to danger or if they were going to take part in other covert operations. However, such an interference with the rights of the defence also had to respect the principle of proportionality and it was the courts’ task to assess the proportionality of the measure. In the case before it, such proportionality was altogether lacking.
In decision no. II. ÚS 583/05 of 13 December 2007, the Constitutional Court found that hearing police officers as anonymous witnesses pursuant to Article 55 § 2 of the CCP was justified on the grounds that revealing their identity might compromise their future work and there was thus a serious danger of interference with their fundamental rights. The Constitutional Court found that the measure in question had been accompanied by adequate procedural safeguards and had thus been proportionate: the Czech police officers had been heard directly in the courtroom, in the presence of the defendants and their defence counsels, who could have asked questions. There had thus been direct contact between the anonymous witnesses and the court and the other procedural parties. The court, the defendants and their counsels had been able to gain an immediate impression as to how the witnesses gave their testimonies and could take part in the questioning. In the case of a Dutch police officer, who used a false name, he had not been present at the courtroom himself but his testimony and all the questions had been transmitted using technical means and the parties had been allowed to react and to put questions to him. The Constitutional Court also underlined the reliability of witnesses who were police officers and distinguished them from other individuals who testified as anonymous witnesses but came from a criminal environment.
In decision no. II. ÚS 677/06 of 6 August 2008 the Constitutional Court pointed out that hearing an Austrian police officer as an anonymous witness was lawful, even though he did not allege that there was any threat from the defendant. But given the nature of the crime, there was a serious danger of interference with his fundamental rights. In addition, the defendant knew the identity of the witness, knew who had testified in his case and might react accordingly. The defendant’s defence counsel put fifteen questions in total to the witness. The mere fact that a defendant does not know the real identity of a witness cannot result in an interference with his defence rights or other fundamental rights. In addition, the Constitutional Court took into account that the testimony in question was not decisive evidence and there was a large body of other circumstantial evidence.
In its decision no. IV. ÚS 407/07 of 29 October 2009, the Constitutional Court referred to its previous case-law in relation to Article 55 § 2 of the CCP and held that the first requirement for lawfulness is the subsidiarity of the measure. It does not suffice for the witness subjectively to feel endangered and therefore ask to be heard as an anonymous witness. The criminal justice authorities are under an obligation to assess whether the measure is justified and to give reasons for their conclusion. The second requirement is an obligation on the part of the court to take all the requisite steps to assess the reliability of the witness (compare Article 209 § 2 of the CCP) and the defendant cannot be prevented from doing the same.
The Constitutional Court found in the aforementioned case that both requirements were met. The courts gave satisfactory reasons for executing the measure pursuant to Article 55 § 2 of the CCP. In relation to the rights of the defence, all the accused, including the defendant, could ask questions and observe the reactions of the witnesses. Thus, even though the defence was put in a more difficult position, the degree of the restriction was minimalised. As far as the second requirement was concerned, the courts adduced a large body of evidence and carefully assessed the reliability of particular testimonies. In addition, the defendant was able to put questions to the witnesses. Furthermore, the Constitutional Court pointed out that these testimonies were not the sole evidence against the defendant as other evidence existed, including wiretaps and other physical evidence.
Mutual assistance in criminal matters between the Czech Republic and Bulgaria and Romania is governed, in particular, by the European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters of 20 April 1959, supplemented by bilateral treaties with Bulgaria of 25 October 1958, and with Romania of 25 November 1976.
The European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters establishes common rules in the field of mutual assistance in criminal matters, such as the questioning of witnesses or experts. Requests for mutual assistance are made by way of letters rogatory, which should be addressed by the Ministry of Justice of the requesting Party to the Ministry of Justice of the requested Party.