The case originated in four applications (nos. 35673/97, 35674/97, 36082/97 and 37579/97) against the Republic of Austria lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four Austrian nationals, Walter Schweighofer, Hans-Dieter Rauch, Peter Heinemann and Josef Mach (“the applicants”), on 12 February 1997, 11 February 1997, 9 April 1997 and 12 May 1997, respectively.
The first and fourth applicants were represented before the Court by Mr W. Weidinger, a lawyer practising in Vienna. The second and third applicants were represented by Mr Eckert & Fries, lawyers practising in Baden. The Austrian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ambassador H. Winkler, Head of the International Law Department at the Federal Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the criminal proceedings against them were unreasonably long.
The applications were transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
The applications were allocated to the Third Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court).Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1 of the Rules of Court.
By a decision of 24 August 1999 the Chamber joined the applications and declared them partly inadmissible. By a decision of the 29 August 2000 the Chamber declared the remainder of the applications admissible.
The applicants and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
On 12 December 1985 the second applicant was arrested at Vienna airport on suspicion of smuggling gold coins. 3200 gold coins and two gold bars were found hidden under his clothes. He was questioned as a suspect. On 15 December 1985 the Vienna Regional Criminal Court (Landesgericht für Strafsachen) opened preliminary investigations against him and he was released. In 1986 he was repeatedly questioned either by the investigating judge or, upon the judge’s request, by the Vienna Customs Office on suspicion of having organised large scale smuggling by which gold coins were exported to a Swiss company, M., and smuggled back to Austria where they were, via a number of firms owned by the applicant and other suspects, sold to banks, mostly the K. bank, and re-exported to Switzerland. Thereby the participants evaded large amounts of turnover tax and gained refunds for turnover tax which is due upon the import of goods but not upon their export.
On 27 July 1986 the fourth applicant was detained on remand on suspicion of participating in the smuggling of gold coins and tax evasion. Subsequently, he was questioned by the Customs Office upon the investigating judge’s request. The proceedings against him were severed from the proceedings against the other suspects.
On 30 October 1986 the third applicant, who was the deputy director of the K. bank, was detained on remand. On 31 October 1986 preliminary investigations were opened against him and the investigating judge at the Vienna Regional Criminal Court questioned him as a suspect for tax evasion and smuggling, as well as for offences under the Foreign Exchange Act (Devisengesetz). The proceedings against him were severed from the proceedings against the other suspects.
On 28 July 1987 the Vienna Public Prosecutor’s Office (Staatsanwaltschaft) preferred an indictment against the third applicant. He was charged under section 33 § 2 (a) of the Tax Offences Act (Finanzstrafgesetz) with having aided and abetted tax evasion, in that he bought smuggled gold coins from the firms belonging to the other suspects and exported them to the M. company in Switzerland, whilst carrying out the necessary banking transactions to falsify a flow of money from the M. company to the K. bank.
On 2 November 1987 the third applicant was released. Subsequently, the proceedings against him were rejoined to the proceedings against the other suspects. On 30 November 1987 the fourth applicant was released.
On 30 June 1988 the Vienna Regional Criminal Court convicted the fourth applicant, inter alia, of tax evasion under section 33 § 2 (a) of the Tax Offences Act and of forging documents. It sentenced him to one year and ten months’ imprisonment and to a fine of twice the amount of the taxes evaded, namely Austrian schillings (ATS) 500 million, or one year’s imprisonment in default. The judgment became final in April 1989, following unsuccessful appeal proceedings. Subsequently, the proceedings against the fourth applicant, as far as they related to facts which had not been the subject of the above judgment, were joined to the proceedings against the other suspects.
On 21 December 1988 the Vienna Regional Criminal Court questioned the first applicant as a suspect and opened preliminary investigations on suspicion of tax evasion against him. Subsequently, he was questioned by the Vienna Customs Office upon the Regional Court’s request.
On 16 October 1991 the Vienna Public Prosecutor’s Office filed the indictment, comprising some 250 pages. During the ten months required for its preparation, the Public Prosecutor responsible for the case had been relieved of all other business. The indictment was preferred against thirteen co-accused including the four applicants. In these and the subsequent proceedings, all four applicant’s were represented by counsel.
On 1 June 1994 the trial before the Vienna Regional Criminal Court started. It lasted a total of twenty-nine days during June, September, October, November and December 1994, in the presence of the applicants and their counsel. The court heard dozens of witnesses and took extensive documentary evidence. It refused a number of requests for the taking of evidence filed by the second and third applicants.
On 22 December 1994 the Vienna Regional Criminal Court gave its judgment comprising some 500 pages. It convicted all four applicants of having partly committed and partly aided and abetted tax evasion under section 33 § 2 (a) of the Tax Offences Act, smuggling under section 35 § 1 of the Tax Offences Act and a breach of foreign exchange regulations under section 24 of the Foreign Exchange Act. In addition it convicted the first and the fourth applicants of forging documents under section 223 § 2 of the Criminal Code. The court sentenced the applicants under both the Tax Offences Act and the Foreign Exchange Act to terms of imprisonment, fines (with terms of imprisonment in default) and fines in lieu of confiscation.
The Regional Court found that the applicants had, together with their co-accused, between 1980 and 1986 run a sophisticated network involving the large scale exportation of gold coins and other precious metals to Switzerland, mostly to the M. company but also to several banks, declaring these exports and claiming refunds for turnover tax, which is not due upon export, and then bringing the coins back to Austria without declaring them, thus avoiding the turnover tax due upon import. Consequently, they breached foreign exchange regulations by exporting Austrian schillings to Switzerland without the permission of the Austrian National Bank, or by manipulating bank accounts by falsifying a flow of money from Switzerland. The amount of taxes evaded were between ATS 205 million and ATS 916 million per applicant. The relevant amounts under the Foreign Exchange Act were between ATS 570 million and ATS 2200 million per applicant.
Subsequently, the applicants each filed a plea of nullity and an appeal (Nichtigkeitsbeschwerde und Berufung).  In their pleas of nullity the applicants raised a number of complex issues of law, concerning inter alia the relationship between section 33 § 2 (a) of the Tax Offences Act to a related provision and the question whether the offence under section 24 of the Foreign Exchange Act had not already been invalidated at the time of the first instance judgment by the liberalisation of the foreign exchange market in 1991.
On 14 November 1996 the Supreme Court (Oberster Gerichtshof) dismissed the applicants’ pleas of nullity and their appeals in a 139-page judgment.
The judgment was served on the second and third applicants on 17 January and on the first and fourth applicants on 21 January 1997.