The case originated in an application (no. 29279/95) against the  lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr İsmail Şahiner (“the 0applicant”), on 22 August 1995.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr A. Kalan, a lawyer practising in . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) did not designate an Agent for the purposes of the proceedings before the Court.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the criminal proceedings brought against him had not been concluded within a “reasonable time” and that his right to a fair hearing had been breached on account of his conviction by the Ankara Martial-Law Court, which lacked independence and impartiality. He further submitted that he had been convicted on the basis of statements he had made to the police under duress and that his political opinions had constituted the basis for his conviction.
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
The application was allocated to the First Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1. Mr R. Türmen, the judge elected in respect of , withdrew from sitting in the case (Rule 28). The Government accordingly appointed Mr F. Gölcüklü to sit as an ad hoc judge (Article 27 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 29 § 1).
By a decision of 11 January 2000 [Note by the Registry. The Court’s decision is obtainable from the Registry], the Chamber declared admissible the applicant’s complaints concerning his right to a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial tribunal and declared the remainder of his complaints inadmissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
On 29 November 1980 police officers from the Ankara Security Directorate arrested the applicant on suspicion of membership of an illegal organisation, the Dev-Yol ().
On 26 January 1981 the  (sıkıyönetim mahkemesi) remanded the applicant in custody.
On 26 February 1982 the military public prosecutor filed a bill of indictment with the  against the applicant and 722 other defendants. The public prosecutor accused the applicant of membership of an illegal armed organisation, namely the Dev-Yol, whose object was to undermine the constitutional order and replace it with a Marxist-Leninist regime. He further charged the applicant with having been involved in a number of crimes such as acting as an armed look-out for the killers of several individuals, a bomb attack on a coffee house and opening fire on a house.
The prosecution sought the death penalty under Article 146 § 1 of the Turkish Criminal Code. 
In a judgment of 19 July 1989 the Martial-Law Court, composed of two civilian judges, two military judges and an army officer, found the applicant guilty as charged, sentenced him to life imprisonment (in effect eighteen years assuming good conduct) for offences under Article 146 § 1 of the Criminal Code and permanently debarred him from employment in the civil service. It took from 19 July 1989 until 1993 for the reasons for the judgment to be set down in writing.
The applicant lodged an appeal with the Military Court of Cassation (askeri yargıtay).
On 23 July 1991 the  ordered the applicant’s release pending trial.
Following promulgation of the Law of 27 December 1993, which abolished the jurisdiction of the martial-law courts, the Court of Cassation (yargıtay) acquired jurisdiction over the case and the file was transmitted to it.
On 27 December 1995 the Court of Cassation upheld the applicant’s conviction.
Article 146 § 1 of the Turkish Criminal Code provides:
“Whosoever shall attempt to alter or amend in whole or in part the Constitution of the Turkish Republic or to effect a coup d’état against the Grand National Assembly formed under the Constitution or to prevent it by force from carrying out its functions shall be liable to the death penalty.”
The provisions governing judicial organisation are worded as follows:
Article 138 §§ 1 and 2
“In the performance of their duties, judges shall be independent; they shall give judgment, according to their personal conviction, in accordance with the Constitution, statute and the law.
No organ, authority, officer or other person may give orders or instructions to courts or judges in the exercise of their judicial powers, nor send them circulars or make recommendations or suggestions to them.”
Article 139 § 1
“Judges ... shall not be removed from office or compelled to retire without their consent before the age prescribed by the Constitution ...”
Article 145
“... Martial-law courts shall be responsible for dealing with offences under special laws committed by civilians against military personnel and offences committed against military personnel in the course of their duties or on scheduled premises.
The offences and persons falling within the jurisdiction of the martial-law courts in time of war or under martial law, the composition of martial-law courts and the appointment, where necessary, of judges and prosecutors from the ordinary courts to martial-law courts shall be regulated by law.
The personal rights and obligations of military judges ... shall be regulated by law in accordance with the principles of the independence of the courts, the safeguards enjoyed by the judiciary and the requirements of military service. Relations between military judges and the commanders under whom they serve as regards their non-judicial duties shall also be regulated by law.”
Section 11(1)
“The Ministry of Defence shall convene a sufficient number of martial-law courts in areas where martial law applies ...”
Section 11(4)
“Judicial advisers, military judges and military prosecutors attached to the martial-law courts are appointed, with the agreement of the Chief of Staff, from among the candidates nominated by a committee composed of the personnel director and the legal adviser to the Office of the Chief of Staff, the personnel director and the legal adviser to the army corps to which the judge in question belongs and finally the head of the Military Legal Service at the Ministry of Defence.”
Article 11(6)
“The army officers serving on martial-law courts are appointed, on the proposal of the Chief of Staff, according to the procedure for appointing military judges ...”
Section 4
“The officers serving on the martial-law courts and their substitutes shall be appointed, in December, by the commander or the superior of the military establishment within which a martial-law court is formed, from among the officers of that establishment. The officers thus appointed are irremovable for one year.”
Article 12
“... The aptitude of military judges for promotion or advancement in salary step, rank or seniority shall be determined on the basis of assessment reports.
(a)  There are three types of assessment report, namely the assessment report for generals, the assessment report for officers (sub-lieutenant – colonel) and the professional assessment report.
...
(b)  The superiors in the hierarchy competent to carry out assessment and draw up assessment reports for officers are the following:
First superior in the hierarchy: the commander or superior of the military establishment to which the judge in question belongs and in which a martial-law court is formed.
Second superior in the hierarchy: the commander or the superior immediately above the first superior in the hierarchy.
Third superior in the hierarchy: the commander or the superior immediately above the second superior in the hierarchy ...”
Section 29
“The Minister of Defence may apply to military judges, after hearing their defence submissions, the following disciplinary sanctions:
(a)  a warning ... in writing ...
(b)  a reprimand ...” 
In the instant case, in which the issue before the Court was the independence and impartiality of martial-law courts in Turkey (Article 6 § 1 of the Convention), I voted in favour of finding that there had not been a violation, because the logical consequence of the conclusion reached by the majority would be to banish military courts of every kind from the judicial system. My reasons are as follows.
In the present case the majority took as their starting-point Incal v. Turkey (judgment of 9 June 1998, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1998IV, p. 1573, § 72). In my opinion, Incal is quite different from this case.
Incal was concerned with a civilian (as opposed to a military) court, namely the , which was composed of two civilian judges and a military judge. That court tried a civilian for an offence under the ordinary criminal law. In Incal the majority of the Court reached the conclusion that, in spite of the safeguards enjoyed by military judges in Turkey’s judicial system, the National Security Court could not be objectively regarded (according to the doctrine of appearances) as an independent and impartial tribunal within the meaning of Article 6 § 1 because one of its members was a military judge, who might have aroused doubts in the mind of the public as to his impartiality and independence. That standpoint was defensible, as the case concerned a civilian court trying a civilian for an ordinary offence.
However, in the instant case, in which the tribunal in issue was a martial-law court composed of two civilian judges, two military judges and an army officer, the situation is quite different. It is common knowledge that martial-law courts are military courts par excellence. Their jurisdiction is limited: in cases involving civilians, they are competent to deal with offences of a strictly military nature and with offences that have led to a declaration of martial law in the region in which the military authorities – and, with them, the martial-law courts – assume jurisdiction ratione loci.
It goes without saying that all military courts will, in the nature of things, necessarily include at least one military judge. To hold, on the basis of the Incal precedent, that a court on which a military judge sits is not independent and impartial within the meaning of Article 6 § 1 would, by logical implication, amount to finding that all military courts contravene Article 6 § 1 and should accordingly be banished from the judicial system. That is the general conclusion which I am unable to accept. Military courts have existed since time immemorial; they currently exist, as far as I know, in all States that possess an army, and they will continue to exist until such time as armed forces and martial law are abolished.