The case originated in an application (no. 12301/12) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Tomislav Merčep (“the applicant”), on 14 February 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Ujević, a lawyer practising in Zagreb. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant complained of a lack of relevant and sufficient reasons for his prolonged pre-trial detention, contrary to Article 5 § 3 of the Convention.
On 16 September 2013 the complaint was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The applicant was born in 1952 and lives in Zagreb.
On 10 December 2010 the Zagreb Police Department (Policijska Uprava Zagrebačka; hereinafter “the police”) lodged a criminal complaint with the Zagreb County State Attorney’s Office (Županijsko državno odvjetništvo u Zagrebu) against the applicant, alleging that in 1991, as commander of a police unit, he had committed war crimes against the civilian population. They relied on extensive material obtained in the course of a preliminary investigation. An investigating judge of the Zagreb County Court (Županijski sud u Zagrebu) was also informed of the case. The case immediately attracted wide media interest and coverage.
On the same day, based on the criminal complaint lodged by the police, the investigating judge questioned the applicant. The applicant contested the allegations of the police and decided not to give further evidence, stressing that he was suffering from health problems. He submitted extensive medical documentation showing that he had suffered a stroke in 2007.
Later on the same day, the Zagreb County State Attorney’s Office requested the investigating judge to open an investigation in respect of the applicant on suspicion of war crimes against the civilian population, as alleged in the criminal complaint lodged by the police. It relied in particular on the material provided to the Croatian authorities by the Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (hereinafter “the ICTY”) concerning the crimes allegedly committed by a unit under the applicant’s command.
Following the request of the Zagreb County State Attorney’s Office, on 13 December 2010 the investigating judge questioned the applicant. The applicant decided to remain silent and refused to give any evidence.
On the same day the investigating judge opened an investigation in respect of the applicant on suspicion of war crimes against the civilian population. The investigating judge found, on the basis of the available material, that there was a reasonable suspicion that in the period between October and December 1991, in his capacity as commander of a police unit, the applicant had ordered arbitrary arrests, ill-treatment and the killing of a number of civilians, and that, by not taking the necessary measures to prevent and punish those responsible, he had consented to a number of other arbitrary arrests, the unlawful confiscation of property, ill-treatment and the killing of civilians by his subordinates.
During the investigation the investigating judge heard evidence from thirty-one witnesses and requested international legal assistance from the Serbian authorities in obtaining evidence from the witnesses. He also obtained a number of relevant reports on the DNA analyses of the victims’ remains, as well as exhumation and autopsy reports, and various documents concerning the actions of the unit under the applicant’s command.
On the basis of the evidence obtained during the investigation, on 9 June 2011 the Zagreb County State Attorney’s Office indicted the applicant in the Zagreb County Court on charges of war crimes against the civilian population. The indictment listed twenty-two counts of arbitrary arrest, unlawful confiscation of property, ill-treatment and the killing of civilians. The relevant part of the indictment concerning the applicant’s participation in those acts reads:
“In the period between 8 October and mid-December 1991, in Zagreb and Pakračka Poljana, during an international armed conflict between the forces of the Republic of Croatia and the former [Yugoslav People’s Army] and the paramilitary Serb forces, assisted by volunteer fighters from other parts of the former Yugoslavia, contrary to Articles 2, 3 § 1 (a) and (c), 13 and 32 of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949 and Articles 4 §§ 4 and 2 (a), 51 §§ 2 and 6, 86 and 87 of the Protocol additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the protection of victims of international armed conflicts (Protocol I), as an official in the Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Croatia and the commander of the reserve unit of the Ministry of the Interior stationed in Pakračka Poljana and partially in Zagreb, where it had its compound, and thereby authorised to command his subordinates and responsible for the application of rules of international humanitarian law concerning the protection of civilians, ordered the unlawful deprivation of liberty, torture and killing of certain civilians, and when he was not present in the field, although aware that his subordinates were acting unlawfully by arbitrarily depriving civilians of their liberty, robbing, ill-treatment, torture, causing physical harm and killing civilians, did not take the necessary measures to prevent or suppress such unlawful actions, thereby accepting that his subordinates continue with such acts and condoning their consequences ...”
On 28 June 2011 the applicant lodged an objection against the indictment, arguing that it was not supported by any relevant evidence.
On 12 September 2011 a three-judge panel of the Zagreb County Court dismissed the applicant’s objection against the indictment as ill-founded on the grounds that there was sufficient evidence supporting the conclusion that there was a reasonable suspicion that he had committed the offences for which he had been charged.
On 4 October 2011 the Zagreb County Court commissioned an expert report concerning the possibility of the applicant following the trial.
In a report of 14 December 2011 a court expert found that with the appropriate accommodation arrangements and medical supervision, the applicant could follow the trial.
In the further course of the proceedings a number of hearings were held before the Zagreb County Court. A hearing held on 29 March 2012 was adjourned to 2 April 2012 due to deterioration in the applicant’s health during the questioning of a witness. A hearing held on 15 June 2012 was also adjourned due to the applicant’s state of health.
The criminal proceedings against the applicant are still pending.
The applicant was arrested on 10 December 2010 in connection with the criminal complaint lodged against him by the police (see paragraph 6 above).
On the same day, having questioned the applicant (see paragraph 7 above), the investigating judge of the Zagreb County Court ordered his remand in custody for a further forty-eight hours on the grounds that he might try to influence the witnesses and on account of the gravity of the charges. The investigating judge noted in particular that some forty-three witnesses needed to be questioned and that the allegations of war crimes against the civilian population imputed to the applicant were of a particularly serious nature, involving killings and severe ill-treatment.
On the order of the investigating judge and because of the applicant’s medical condition (see paragraph 7 above), he was placed in a prison hospital. Later during his confinement he was also treated in a special rehabilitation hospital in Krapinske Toplice.
On 12 December 2010 the investigating judge ordered that the applicant be remanded in custody for a further day.
On 13 December 2010 the investigating judge ordered the applicant’s pre-trial detention for one month under Article 102 § 1 (2) and (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (risk of collusion and gravity of charges), reiterating his previous arguments.
The applicant appealed against the decision of the investigating judge before a three-judge panel of the Zagreb County Court, invoking his state of health and arguing that twenty years had passed since the alleged crimes had taken place.
On 17 December 2010 a three-judge panel of the Zagreb County Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal as unfounded. The relevant part of the decision reads:
“It is firstly to be noted that in connection with the offences imputed to the defendant, in particular concerning the acts of the reserve [police] forces under his command, the questioning of a number of victims and witnesses, who have the relevant knowledge about the events from the period at issue, has been requested. Irrespective of the time that has passed since the period at issue, the defendant, who has only recently been informed of the facts of the offences forming the charges against him, if at large is likely to try to contact the [following] witnesses ... [These witnesses] still feel distress and fear and [the defendant could], in order to minimise his criminal responsibility, directly or indirectly influence their statements and thereby hinder the proper course of the investigation. Therefore, in order to avert the collusion, the investigating judge properly ordered the defendant’s pre-trial detention under Article 102 § 1 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Furthermore, in view of the manner in which the war crimes against the civilian population under Article 120 of the Criminal Code were allegedly committed by the defendant, and which are punishable by twenty years’ imprisonment, the investigating judge correctly found that the circumstances of the offences were particularly grave, warranting pre-trial detention under Article 102 § 1 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure. These particularly grave circumstances of the offences concern, in the view of this panel, the manner in which the civilians ... were unlawfully and arbitrarily deprived of their liberty, how their property was confiscated without any legal basis, how they were physically and mentally ill-treated (often by the use of electric shocks) and eventually killed; and the fact that some of these unlawful acts were committed on the basis of the defendant’s orders, while the others he did not prevent although he was aware of them ...”
On 5 January 2011 the investigating judge extended the applicant’s detention for a further two months under Article 102 § 1 (2) and (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (risk of collusion and gravity of charges). He found that some more witnesses needed to be questioned and reiterated his previous findings concerning the gravity of the charges against the applicant.
The applicant appealed against that decision and on 14 January 2011 a three-judge panel of the Zagreb County Court dismissed his appeal as ill-founded, reiterating its previous arguments.
The investigating judge extended the applicant’s detention on 9 March 2011 for a further two months, relying on Article 102 § 1 (2) and (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (risk of collusion and gravity of charges). He found that eight witnesses still needed to be questioned and that the arguments concerning the gravity of the charges were still valid.
The applicant appealed against that decision, reiterating his previous arguments, and on 18 March 2011 a three-judge panel of the Zagreb County Court dismissed his appeal as ill-founded, relying on the same grounds as those in its previous decisions.
On 9 May 2011 the investigating judge extended the applicant’s detention for a further month under Article 102 § 1 (2) and (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (risk of collusion and gravity of charges), reiterating his previous arguments concerning the gravity of the charges and finding that five more witnesses needed to be questioned.
The applicant appealed against that decision and on 27 May 2011 a three-judge panel of the Zagreb County Court dismissed his appeal as ill-founded, noting in particular that, in view of the gravity of the charges imputed to the applicant and given that he had been detained for some six months, there was still a predominant interest in keeping him in detention. It also considered that he should be remanded in custody until all the witnesses had been questioned.
Following the submission of the indictment against the applicant to the Zagreb County Court (see paragraph 12 above), on 10 June 2011 a three-judge panel of that court extended the applicant’s detention pending trial under Article 102 § 1 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (gravity of charges). The relevant part of the decision reads:
“When assessing whether further extension of the detention is needed under Article 102 § 1 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the panel looked into the facts of the indictment and found that there was a reasonable suspicion that the accused Tomislav Merčep, in the period between 8 October 1991 and mid-December 1991, as an official and the commander of the reserve unit of the Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Croatia, authorised to command his subordinates, ordered the unlawful deprivation of liberty, torture and killing of certain civilians. When he was not present in the field, although aware that his subordinates were acting unlawfully by arbitrarily depriving civilians of their liberty, robbing, ill-treatment, torture, causing physical harm and killing civilians, he did not take the necessary measures to prevent and suppress such unlawful actions, therefore accepting that his subordinates continue with such acts and condoning their consequences.
...
Furthermore, the perpetrators – members of the accused’s unit – took money and valuables from their victims (cars, jewellery, household appliances etc.) and subsequently exposed them to brutal torture, such as electric shocks through an induction telephone, cutting open muscles and wiring open wounds, severe beatings, physical ill-treatment, degrading treatment and locking them in rooms without beds or toilets. In addition, the charges against the accused also concern an incident in which members of the unit under his command killed a twelve year-old girl A.Z. by firing six bullets into her head, together with her mother M., both of whom had been taken away after her father, M.Z., had been killed in their doorway in Z.
Consequently, and bearing in mind the extent of the unlawful actions which there is a reasonable suspicion that the accused committed and in particular the number of victims, which was, according to the facts of the indictment, more than twenty, all of them civilians, who were brutally tortured, robbed and killed or who have disappeared, the panel finds that the perpetrator acted with extreme cruelty, brutality, persistence and an extraordinary degree of criminal intent.
All of the above-mentioned circumstances, in the opinion of this panel, represent particularly grave circumstances that overcome the usually grave circumstances pertinent to such offences. Therefore, the detention is necessary under Article 102 § 1 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure ...”
The applicant appealed against that decision to the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske), challenging the necessity of his detention and alleging a number of substantive and procedural flaws.
On 6 July 2011 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal, upholding the decision of the Zagreb County Court. The Supreme Court in particular noted:
“... the finding of the first-instance court that the grounds for further detention of the accused under Article 102 § 1 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure still exist is correct.
The indictment shows a relevant degree of reasonable suspicion that the accused committed the criminal offence under Article 120 § 1 of the Criminal Code, by which the general statutory condition under Article 102 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure has been fulfilled.
...
According to the indictment ... the behaviour of the accused, in the view of this second-instance court, significantly surpasses the ordinary circumstances and consequences of such offences, and represents particularly grave circumstances of the offence allegedly committed by the accused which warrant detention under Article 102 § 1(4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
In his appeal, the accused alleged that there had been a serious breach of criminal procedure, without specifying his argument. In this regard, the second-instance court was unable to find breaches that should have been examined ex officio.
The appeal argument of errors of facts is also unfounded, since the first-instance court fully determined the facts and gave detailed, valid and clear reasons for its findings, which this second-instance court fully accepts.
The accused also relied on the case-law of the Constitutional Court in its decision U-III-1683/2008 of 7 May 2008 and Article 5 § 1 [of the Convention], arguing that deprivation of liberty before a final judgment is a particularly sensitive issue, and that such detention should not turn into a prison sentence. Thus, [according to the accused] it can be ordered only when there is a high probability that guilt will be established and a sentence imposed, in cases where there is a reasonable suspicion that the accused has committed a criminal offence and only for the purposes of the proper conduct of the proceedings, conditions which had not been met in the case at issue.
Contrary to the appeal arguments, the extension of detention under Article 102 § 1 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure is not contrary to the Constitution or Article 5 of the European Convention on Human Rights. Detention under Article 102 § 1 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure has a preventive purpose, namely the deprivation of liberty of the perpetrators of such serious crimes that, if they would be at large, the reputation of the judiciary and the public’s faith in it would be diminished; its purpose is not to avert the risk of the proceedings being hindered.
...
The poor state of health of the accused does not call into question the reasonableness of his detention, since adequate medical care, bearing in mind that he suffers from a chronic disease, can be offered to him in detention, that is to say in the prison hospital.”
The applicant challenged the decision of the Supreme Court before the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske), arguing that the Supreme Court had failed to provide relevant and sufficient reasons for his prolonged pre-trial detention.
On 30 August 2011 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s constitutional complaint as ill-founded, endorsing the decisions of the Zagreb County Court and the Supreme Court. The relevant part of the decision reads:
“In view of the competence of the Supreme Court as the highest court ensuring the coherent application of the law and the equality of everyone in its application (Article 116 § 1 of the Constitution), the likelihood of a prison sentence within the given term and the particularly grave circumstances of the offence, the Constitutional Court finds that the Supreme Court and the Zagreb County Court satisfied the relevant opinions and requirements when extending the pre-trial detention under Article 102 § 1 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure ...”
On 6 September 2011 a three-judge panel of the Zagreb County Court extended the applicant’s detention under Article 102 § 1 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (gravity of charges), reiterating its previous arguments.
The applicant appealed against that decision to the Supreme Court and on 28 September 2011 the Supreme Court dismissed his appeal as ill-founded on the grounds that, in the particular circumstances of the case, his detention was still justified.
On 28 November 2011 a three-judge panel of the Zagreb County Court extended the applicant’s detention under Article 102 § 1 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (gravity of charges) on the grounds that the reasons warranting his detention still persisted.
The applicant appealed against that decision and on 14 December 2011 the Supreme Court dismissed his appeal as ill-founded, endorsing the reasoning of the Zagreb County Court.
The applicant’s detention was further extended on 14 February 2012 by a decision of a three-judge panel of the Zagreb County Court, relying on Article 102 § 1 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (gravity of charges) and reiterating its previous arguments.
The applicant challenged that decision before the Supreme Court and on 29 February 2012 the Supreme Court dismissed his appeal as ill-founded on the grounds that no doubts had been raised as to the findings of the Zagreb County Court.
The applicant then lodged a constitutional complaint before the Constitutional Court, arguing that his detention was no longer justified and proportionate.
On 18 April 2012 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s constitutional complaint, endorsing the extension of his pre-trial detention. However, the Constitutional Court indicated that the lower courts were obliged to thoroughly assess all the relevant circumstances of the case, and in particular the applicant’s state of health, when deciding whether his pre-trial detention should be extended.
On 27 April 2012 a three-judge panel of the Zagreb County Court extended the applicant’s detention under Article 102 § 1 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (gravity of charges), finding that the circumstances warranting his detention still persisted. With regard to the applicant’s state of health, it indicated that so far, nothing suggested that he could not receive appropriate medical treatment in detention.
The applicant appealed to the Supreme Court alleging lack of appropriate reasoning in the decision of the Zagreb County Court to extend his pre-trial detention.
On 21 May 2012 the Supreme Court accepted the applicant’s appeal and remitted the case to the Zagreb County Court on the grounds that it had not established all the relevant facts concerning the health care provided to the applicant in detention.
In compliance with the order of the Supreme Court, a three-judge panel of the Zagreb County Court re-examined the case. On 29 May 2012 it extended the applicant’s detention under Article 102 § 1 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (gravity of charges). With regard to the applicant’s state of health, it noted that he was receiving appropriate medical treatment in detention.
The applicant challenged that decision before the Supreme Court. On 29 June 2012 the Supreme Court accepted his appeal and remitted the case for re-examination on the grounds that the decision of the Zagreb County Court lacked relevant reasoning.
On 5 July 2012 a three-judge panel of the Zagreb County Court revoked the decision on the applicant’s detention and ordered his immediate release on the grounds that, although the circumstances of the case warranted his detention, the quality of the medical treatment which he was receiving in detention was not adequate. Since that could raise an issue under Article 3 of the Convention, the Zagreb County Court considered that he should be released pending trial. It stressed in particular:
“Thus, in the concrete case priority should be given to the values protected by Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights because the public interest is reflected not only in the grounds for detention under Article 102 § 1 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure but also in the protection and application of the values provided for under the cited provision of the European Convention on Human Rights. In this respect, the time that has elapsed since according to the indictment the offence was committed should be noted, and in particular the period which the accused has spent in detention, as well as the likely duration of the criminal proceedings.”
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 56/1990, 135/1997, 8/1998, 113/2000, 124/2000, 28/2001, 41/2001, 55/2001, 76/2010, 85/2010 and 5/2014) read as follows:
“Personal freedom and integrity are inviolable.
No one shall be deprived of his liberty save in accordance with the law, and any deprivation of liberty must be examined by a court.”
The relevant provision of the Criminal Code (Osnovni krivični zakon Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 53/1991, 39/1992, 91/1992 and 31/1993) provides:
“(1) Whoever, in breach of the rules of international law during war, armed conflict or occupation, orders ... the killing, torture or inhuman treatment of civilians; ... the infliction of grave suffering on or injuries to the bodily integrity or health of civilians; ... measures of fear and terror against civilians or the taking of hostages, ... illegal arrests ... shall be sentenced to not less than five years’ imprisonment or ... twenty years’ imprisonment.”
The Code of Criminal Procedure (Zakon o kaznenom postupku, Official Gazette nos. 110/1997, 27/1998, 58/1999, 112/1999, 58/2002, 143/2002, 62/2003, 178/2004 and 115/2006) in its relevant part reads as follows:
“(1)  Detention may be imposed only if the same purpose cannot be achieved by another [preventive] measure.
(2)  Detention shall be lifted and the detainee released as soon as the grounds for detention cease to exist.
(3)  When deciding on detention, in particular its duration, a court shall take into consideration the proportionality between the seriousness of the offence, the sentence which ... may be expected to be imposed, and the need to order and determine the duration of detention.
(4)  Judicial authorities conducting criminal proceedings shall proceed with particular urgency when the defendant is in detention, and shall review of their own motion whether the grounds and legal conditions for detention have ceased to exist, in which case detention shall immediately be lifted.”
“(1) Where a reasonable suspicion exists that a person has committed an offence, that person may be placed in detention:
...
if there is a risk that he or she might destroy, hide, alter or forge evidence or traces relevant for the criminal proceedings or might suborn witnesses, or where there is a risk of collusion;
...
if the charges involved relate to murder, robbery, rape, terrorism, kidnapping, abuse of narcotic drugs, extortion or any other offence carrying a sentence of at least twelve years’ imprisonment, when detention is justified by the modus operandi or other particularly grave circumstances of the offence;
...”
“(1)  A defendant, defence counsel or the State Attorney may lodge an appeal against a decision ordering, extending or lifting a custodial measure, within two days thereof.”
In its decision no. U-III-3698/2003 of 28 September 2004, the Constitutional Court examined the conditions under which pre-trial detention could be ordered and extended under Article 102 § 1 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (gravity of charges). The relevant part of the decision reads:
“Before every extension of pre-trial detention, [the competent court] must examine all the circumstances of the case so as to establish whether the grounds for detention still persist. The decision on detention must be reasoned and based on rational grounds justifying such a measure – with the aim of establishing that the detention is a necessary legal measure securing the presence of the defendant (the accused) during the proceedings or that it is necessary and justified because it is obvious in the circumstances that the protection of an important public interest is so relevant that it outweighs, irrespective of the presumption of innocence, the constitutional principle of freedom.”
On 28 July 2010 the Constitutional Court, in case no. U-III-3804/2010, dismissed a constitutional complaint lodged by an appellant who had been detained pending trial under Article 102 § 1 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (gravity of charges) on charges of war crimes against the civilian population. The relevant part of the decision reads:
“[T]he offence under Article 120 § 1 of the Criminal Code is one of the gravest criminal offences. In the circumstances of the present case, given the manner in which the offence was committed, the severity of the likely sentence and the particularly grave consequences of the crime, the proceedings would in principle be complex and lengthy. The Constitutional Court therefore finds that the impugned decision of the Supreme Court is in compliance [with the Constitution and the relevant law].”
In its decision no. Kž 174/11-4 of 8 April 2011, the Supreme Court explained the underlying purpose of pre-trial detention under Article 102 § 1 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (gravity of charges) in the following manner:
 “The purpose of pre-trial detention under Article 102 § 4 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure is not to prevent the defendant from hindering the proceedings, as is the case under Article 102 § 1 (1), (2) and (3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The distinct purpose of pre-trial detention under this provision is to prevent persons whose actions provoke particular moral condemnation from remaining at large, which could be condemned by the public. Thus it would diminish the reputation of the criminal justice system and the public’s faith in it. ...”
In an article entitled “Duration of Detention in the Light of International Standards and Domestic Law and Practice” (“Trajanje pritvora u svjetlu međunarodnih standarda te domaćeg prava i prakse”) Dr Z. Đurđević and D. Tripalo explained that it was the settled practice of the domestic courts to order pre-trial detention under Article 102 § 1 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (gravity of charges) only in the context of specific criminal offences which were of a particularly serious nature, in terms of the manner in which they had been perpetrated or their specific consequences. They also noted that, although it was not expressly stated in the relevant domestic law, a historical and comparative interpretation of the relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure led to the conclusion that the underlying reason for ordering pre-trial detention on the grounds of gravity of the charges was to protect public safety and legal order in cases of the most serious crimes; or, more precisely, to protect the public from great disturbance and to ensure public confidence in the functioning of the judiciary (Z. Đurđević and D. Tripalo, “Trajanje pritvora u svjetlu međunarodnih standarda te domaćeg prava i prakse”, 13(2) Hrvatski ljetopis za kazneno pravo i praksu (2006), pp. 573-576).
The relevant part of Committee of Ministers Recommendation Rec(2006)13 to member states of 27 September 2006 on the use of remand in custody, the conditions in which it takes place and the provision of safeguards against abuse provides:
“II. The use of remand in custody
Justification
Remand in custody shall generally be available only in respect of persons suspected of committing offences that are imprisonable.
A person may only be remanded in custody where all of the following four conditions are satisfied:
there is reasonable suspicion that he or she committed an offence; and
there are substantial reasons for believing that, if released, he or she would either (i) abscond, or (ii) commit a serious offence, or (iii) interfere with the course of justice, or (iv) pose a serious threat to public order; and
there is no possibility of using alternative measures to address the concerns referred to in b.; and
this is a step taken as part of the criminal justice process.
[1] In order to establish whether the concerns referred to in Rule 7b. exist, or continue to do so, as well as whether they could be satisfactorily allayed through the use of alternative measures, objective criteria shall be applied by the judicial authorities responsible for determining whether suspected offenders shall be remanded in custody or, where this has already happened, whether such remand shall be extended.
[2] The burden of establishing that a substantial risk exists and that it cannot be allayed shall lie on the prosecution or investigating judge.
[1] The determination of any risk shall be based on the individual circumstances of the case, but particular consideration shall be given to:
the nature and seriousness of the alleged offence;
the penalty likely to be incurred in the event of conviction;
the age, health, character, antecedents and personal and social circumstances of the person concerned, and in particular his or her community ties; and
the conduct of the person concerned, especially how he or she has fulfilled any obligations that may have been imposed on him or her in the course of previous criminal proceedings.”
In the Order denying a motion for provisional release, in the case of The Prosecutor v. Tihomir Blaškić, no. IT-95-14, on 20 December 1996 a Trial Chamber of the ICTY held as follows:
“CONSIDERING that both the letter of this text and the spirit of the Statute of the International Tribunal require that the legal principle is detention of the accused and that release is the exception; that, in fact, the gravity of the crimes being prosecuted by the International Tribunal leaves no place for another interpretation even if it is based on the general principles of law governing the applicable provisions in respect of national laws which in principle may not be transposed to international criminal law; ...”
In the case of The Prosecutor v. Rahim Ademi, no. IT-01-46-PT, the relevant part of the Trial Chamber’s order on a motion for provisional release of 20 February 2002 reads:
“12. In addition to those that are still included, Rule 65(B) originally included a requirement that provisional release could be ordered by a Trial Chamber “only in exceptional circumstances.” Under this rule it seemed that detention was considered to be the rule and not the exception. However, some decisions issued by Trial Chambers concluded that the fact that the burden was on the accused and that he or she had to show that exceptional circumstances existed before release could be granted, was justified given the gravity of the crimes charged and the unique circumstances in which the Tribunal operated.
The requirement to show “exceptional circumstances” meant that in reality Trial Chambers granted provisional release in very rare cases. These were limited to those where for example, very precise and specific reasons presented themselves which leant strongly in favour of release. Thus, for example, Trial Chambers, before the amendment was adopted, accepted that a life-threatening illness or serious illness of the accused or immediate family members constituted exceptional circumstances justifying release, while illnesses of a less severe nature did not. As stated, the burden remained on an accused at all times to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Trial Chamber that such circumstances existed. Should the Trial Chamber conclude that they did not, release would not be ordered.
After amendment of the rule, an accused no longer needed to demonstrate that such “exceptional circumstances” existed. Trial Chambers seem to have taken two approaches to the new provision. Most Trial Chambers have continued to find that the amendment did not change the other requirements in the Rule and that provisional release was not now the norm. They considered that the particular circumstances of each case should be assessed in light of Rule 65(B) as it now stood. The burden still remained on the accused to satisfy the Trial Chamber that the requirements of Rule 65(B) had been met. This was justified by some given the specific functioning of the Tribunal and absence of power to execute arrest warrants. The second approach seems to have been the following. It has been concluded that based on international human rights standards, “de jure pre-trial detention should be the exception and not the rule as regards prosecution before an international court.” The Trial Chamber in question referred to the fact that, at the Tribunal, in view of its lack of enforcement powers, “pre-trial detention de facto seems to be...the rule.” In addition, it stated that one must take account of the reference to serious crimes. Nevertheless, it found that, “any system of mandatory detention on remand is per se incompatible with Article 5(3) of the Convention (see Ilijkov v. Bulgaria, ECourtHR, Decision of 26 July 2001, para. 84). Considering this, the Trial Chamber must interpret Rule 65 with regard to the factual basis of the single case and with respect to the concrete situation of the individual human being and not in abstracto.”
In its decision on a defence motion for release in the case of The Prosecutor v. Théoneste Bagosora et al., no. ICTR-98-41-T, on 12 July 2002 a Trial Chamber of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda noted the following:
“27. The Chamber notes that in certain circumstances, six years of pre-trial detention may be a factor in the consideration of exceptional circumstances warranting the release of an accused. However, the length of current or potential future detention of the Accused cannot be considered material in these circumstances because it does not mitigate in any way that the Accused, who is charged with the grave offences coming under the subject matter jurisdiction of this Tribunal, which offences carry maximum term of imprisonment of his life, may be a flight risk or may pose a threat to witnesses or to the community if he were to be released. Detention under Rule 65 is intended to ensure the safety of the community and the integrity to the trial process. The Chamber observes that the Accused even while in custody found the opportunity to intentionally absent himself from the trial proceedings of 2 April 2002.”
The relevant part of the Decision of a Pre-Trial Chamber on the application for the interim release of Thomas Lubanga Dyilo of 18 October 2006, in the case of The Prosecutor v. Thomas Lubanga Dyilo, no. ICC‐01/04‐01/06, reads:
“CONSIDERING that since pre‐trial detention cannot be extended to an unreasonable degree; that reasonableness cannot be assessed in abstracto but depends on the particular features of each case; and that to assess the reasonableness of the detention, it is particularly important to assess the complexity of the case; ...”