The case originated in an application (no. 16332/18) against Bosnia and Herzegovina lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by fourteen citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina (“the applicants”), Ms Fata Orlović, Mr Šaban Orlović, Ms Fatima Ahmetović, Mr Hasan Orlović, Ms Zlatka Bašić, Ms Senija Orlović, Mr Ejub Orlović, Mr Abdurahman Orlović, Ms Muška Mehmedović, Ms Mirsada Ehlić, Ms Melka Mehmedović, Ms Rahima Dahalić, Ms Fatima Orlović and Ms Murtija Hodžić, on 30 March 2018.
The applicants were represented by Mr F. Karkin, a lawyer practising in Sarajevo. The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms B. Skalonjić.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that they were prevented from effectively enjoying their possession because an unlawfully built church has not been removed from their land. The applicants also alleged that the domestic courts’ decisions concerning their civil claim had been contrary to Article 6 of the Convention.
On 24 May 2018 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicants were born in 1942, 1966, 1969, 1972, 1976, 1974, 1980, 1968, 1970, 1973, 1975, 1978, 1980 and 1982, respectively. The first applicant lives in Konjević Polje, Bosnia and Herzegovina. According to the information provided by the remaining applicants, they live in Srebrenik, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The applicants are heirs to the first applicant’s husband, Š.O., and his brother M.O. The first applicant’s husband and more than twenty other relatives were killed in the Srebrenica genocide in 1995.
The applicants Mr Šaban Orlović, Ms Fatima Ahmetović, Mr Hasan Orlović, Ms Zlatka Bašić, Ms Senija Orlović and Mr Ejub Orlović are the first applicant’s and her late husband’s children. Mr Abdurahman Orlović, Ms Muška Mehmedović, Ms Mirsada Ehlić, Ms Melka Mehmedović, Ms Rahima Dahalić, Ms Fatima Orlović and Ms Murtija Hodžić are M.O.’s children.
The applicants lived in Konjević Polje, Bratunac Municipality in what is now the Republika Srpska (one of the two constituent entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina), on a property belonging to Š.O. and M.O. The property consisted of several individual and agricultural buildings, fields and meadows.
During the 1992-95 war the applicants were forced to flee their home and became internally displaced persons.
On 11 September 1997, following a request submitted by the Drinjača Serbian Orthodox Parish (“the Parish”), Bratunac Municipality expropriated a part of the applicants’ land – a field with a total area of 11,765 sq. m, designated as cadastral parcel no. 996/1 – and allocated it to the Parish for the purpose of building a church. The decision referred to the land in question as undeveloped construction land and stipulated that compensation to the previous owners would be determined in separate proceedings. The applicants were never informed of the expropriation proceedings.
In 1998 a church was built on plot no. 996/1, 20.5 m away from the existing house in which the first applicant had lived with her family before the war. The church was built without any relevant technical documentation.
On 21 October 2003 the Parish submitted a request to the Spatial Planning and Housing Unit of Bratunac Municipality (“the SPHU”), asking for planning permission for the church.
On 14 April 2004, in the supervision proceedings of the work of the SPHU, the Construction Inspectorate of the Ministry of Spatial Planning, Construction and Ecology of the Republika Srpska (“the Inspectorate”) issued a decision by which it ordered the Construction Inspectorate of Bratunac Municipality (“the Municipal Inspectorate”) to ban the use of the church in Konjević Polje within three days of the delivery of that decision, in accordance with section 138 of the Spatial Development Act 2002 (see paragraph 43 below). The Inspectorate considered that the Municipal Inspectorate had not acted in accordance with the relevant law because it had failed to stop the construction work and later prevent the use of the church, although it had been built without planning permission and other technical documentation. Moreover, the Parish had never obtained a use permit.
On 27 August 2004 the Municipal Inspectorate informed the Ministry of Spatial Planning, Construction and Ecology that the deputy mayor of Bratunac had “expressly demanded” that the use of the church for that function not be stopped. It was further stated that in the deputy mayor’s opinion the issue should be resolved at a higher political level, for which purpose a meeting had been organised between the municipal representatives, the Ministry of Spatial Planning, Construction and Ecology and the bishop of the Zvornik-Tuzla Eparchy. After the meeting, the Serbian Orthodox Church had initiated the proceedings for the legalisation of the church. The Municipal Inspectorate concluded by stating that in view of those developments it had desisted from acting in accordance with section 138 of the Spatial Development Act 2002.
In December 2004 the Parish obtained planning permission for the church (see paragraph 12 above).
On 28 October 1999, following a request submitted by the second applicant, Mr Šaban Orlović, the Commission for Real Property Claims of Displaced Persons and Refugees (“the CRPC”), set up by Annex 7 to the Dayton Peace Agreement (see paragraph 44 below), established that the first applicant’s late husband, Š.O., had been the owner of the land in Konjević Polje and annulled any involuntary transfer or restriction of ownership after 1 April 1992. The decision further established that Š.O.’s heirs were entitled to repossess the land in question sixty days after submitting a request for the enforcement of that decision.
On 14 November 2001, following a request submitted by the first applicant, Ms Fata Orlović, the Ministry for Refugees and Displaced Persons of the Republika Srpska, Bratunac Unit (“the Ministry for Refugees”), also established that Š.O. was the owner of the land in question, and in particular, the co-owner of plot no. 996/1 together with his brother M.O. Immediate repossession of the land was ordered.
On 17 April 2002 the first applicant submitted a request for the enforcement of the CRPC decision of 28 October 1999 to the Ministry for Refugees (see paragraph 16 above).
On an unspecified date after that the applicants regained possession of their land, except for plot no. 996/1, on which the church remained (see paragraph 11 above). The first applicant returned to the house in which she had lived with her family before the war.
On 3 April 2003 the first applicant submitted a request to the Ministry for Refugees asking for the full enforcement of its decision of 14 November 2001 (see paragraph 17 above). She also asked it to order the Parish to remove the church from her property in order to enable full repossession and to return the land in its original condition.
On 20 April 2004 the applicants wrote to the Parish asking for an amicable solution of the dispute. The applicants proposed relocation of the church as the best solution, as they argued that it had been illegally built on their land. In that regard they referred to the Inspectorate’s decision of 14 April 2004 (see paragraph 13 above).
On 20 January 2005 the mayor of Bratunac offered the applicants compensation, in an unspecified amount, or allocation of another property in lieu of the restitution of plot no. 966/1. The applicants refused and maintained their request for the full restitution of their property.
On 19 September 2005 the applicants wrote to the Ministry for Refugees, the Parish, the Ministry of Spatial Planning, Construction and Ecology and the mayor of Bratunac urging them to enable the full enforcement of the CRPC decision.
On 29 October 2002 the first applicant brought a civil action in the Srebrenica Court of First Instance (“the Court of First Instance”) against the Serbian Orthodox Church in Bosnia and Herzegovina seeking to recover possession of plot no. 996/1. She asked for the church to be removed from her land and for restitution of the land in its original condition.
On 4 March 2003 the Court of First Instance decided that it lacked subject-matter jurisdiction to decide the case and rejected the first applicant’s civil action.
On 25 August 2006, following an appeal by the first applicant, the Bijeljina District Court (“the District Court”) quashed the judgment of 4 March 2002 and remitted the case for re-examination.
In the course of the re-examination proceedings before the Court of First Instance, the other thirteen applicants joined the first applicant’s civil action. At the court’s request the applicants specified the respondents as follows: the Zvornik-Tuzla Eparchy of the Serbian Orthodox Church, the Bratunac Parish and the Konjević Polje Parish. The applicants specified that they sought a court order to remove the church built on the land in question and to cede possession of the land to the applicants within thirty days of the date of the judgment, in default of which the applicants would be authorised to remove the church themselves at the respondents’ expense.
The preparatory hearings before the Court of First Instance were adjourned several times at the request of the parties. In particular, a hearing scheduled for 27 December 2007 was adjourned at the request of the applicants’ representative who informed the court that he had talked to the Prime Minister of the Republika Srpska and that there was a possibility that the case could be settled in the course of 2008.
At a hearing of 20 April 2010 the applicants changed their claim in that they asked the court to recognise the validity of an out-of-court settlement concluded on 11 January 2008 between their representative and the respondents, who were represented by the Prime Minister of the Republika Srpska, his adviser, M.D., and the bishop of the Zvornik-Tuzla Eparchy, which was worded as follows:
“The respondents must remove the church built on plot no. 996 ... within fifteen days of the date on which they will have provided other land for the purpose of building a church in Konjević Polje, in default of which [the settlement will be] compulsorily enforced.”
On 21 May 2010 the Court of First Instance dismissed the applicants’ claim. That judgment was upheld by the District Court on 17 September 2010 (copies of those decisions are not in the case file).
On 1 February 2012, following an appeal on points of law lodged by the applicants, the Supreme Court of the Republika Srpska (“the Supreme Court”) quashed the District Court’s judgment of 17 September 2010 and remitted the case for re-examination (a copy of the Supreme Court’s decision is not in the case file).
Following remittal, on 24 September 2012 the District Court quashed the Court of First Instance’s judgment of 21 May 2010 and remitted the case to that court for re-examination (a copy of that decision is not in the case file). The District Court instructed the Court of First Instance to examine the facts concerning the existence of the out-of-court settlement, its content and the existence of the proper authorisation to conclude the settlement.
On 3 June 2013 the Court of First Instance rejected the applicants’ claim. On the one hand, the court held that the applicants had failed to demonstrate that the Prime Minister and his adviser had been authorised to conclude the settlement on behalf of the respondents. They had not been authorised to do so by the law either because of the principle of the separation of church and state. On the other hand, while the bishop of the Zvornik-Tuzla Eparchy could be considered as the respondents’ legal representative, it had not been proved that the settlement had indeed been concluded with him. In his witness statement M.D. had confirmed that he had contacted the bishop by phone to discuss the possibility of an amicable solution, but that no agreement had been reached. The applicants were ordered to pay 11,243.70 convertible marks (BAM – approximately 5,760 euros) in legal costs.
On 23 October 2013, following an appeal by the applicants, the District Court overturned the Court of First Instance’s judgment in the part concerning legal costs, decreasing the award to BAM 1,029.60, and upheld the remainder of the judgment.
On 6 August 2014 the Supreme Court rejected the applicants’ appeal on points of law. The court noted in particular that negotiations which had taken place in 2008 between the applicants’ representative and the Republika Srpska’s Prime Minister and his adviser had concerned the government’s financial aid to the Zvornik-Tuzla Eparchy with the purpose of relocation of the church from the applicants’ land. The lower courts had correctly concluded from the facts that no agreement had been concluded between the parties to the proceedings, namely the applicants and the Serbian Orthodox Church.
On 17 October 2014 the applicants lodged a constitutional appeal, relying on Article 6 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1. They reiterated, in particular, that their right to the peaceful enjoyment of possessions had been violated because the church had been illegally built on their land. They also argued that the bishop during the telephone conversation with M.D. had given his consent to the out-of-court agreement.
On 28 September 2017 the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina (“the Constitutional Court”) dismissed the appeal as ill-founded, by five votes to four. Under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, it held that the lower courts had given clear and convincing reasons for their rulings, and that these reasons were not arbitrary. In examining the applicants’ complaint under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1, the court essentially referred to its conclusion under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. That decision was delivered to the applicants on 2 November 2017.
On 10 September 2008 the first applicant was physically attacked by one of the police officers who were supervising the cleaning up of the area around the church in preparation for a service which was to be held the following day.
On the same day the Office of the High Representative issued the following statement:
“Agreement On Konjević Polje Church Must Be Implemented
The OHR condemns the incident that took place on Fata Orlović’s property in Konjević Polje this morning.
Last year the Government of Republika Srpska decided to provide funding for the relocation of the illegally constructed church from the private property of Fata Orlović in Konjević-Polje.
OHR welcomed the agreement as a sign that Fata Orlović’s right to private property would be respected.
On 30 August of last year, the Bratunac Security Forum, chaired by Bratunac Mayor Nedeljko Mlađenović, and attended by all the relevant actors, announced that the annual church feast of 11 September would be held for the last time in the existing church in Konjević Polje on 11 September 2007.
OHR maintains that last year’s agreement must be respected.
The Office of the High Representative calls for all those involved to stick to previously agreed positions, to show restraint and to refrain from any action that might enflame the situation.”
On 12 September 2010 the first applicant was again attacked on her property by a police officer.
The Restitution of Property Act 1998 (Zakon o prestanku primjene Zakona o korištenju napuštene imovine, Official Gazette of the Republika Srpska “OG RS”, no. 16/10), which regulates the restitution of privately-owned real property abandoned after 30 April 1991, replaced the Abandoned Property Act 1996 (Zakon o korištenju napuštene imovine, OG RS, nos. 3/96 and 21/96) and annulled all the acts regulating the status of abandoned property issued in the period between 30 April 1991 and 19 December 1998.
In accordance with section 5 of this Act, an owner has the right to repossession of property and to recognition of all the rights he or she had over that property until 30 April 1991 or until the date of the loss of possession. The right to claim repossession is not subject to the statute of limitations (section 9). A request can be submitted at any time to the competent unit of the Ministry for Refugees in the municipality in which the property in question is located and/or to the CRPC (sections 10(1) and 16(1)). The decisions of the CRPC are final and immediately enforceable by the relevant authorities of the Republika Srpska (section 16(3) and (5)). Property which has been vacated (by a temporary occupant) can be repossessed immediately (section 14(5)).
Under section 138 of the Spatial Development Act 2002 (Zakon o uređenju prostora, OG RS, no. 84/02), which was in force at the material time, a building inspector was authorised, inter alia, to ban the use of an object or a part thereof, in the absence of a valid authorisation to use it.
The Dayton Peace Agreement was initialled at a military base near Dayton, the United States, on 21 November 1995. It entered into force on 14 December 1995 when it was signed in Paris, France. It put an end to the 1992-95 war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The relevant part of Annex 4 (the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina) reads as follows:
“All refugees and displaced persons have the right freely to return to their homes of origin. They have the right, in accordance with Annex 7 to the General Framework Agreement, to have restored to them property of which they were deprived in the course of hostilities since 1991 and to be compensated for any such property that cannot be restored to them. Any commitments or statements relating to such property made under duress are null and void.”
The relevant part of Annex 7 (the Agreement on Refugees and Displaced Persons) provides:
“All refugees and displaced persons have the right freely to return to their homes of origin. They shall have the right to have restored to them property of which they were deprived in the course of hostilities since 1991 and to be compensated for any property that cannot be restored to them. The early return of refugees and displaced persons is an important objective of the settlement of the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Parties confirm that they will accept the return of such persons who have left their territory, including those who have been accorded temporary protection by third countries.
The Parties shall ensure that refugees and displaced persons are permitted to return in safety, without risk of harassment, intimidation, persecution, or discrimination, particularly on account of their ethnic origin, religious belief, or political opinion.
The Parties shall take all necessary steps to prevent activities within their territories which would hinder or impede the safe and voluntary return of refugees and displaced persons. To demonstrate their commitment to securing full respect for the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all persons within their jurisdiction and creating without delay conditions suitable for return of refugees and displaced persons, the Parties shall take immediately the following confidence building measures:
the repeal of domestic legislation and administrative practices with discriminatory intent or effect;
the prevention and prompt suppression of any written or verbal incitement, through media or otherwise, of ethnic or religious hostility or hatred; ...”
“The Parties hereby establish an independent Commission for Displaced Persons and Refugees (‘the Commission’) ...”
“The Parties shall cooperate with the work of the Commission, and shall respect and implement its decisions expeditiously and in good faith, in cooperation with relevant international and nongovernmental organizations having responsibility for the return and reintegration of refugees and displaced persons.”