The case originated in an application (no. 3967/09) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Azerbaijani national, Mr Ali Amirhuseyn oglu Kerimli (Əli Əmirhüseyn oğlu Kərimli – “the applicant”), on 16 January 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr I. Aliyev, a lawyer practising in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Asgarov.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the refusal to renew his international passport had infringed on his right to freedom of movement.
On 16 January 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1965 and lives in Baku.
The applicant is an opposition politician and, since 2001, the chairman of the reformist wing of the Azerbaijan Popular Front Party.
On 10 September 1994 the applicant was arrested during a demonstration organised by the Popular Front Party and taken to the Baku City Chief Police Department where a hand grenade was allegedly found in the pocket of his suit’s jacket. According to the applicant, the suit had been acquired immediately before the demonstration and he had not had time to remove the manufacturer’s stitches sealing the pockets and, therefore, would not have been physically able to put anything inside the pockets.
On the same day, criminal proceedings were instituted against the applicant under Article 220 (illegal possession of weapons) of the 1960 Criminal Code (in force until 1 September 2000, when it was replaced by the new Criminal Code).
Until 13 September 1994, the applicant was detained as a suspect. On 13 September 1994 he was formally charged under Article 220 § 1 of the 1960 Criminal Code by the investigator of the Baku City Chief Police Department. On the same day, the investigator ordered his detention on remand pending trial.
By a decision of the investigator of 23 September 1994 the applicant was released from detention.
By a decision of the investigator of the Nasimi District Prosecutor’s Office of 11 December 1995, the investigation in the framework of the criminal proceedings against the applicant was suspended on the ground that “the perpetrator of the criminal offence [had] not been identified”. The applicant was not informed about the decision to suspend the investigation at that time.
In the 1995 and 2000 parliamentary elections, the applicant was elected and re-elected to the National Assembly for two consecutive terms and served as a parliament member until 2005. In the elections of 6 November 2005, according to the official election results published by the Central Electoral Commission, he was again re-elected to the National Assembly, however on 1 December 2005 the Constitutional Court annulled the election results in the applicant’s constituency in an arbitrary manner, depriving the applicant of his parliamentary seat (see, for more details, Kerimli and Alibeyli v. Azerbaijan, nos. 18475/06 and 22444/06, 10 January 2012).
The applicant held a diplomatic passport issued in 1998, which expired in 2003. On 15 July 2003 he was issued a new diplomatic passport valid until 31 December 2005.
In addition, the applicant held a regular passport issued in 2001, which expired on an unspecified date in June 2006 (according to the applicant) or on 24 July 2006 (according to the Government).
In June 2006 the applicant applied to the Passport Registration Department of the Ministry of Internal Affairs (“the PRD”) for a new regular passport. However, according to the applicant, his application was rejected in an informal manner. The applicant was informed that the PRD had no information of the outcome of the criminal proceedings instituted in 1994. He was told that, as the PRD could not issue passports to persons against whom criminal proceedings were pending, the applicant had to provide a statement from the relevant prosecuting authorities confirming that the criminal proceedings had been discontinued.
Following an inquiry with the Baku City Chief Police Department, the applicant discovered that the criminal proceedings instituted in 1994 had been transferred to the Nasimi District Prosecutor’s Office and suspended on 11 December 1995, but had never been discontinued.
Subsequently, the applicant complained about the authorities’ failure to discontinue the proceedings and his resulting inability to receive a passport to the Prosecutor General’s Office, the Baku City Prosecutor’s Office, the Nasimi District Prosecutor’s Office and the Ministry of Internal Affairs, but to no avail.
In September 2006 the applicant lodged a civil action against the PRD and the Nasimi District Prosecutor’s Office, asking the court to order the PRD to issue him a passport and to order the prosecutor’s office to “remove the restriction on his freedom of movement” by discontinuing the criminal proceedings instituted in 1994. He noted that, the limitation period for prosecution in respect of the criminal offence under Article 220 of the 1960 Criminal Code was five years from the date of the alleged criminal offence, while under the 2000 Criminal Code it was seven years in respect of the equivalent criminal offence. He therefore argued that the proceedings should have been discontinued years earlier owing to the expiry of the prescription period.
On 2 November 2006 the Nasimi District Court dismissed the applicant’s claim as unsubstantiated. It noted that the Nasimi District Prosecutor’s Office had responded to the applicant’s requests by advising him to apply to the PRD and that the applicant had been unable to demonstrate that the PRD had breached his rights.
On 14 March 2007 the Court of Appeal upheld the Nasimi District Court’s judgment on the same grounds, and also added that the applicant had failed to appeal against the decision of 11 December 1995 to suspend the investigation under the relevant procedure of judicial supervision.
On 15 February 2008 the Supreme Court quashed the Court of Appeal’s judgment and terminated the civil proceedings. It noted that the complaints raised by the applicant, and more specifically his complaint concerning the prosecution authorities’ failure to discontinue the criminal proceedings, were subject to examination under the criminal procedure and not in the civil proceedings under the rules of civil procedure. The applicant was advised to lodge a complaint against the prosecuting authorities’ actions under the relevant procedure of judicial supervision envisaged by the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCrP”).
In May 2008 the applicant lodged such a complaint under the procedure of judicial supervision provided by Article 449 of the CCrP, asking the court to discontinue the criminal proceedings instituted in 1994 owing to the expiry of the prescription period.
On 26 May 2008 the Nasimi District Court dismissed this complaint, noting that, while the CCrP provided for a right to complain against a prosecuting authority’s decision to discontinue the proceedings, the same Code did not provide for a right to complain against the prosecuting authority’s failure to take a decision to discontinue the proceedings. Therefore, the court could not order the Nasimi District Prosecutor’s Office to discontinue the proceedings. Furthermore, the court noted that it had no competence under the CCrP to discontinue the proceedings itself.
On 22 July 2008 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the decision of the Nasimi District Court. No further appeal lay against the Baku Court of Appeal’s decision.
In accordance with Article 1 of the Passports Act, as in force at the material time, the right of a person charged with a criminal offence to leave the country could be temporarily restricted until the termination of the criminal proceedings or until the time when the sentence had been served.
In accordance with Article 9 of the Passports Act, as in force at the material time, applications for a passport by persons whose right to leave the country was restricted in accordance with Article 1 of the Passports Act should be rejected in writing, together with an explanation of the reasons for the rejection, and their repeat applications could be examined only after the reasons for the rejection ceased to exist.
In accordance with Article 44 of the Code, the criminal prescription period for a criminal offence punishable with imprisonment for a period of no longer than five years expired five years after the day of commission of the criminal offence. The running of the prescription period stopped if the offender absconded and was resumed when he or she was apprehended or appeared voluntarily before the investigating authority or court. In any event, the prescription period expired fifteen years after the date of commission of the alleged criminal offence, unless a new criminal offence was committed by the same person during that period.
Article 220 § 1 of the Code provided that the criminal offence of carrying, possessing, acquiring, manufacturing or selling of weapons, ammunition or explosive substances without a relevant permit was punishable by imprisonment for a period of up to five years.
In accordance with Article 10.4 of the Code, a provision of criminal law which aggravates the position of a person who has committed an offence has no retroactive effect.
In accordance with Article 75.1.2 of the Code, the criminal prescription period for a “less serious criminal offence” is seven years from the day of commission of the criminal offence. In accordance with Article 15 of the Criminal Code, a “less serious criminal offence” is defined as an offence committed deliberately or negligently, which is punishable with imprisonment for a period of more than two years and up to seven years.
Article 228.1 of the Code provides that the criminal offence of unlawfully acquiring, handing over, selling, possessing, transporting or carrying of firearms, their component parts, ammunition or explosive substances or devices, was punishable by correctional labour for a period of up to two years or imprisonment for a period of up to three years.
Article 39 of the CCrP provides as follows:
1.  Criminal prosecution may not be commenced or shall be discontinued (and a criminal case may not be opened or proceedings in the opened criminal case shall be discontinued) in the following circumstances:
...
1.3  if the limitation period for prosecution has expired (excluding cases where the limitation period for prosecution is suspended); ...”
Article 41 of the CCrP provides as follows:
1.  The preliminary investigator, investigator or prosecutor shall take a decision on discontinuation of criminal prosecution (including discontinuation of [pending] criminal proceedings) at any pre-trial stage of the proceedings, if they ascertain any circumstance provided for in Article 39 of this Code.”
Article 53 of the CCrP provides as follows:
1.  Criminal prosecution may be suspended in the following circumstances:
1.1.  if the person to be charged is unknown;
...
7.  Proceedings in cases where the perpetrators are known, which have been suspended, shall be discontinued on the ground of the expiry of the limitation period for criminal prosecution, except in case where the person to be charged is absconding the investigation or trial, or in case of commission of a criminal offence punishable by life imprisonment, or in case of crimes against peace and humanity and war crimes.”
Article 449 of the CCrP provides for a procedure for lodging a judicial complaint against procedural steps or decisions taken by the prosecuting authority. It provides, in the relevant part:
“449.2.  The following persons shall have the right to lodge a complaint against procedural steps or decisions taken by the prosecuting authority:
2.1.  the accused (suspected) person and his defence counsel;
2.2.  the victim and his legal representative;
2.3.  other persons whose rights and freedoms are violated as a result of the procedural decision or act.
3.  The persons referred to in Article 449.2 of this Code shall have the right to lodge a complaint with a court concerning the procedural steps or decisions taken by the prosecuting authority in connection with the following matters:
...
3.5.  the refusal to open a criminal case, or the suspension or discontinuation of criminal proceedings; ...”