The case originated in an application (no. 29226/03) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Mr Sorin Creangă (“the applicant”), on 4 September 2003.
The applicant was represented by Mr Septimiu Sorin Cus, a lawyer practicing in . The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr RăzvanHoraţiu Radu, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been unlawfully placed in detention.
On 19 February 2009 the President of the Third Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided that the Chamber would rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 3 of the Convention).
The applicant was born in 1956 and lives in .
From 1995 the applicant was a junior police officer in Section No. 5 of the Bucharest Police.
On 16 July 2003 the applicant was informed by his hierarchical superior that he was required to go to the National Anti-Corruption Prosecution Service (“the NAP”) for questioning, without being given any further information on the subject of the interview.
At 9 a.m. on the same day the applicant went to the headquarters of the NAP. At 10 a.m. he was questioned by a prosecutor in the presence of an officially-assigned lawyer. The time of the interview was noted on his statement. The applicant was questioned about thefts of fuel by third persons from pipelines belonging to the company P., his relations with the individuals implicated in these thefts and his participation in the investigations concerning those persons.
The applicant was kept at the NAP headquarters until 8 p.m., when he was given permission to contact a lawyer of his own choosing. At that point he was informed that he was suspected of taking bribes, aiding and abetting aggravated theft and criminal conspiracy.
By an order of 16 July 2003, the NAP ordered that the applicant be charged. By an order of the same date, the NAP ordered that he be remanded in custody (detenţie preventivă provizorie) for three days, on the basis of Article 148 § 1 (h) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“CCP”). Referring to the relevant statutory provisions, the prosecutor indicated that the acts imputed to the applicant contained the constitutive elements of the offences of criminal conspiracy, taking bribes and aiding and abetting aggravated theft. The relevant part of the order was worded as follows:
“On an unspecified date in 1999 or 2000, a date that will be determined precisely [at a later date], [the applicant], along with several colleagues from Police Section No. 5, caught in the act several persons who were transporting in a Dacia hatchback two tons of petrol that had been siphoned from pipelines in the Bucureştii Noi district, in which circumstances they requested and received the sum of 20,000,000 lei from B.S. and I.M. in exchange for refraining from opening a criminal investigation against them and allowing them to continue the unlawful activity.
The fact that the defendant/accused committed the criminal acts is shown by the following evidence:
- witness statements;
- records of the confrontation;
- statements by the accused persons;
- audio recordings;
- photographs;
- records of photo-based identification procedures.
Given that the conditions laid down in Article 148 § 1 (h) of the CCP have been met in this case, namely that the offence committed is punishable by between four and eighteen years’ imprisonment and that [the applicant’s] release represents a danger for public order and could hinder the investigation in this case, since the accused is a police officer and could use this fact to influence the persons who are to be questioned;
On the basis of Articles 136 § 5, 146 § 1, 148 § 1 (h), 149/1 and 151 of the CCP [the prosecutor] decides:
(1) The defendant/accused is to be remanded in custody ... for a period of three days;
(2) Pursuant to Articles 146 § 3 and 149/1 § 3 of the CCP, the period mentioned in the first paragraph is to run from 10 p.m. on 16 July 2003 to 10 p.m. on 18 July 2003.
(3) A warrant for remanding in custody is to be drawn up ... from 16 July 2003 ...”
The applicant stated that he was informed towards midnight that an interim arrest warrant had been issued against him. The arrest warrant issued by virtue of the order of 16 July 2003 (see paragraph 10 above), mentioned that the measure of interim preventive detention had been ordered against the applicant for three days, namely from 16 to 18 July 2003. During the night the applicant was placed in Rahova Prison.
At the same time thirteen other persons were charged in the same case and remanded in custody.
On 17 July 2003, on the basis of Article 148 § 1 (c), (d) and (h) of the CCP, the NAP asked the Bucharest Military Court to extend by twenty-seven days the pre-trial detention of the applicant and his thirteen co-accused, starting from 19 July 2003.
At 10 a.m. on 18 July 2003 the applicant was taken to court. He alleged that his lawyer was given access to the case file only while the prosecution was presenting its request for an extension of the detention on remand. The military court ordered that the case be remitted to the military appeal court, which, in view of the military rank of one of the co-accused, had jurisdiction.
By an interlocutory judgment delivered in private on the same date, the military court of appeal, ruling as a single judge, granted the prosecution’s request and extended the pre-trial detention of the applicant and the other co-accused by twenty-seven days.
The military appeal court held that the materials in the case file indicated the existence of evidence that the accused had committed the offences of criminal conspiracy, taking bribes, aiding and abetting aggravated theft and inciting others to give false evidence. The military appeal court held that it was necessary to place the accused in pre-trial detention on the grounds of public order, and noted that they could influence witnesses and had taken steps to evade criminal proceedings and execution of the sentence. Finally, it noted that the complexity of the case, the large number of defendants and the difficulty in obtaining evidence were also to be taken into account.
On the same date an arrest warrant was issued against the applicant, with the same content as that of 16 July 2003.
The applicant and his co-accused lodged an appeal, arguing that the tribunal which had delivered the interlocutory judgment had not been legally constituted. The prosecution service also referred to the incorrect constitution of the court.
By a final judgment of 21 July 2003, the Supreme Court of Justice upheld the appeal, set aside the first-instance judgment and ordered that the applicant and his co-accused be released. The Supreme Court of Justice held that, in order to ensure better transparency in the fight against corruption, Law No. 161 of 21 April 2003 had amended, with immediate effect, the procedural provisions set out in Law No. 78/2000. Thus, section 29 §§ 1 and 2 of Law No. 78/2000 provided that a court ruling at first instance on the offences set out in that Law had to be composed of two judges.
The applicant was not informed of the reasoning in this judgment.
The applicant was released on the same day.
On an unspecified date the Procurator-General of  lodged an application the Supreme Court of Justice to have the final judgment of 21 July 2003 quashed. He considered that the Supreme Court had committed serious errors of law in its interpretation of the domestic legislation, resulting in an unsatisfactory solution to the matter.
The applicant stated that he learned of the existence of the application to have the judgment quashed, and of the fact that the hearing had been scheduled for 25 July 2003, only on 24 July 2003, through the media.
At 9.30 a.m. on 25 July he went to the hearing with his lawyer, who requested that the case be adjourned on the ground that neither the reasoning of the judgment of 21 July 2003 nor an application to have that judgment quashed had been communicated to him. The Supreme Court of Justice granted this request and, referring to the urgent nature of the case, adjourned the hearing until 12.30 p.m.
When the proceedings resumed the applicant submitted that the final judgment of 21 July 2003 could only be challenged through an appeal in the interests of the law and not by an application to have it quashed, and that there were no plausible reasons to justify his placement in detention on remand.
By a final judgment of 25 July 2003, the Supreme Court of Justice, sitting as a bench of nine judges, upheld the application for judicial review, set aside the judgment of 21 July 2003 and, on the merits, dismissed the applicant’s appeal. In so doing, it held that that the Supreme Court had incorrectly interpreted section 29 §§ 1 and 2 of Law No. 78/2000. It considered that the previous application of the amendments to Law No. 78/2000 and to the CCP led to the conclusion that the legislature’s wish had been to ensure a single set of rules concerning detention on remand, namely that it was to be ordered in private by a single-judge bench, whatever the nature of the offence.
The Supreme Court of Justice also held that the evidence in the case file indicated that it was justified to remand the accused in custody, in view of sufficient information implying that each of the accused could have committed the offences in question.
On 25 July 2003 the applicant was placed in pre-trial detention.
On 2 July 2004, by an interlocutory judgment of 29 June 2004, upheld on 2 July 2004 by the military appeal court, the territorial military court ordered that the applicant be released, and replaced the remand measure by a measure prohibiting him from leaving the country.
The documents in the case file indicate that the criminal proceedings against the applicant are currently pending before the domestic courts.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”) in force at the material time are described in the case of Calmanovici v. Romania, (no. 42250/02, §§ 40-41, 1 July 2008).
Article 136 of the CCP, as in force at the material time, provided for police custody and detention on remand as preventive measures involving a deprivation of liberty. Under Article 144 of the CCP, police custody was to be imposed by an order and could not exceed twenty-four hours.
The following legal provisions are also relevant:
Article 137
“The legal instrument by which an interim measure is adopted must list the facts which gave rise to the charges, their legal basis, the sentence provided for in the legislation concerning the offence in question and the specific reasons which determined the adoption of the interim measure.”
Article 143
“(1) The authority responsible for criminal proceedings may detain a person in police custody if there is cogent direct or indirect evidence that he or she has committed an offence prohibited by the criminal law...”
(3) Cogent evidence exists where, in the circumstances of the case at issue, the person who is subject to criminal proceedings may be suspected of having committed the alleged offences.”
Article 146
“(1) Where the requirements of Article 143 are met and where there is proof of the existence of one of the cases provided for in Article 148, the prosecutor..., after having heard the person concerned ... shall order that the defendant be placed in pre-trial detention, by a reasoned order indicating the legal grounds for such detention, for a period not exceeding three days.
(2) At the same time, the prosecutor shall draw up an interim arrest warrant against the defendant. The warrant must state... the length of time for which the detention has been ordered...”
It should be noted that under domestic law no appeal lay against an order for the detention of an accused pending trial, provided for by the above-cited Article 146 § 1. By virtue of the legal provisions in force at the time, within a period of 24 hours of having detention on remand, the prosecution service had to submit to the relevant court a request seeking a committal warrant. If the court accepted that request, it ordered an extension of the pre-trial detention for a new period of twenty-seven days, by an interlocutory judgment delivered in private. An appeal could be lodged against the latter judgment.
Article 148
“Pre-trial detention of the accused may be ordered [by the prosecutor] where the requirements set out in Article 143 are met [that Article requires cogent direct or indirect evidence that an offence has been committed] and if one of the following conditions is satisfied: ...
(d) the existence of sufficient information to the effect that the accused has attempted to impede the discovery of the truth by corrupting a witness or an expert, by destroying or altering evidence...
(h)  the accused has committed an offence for which the law prescribes a prison sentence of more than two years and his or her continued liberty would constitute a threat to public order.”
Article 409
“The Procurator-General may, of his own motion or on an application by the Minster of Justice, apply to the Supreme Court of Justice for any final judicial decision to be quashed.”
Article 410 § 2
“Final decisions ... may only be contested by an application to have them quashed if they are contrary to the law.”
The Articles of the Code of Criminal Procedure governing applications to have judicial decisions quashed were repealed by Law No. 576 of 14 December 2004, which was published in Official Gazette No. 1223 of 20 December 2004 and entered into force on 23 December 2004.