The case originated in an application (no. 55057/00) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Mr Valentin Kotzev Sidjimov (“the applicant”), on 28 July 1999.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Stoyanov, a lawyer practising in Pazardjik. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs M. Dimova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the criminal proceedings against him were unreasonably lengthy and that he had no effective remedy in this respect.
The application was allocated to the First Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court).
By a decision of 4 September 2003, the Court declared the application admissible.
The applicant’s lawyer and the Government each filed additional observations.
On 1 November 2004 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). This case was assigned to the newly composed First Section (Rule 52 § 1). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
The applicant was born in 1973 and lives in Pazardjik.
On 19 August 1993 he was arrested, charged with the rape of a minor and remanded in custody. Six other persons were also charged.
According to the indictment, the victim had been abducted by a Mr. A. and had been raped numerous times by several persons, some of whom had paid to Mr A. for having sex with the victim. Mr A. was charged with rape and acting as a procurer of prostitution. According to the applicant, all accused persons and the alleged victim are of Roma origin.
On unspecified dates an investigator interrogated the alleged victim and other accused persons and heard several experts.
In June 1994 the applicant and six other persons were indicted and the case listed for trial.
In September and October 1994 the trial court referred the case to the prosecutor in view of certain deficiencies in the investigation. On 17 February 1995 the applicant was released on bail.
In November 1995 the investigator concluded his work and submitted the file to the prosecutor.
In May 1996 the prosecutor ordered additional investigation. In June 1996 the investigator submitted the case to the prosecutor with the proposal that the applicant should be indicted.
In 1999 the applicant’s lawyer lodged requests with the prosecuting authorities complaining of the length of the criminal proceedings.
On 27 February 2001, noting that the case had remained dormant since June 1996, a prosecutor ordered the resumption of the proceedings and referred the case to an investigator.
On 4 April 2002 the investigator objected, stating that in view of the lapse of time, the ensuing evidentiary difficulties and the workload of the investigation service it was preferable to terminate the proceedings.
The prosecutor did not accept the investigator’s proposal and on 22 April 2002 ordered additional investigation.
It appears that as of November 2004 the proceedings were still pending.
In June 2003 an amendment to the Code of Criminal Procedure, the new Article 239a, introduced the possibility for an accused person to have his case examined by a trial court if the investigation has not been completed within the statutory time-limit (two years in investigations concerning serious crimes and one year in all other investigations).
By letter postmarked 17 December 2001 the applicant’s lawyer stated that his client had informed him that he did not intend to pursue the application since his relatives and the persons with whom he stood co-accused feared “an adverse reaction by the State” if he maintained his application.
After the Court’s admissibility decision the parties exchanged observations on the merits and on just satisfaction. The applicant’s lawyer submitted that the Court should continue the examination of the case which disclosed a flagrant denial of justice. The Government objected.
On 24 November 2004 the applicant submitted a written declaration stating that he did not claim monetary compensation from the State, but insisted that the criminal proceedings against him should be terminated, as he had already suffered a lot. He also stated that he left the issue of costs at the Court’s discretion.