The case originated in an application (no. 16580/09) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Lithuanian nationals, Ms Rimanta Irena Urbšienė (“the first applicant”) and Mr Dalius Urbšys (“the second applicant”), on 31 October 2008.
The applicants, a married couple, were represented by Ms J. Guzevičiūtė, a lawyer practising in Vilnius. The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Bubnytė.
The applicants alleged that they had been refused legal aid and that that refusal, based solely on the fact that they as individuals were engaged in commercial activities, had limited their access to court and was discriminatory. They also alleged that they had not been properly notified of an oral hearing before the appellate court.
On 2 November 2015 the complaints concerning the refusal of legal aid and alleged improper notification of the oral hearing before the appellate court were communicated to the Government. The remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants were born in 1963 and 1964 respectively and live in Kaunas.
The first applicant was the owner of a private unlimited liability company (individuali įmonė) (see paragraphs 29-31 below). In 2001 another company brought a claim against her company to recover rent arrears for its premises together with interest for late payment. During the proceedings before the court of first instance the first applicant asked for several adjournments due to her illness, one of which was granted. On 27 February 2001 the Kaunas Regional Court ordered the first applicant’s company to pay a total of 211,883 Lithuanian litai (LTL – approximately 61,365 euros (EUR)) to the claimant company. The first applicant appealed and on 26 June 2001 the Court of Appeal remitted the case to the court of first instance for fresh examination. On 27 September 2001 the first applicant brought a counterclaim for LTL 167,018, alleging that the claimant company had failed to properly fulfil its contractual obligations. On 8 April 2002 the Kaunas Regional Court allowed the claim and allowed the counterclaim in part, ordering the first applicant’s company to pay LTL 211,884 and the claimant company LTL 5,295. The first applicant appealed and on 15 July 2002 the Court of Appeal increased the sum to be paid by the claimant company to LTL 8,103. The first applicant submitted a cassation appeal and on 29 January 2003 the Supreme Court upheld the Court of Appeal’s decision. In those proceedings the first applicant’s company was always represented by a lawyer hired by her.
On 28 March 2003 the Kaunas Regional Court instituted bankruptcy proceedings in respect of the first applicant’s company.
In 2004 the second applicant asked the domestic courts to reopen the rent arrears proceedings and to suspend the bankruptcy proceedings. He claimed that he had not been party to the proceedings even though he was the first applicant’s husband and the private unlimited liability company was a joint matrimonial asset. The second applicant was represented by a lawyer throughout those proceedings. The second applicant also asked for an adjournment of the proceedings due to his lawyer’s absence and his request was granted.
On 25 May 2004 the Kaunas Regional Court refused to reopen the proceedings because the second applicant had failed to lodge his claim within the prescribed time-limit of three months of becoming aware of the circumstances providing the grounds for the reopening of the proceedings. He appealed and on 26 August 2004 the Court of Appeal returned the case to the court of first instance for fresh examination. During the proceedings, the second applicant asked for adjournment due to his lawyer’s absence, which was granted. On 7 January 2005 the Kaunas Regional Court decided to reopen the rent arrears proceedings. On 19 January 2005 it joined them to the bankruptcy proceedings. The second applicant submitted several appeals against the joining of the two cases but they were subsequently dismissed.
On 20 June 2005 the Kaunas Regional Court examined the reopened rent arrears case, concluded that the second applicant should not have been involved in the proceedings and rejected the request of the second applicant to have the decision of the Kaunas Regional Court of 8 April 2002 quashed (see paragraph 6 above). The applicants appealed against this decision and on 9 August 2005 the Court of Appeal upheld the decision of the Kaunas Regional Court of 20 June 2005 not to quash the decision of the Kaunas Regional Court of 8 April 2002 regarding the payment of rent arrears, but observed that the second applicant should have been involved in the proceedings because that was the main reason for reopening the rent arrears case. The second applicant requested legal aid in order to prepare a cassation appeal against the Kaunas Regional Court’s decision of 20 June 2005 and the Court of Appeal’s decision of 9 August 2005. On 4 November 2005 his request was accepted by the Kaunas State Guaranteed Legal Aid Service (hereinafter “the Legal Aid Service”). The first applicant also requested legal aid to prepare comments on the second applicant’s cassation appeal. On 6 January 2006 her request was granted by the Legal Aid Service. On 20 March 2006 the Supreme Court examined the applicants’ cassation appeals, observing that the reopened case concerned only procedural aspects and that the merits had not been examined at all. The case was returned to the Kaunas Regional Court for fresh examination.
On 12 August 2005 both applicants requested legal aid to prepare claims with regard to the bankruptcy and rent arrears proceedings. On 7 September 2005 both applicants’ requests were denied because their claims were directly related to their commercial or independent professional activities. The applicants started administrative proceedings, complaining about the decisions of the Legal Aid Service not to provide them with legal assistance. The applicants asked for legal aid in the administrative proceedings, which they were given on 2 November 2005 and 6 January 2006 respectively. On 10 February and 1 August 2006 respectively the Kaunas Regional Administrative Court and the Supreme Administrative Court dismissed as unsubstantiated the applicants’ claims concerning the refusal to grant them legal aid, holding that under domestic law, legal aid was unavailable if the claims were directly related to a person’s commercial or independent professional activities (see paragraph 28 below).
On 4 April 2006 the Kaunas Regional Court decided to separate the bankruptcy case from the rent arrears case.
On 8 May 2006 both applicants requested that the Court of Appeal transfer the bankruptcy and rent arrears cases to the Vilnius Regional Court, but their request was dismissed on 15 May 2006 by the Court of Appeal.
On 22 May 2006 both applicants submitted two requests for legal aid: one concerned the preparation of the cassation appeal against the Court of Appeal’s refusal to transfer their cases to the Vilnius Regional Court and the other concerned the reopening of the bankruptcy case. The requests were rejected on 25 May 2006 by the Legal Aid Service as their claims were directly related to their commercial or independent professional activities (see paragraph 28 below). The applicants started administrative proceedings, complaining about the decisions of the Legal Aid Service not to provide them with legal assistance. On 28 September 2006 and 6 April 2007 respectively their complaints were dismissed by the Kaunas Regional Administrative Court and the Supreme Administrative Court, which again held that under domestic law, legal aid was unavailable if the claims were directly related to a person’s commercial or independent professional activities. The applicants asked for the proceedings to be reopened but their request was dismissed on 8 May 2008 by the Supreme Administrative Court.
On 12 July 2006 the second applicant submitted a request to have the examination of the rent arrears case suspended because the administrative proceedings concerning legal aid were ongoing (see paragraph 11 above). His request was granted by the Kaunas Regional Court the same day. In the meantime the applicants submitted a request to the Kaunas Regional Court and asked for the time-limit for submissions in the rent arrears case to be extended and the legality of the refusal of the legal aid to be examined. On 22 August 2006 the time-limit for submissions was extended but the legality of the refusal to grant them legal aid was not examined as it was considered to be outside the court’s jurisdiction.
On 5 July 2006 both applicants submitted a request for legal aid for their representation in the reopened rent arrears case. It was rejected on 12 July 2006 by the Legal Aid Service as their claim was directly related to their commercial or independent professional activities (see paragraph 28 below). The applicants started administrative proceedings, complaining about the decision of the Legal Aid Service not to provide them with legal assistance. On 22 December 2006 and 8 June 2007 respectively their complaint was dismissed by the Kaunas Regional Administrative Court and the Supreme Administrative Court, which again held that under domestic law, legal aid was not available if the claims were directly related to a person’s commercial or independent professional activities. The applicants asked for the proceedings to be reopened but their request was dismissed on 8 May 2008 by the Supreme Administrative Court.
The examination of the rent arrears case was resumed but was suspended by the Kaunas Regional Court on 5 September 2006 due to the ongoing administrative proceedings concerning the legal aid (see paragraph 16 above).
After the examination of the rent arrears case was resumed on 28 June 2007 by the Kaunas Regional Court, the applicants asked for adjournments numerous times due to their own inability to be present. All their requests were granted by the Kaunas Regional Court.
On 21 November 2007 both applicants submitted a request to the Legal Aid Service for legal aid for their representation in the reopened rent arrears case but their requests were dismissed on 27 November 2007 as their claim was directly related to their commercial or independent professional activities (see paragraph 28 below). The applicants started administrative proceedings, complaining about the decision of the Legal Aid Service not to provide them with legal assistance. On 7 April 2008 and 6 February 2009 respectively their complaint was dismissed by the Kaunas Regional Administrative Court and the Supreme Administrative Court, which again held that under domestic law, legal aid was not available if the claims were directly related to the person’s commercial or independent professional activities.
On 20 December 2007 the Kaunas Regional Court examined the reopened rent arrears case and held that the first applicant’s company had to pay LTL 134,746 in unpaid rent and interest.
On 19 January 2008 both applicants appealed, asking for the examination of the rent arrears case to be suspended until the administrative proceedings concerning legal aid were concluded (see paragraph 19 above). Their request was granted on 6 May 2008 by the Kaunas Regional Court.
On 3 June 2009 the Court of Appeal resumed the rent arrears case and scheduled a hearing for 6 October 2009. On 25 June 2009 the applicants were sent a notice informing them that the case would be examined in a “public hearing in writing” (viešame teismo posėdyje rašytinio proceso tvarka) on 6 October 2009. The applicants responded on 2 October 2009 (as indicated on the post mark) that they would not be able to attend the hearing because on 30 September 2009 they were sent a notice that another case involving the first applicant was being examined at the same time that day. This letter was received by the Court of Appeal on 7 October 2009. On 6 October 2009 the Court of Appeal held an oral hearing where none of the parties were present. It examined the case in the parties’ absence, holding that all the parties had been duly notified of the date and time of the hearing. On 23 October 2009 the applicants’ appeal was dismissed.
On 3 November 2009 both applicants submitted requests for legal aid for the preparation of a cassation appeal against the decision of 23 October 2009 of the Court of Appeal. Their requests were left unexamined on 6 November 2009 as they were considered to be analogous to the previously submitted and already rejected requests.
As a consequence, no cassation appeal was submitted because in accordance with the provisions of domestic law, such appeals had to be submitted by a lawyer.
The applicants brought proceedings against the State for damages, alleging that the decisions of the domestic courts had been unlawful. They submitted numerous complaints, including about being deprived of legal representation. On 3 March and 17 November 2014 respectively their complaints were rejected by the Vilnius Regional Court and the Court of Appeal. Their cassation appeal was rejected on 24 February 2015 by the Supreme Court.
At the material time, the relevant provisions of the 1964 Code of Civil Procedure, in force until 1 January 2003, provided:
“Individuals may conduct cases in court themselves or through a representative. Personal participation in a hearing shall not deprive a person of the right to have a representative.
Cases involving legal entities shall be conducted in court by its representatives or members in accordance with the law and its incorporation documents.
The head of a State enterprise, collective farm or other cooperative or public organisation who is representing a legal entity as its member shall provide the court with documents defining his rights and obligations.
Representatives in court under authorisation may be:
(1)  lawyers, assistant lawyers and other individuals with a licence to conduct legal activities issued by the Ministry of Justice;
(2)  employees of enterprises and organisations in cases involving those legal entities;
(3)  representatives of trade unions in cases involving their members;
(4)  representatives of organisations authorised to represent their members by law or their documents;
(5)  representatives of State bodies, enterprises and organisations authorised to represent the State and other individuals and protect their rights and interests;
(6)  one claimant with the authorisation of the other claimants;
(7)  other individuals who have provided documents containing the wishes of the person who has given them authorisation.
...
Parties to the proceedings and their representatives shall be notified by summons or notice of the time and place of a hearing or specific procedural steps. Court summons are also sent to the witnesses, experts and translators.
A summons must be served on parties to the proceedings by such date that they have sufficient time to arrange to attend court and prepare for the case.
...
Summons are delivered by post or via messengers. The time of delivery is marked on the summons and on the signed return receipt to the court.
...
...
If a defendant fails to appear in court because he was not duly notified of the time and place, the court shall adjourn the hearing. If a defendant fails to appear in court and he was duly notified of the time and place, and there are no comments regarding the complaint, the defendant shall be deemed to have accepted the claim and the case shall be examined in his absence. The case may be adjourned at the request of the defendant if he provides documents providing the reasons for his failure to appear prior to it starting and the court accepts the reasons as important. If the court decides that the participation of the defendant is required and he, despite being duly summoned, repeatedly fails to appear, the case shall be examined in his absence.
...
A court shall be entitled to adjourn proceedings in the cases set forth by this Code as well as in cases where a case cannot be heard because a translator/interpreter cannot appear or a counterclaim has been filed, or new evidence is required or for other important reasons.
...
A court must suspend the proceedings:
...
(4)  if a specific case cannot be heard until other pending civil, criminal or administrative proceedings are decided...
...
...
In the event of an oral hearing, the parties to the proceedings shall be informed of the time and place. If they fail to appear, the court shall not be prevented from examining the case.
Judges may examine an appeal without an oral hearing if:
(1)  the court of first instance which accepted the appeal has to refuse to accept it. In such cases the appellate court shall discontinue the appeal proceedings and adopt an order for the return of any court fees;
(2)  it finds that there are grounds for the decision of the court of first instance to be declared invalid;
(3)  the court of first instance which decided to accept the appeal must order the claimant to correct mistakes in the appeal. In such cases the appeal and case file must be returned to the court of first instance that takes the action enumerated in Article 327 § 1.
...
An application to reopen the proceedings may be submitted within three months of the date the applicant became aware or had to become aware of the circumstances providing the grounds for reopening the proceedings.
...”
At the material time, the relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, in force since 1 January 2003 provided:
“1.  Individuals may conduct cases in court themselves or through a representative. Personal participation in a hearing shall not deprive a person of the right to have a representative...
A representative’s appearance in court shall be considered proper participation in a hearing, except in cases where the court considers the represented person’s personal participation in the proceedings essential.
For cases under this Code and the Civil Code, an individual shall have a lawyer.
Cases involving legal entities shall be conducted in court by its representatives or members in accordance with the law and its incorporation documents, the rights granted to it and its obligations. In such cases, a case will be considered to be conducted by the legal entity itself.
Representatives of legal entities in court may be employees of respective legal entities (in the appellate courts those holding a university degree in law), lawyers or assistant lawyers with the written consent of lawyers supervising the assistants’ training to represent [a party] in a specific case.
Other individuals that may represent a legal entity together with those specified in paragraphs 1 and 2 ... [are] non-legal professionals (auditors, accountants, tax advisors, patent attorneys etc.).
Representatives in court under authorisation may be:
(1)  lawyers;
(2)  assistant lawyers with the written consent of lawyers supervising the assistants’ training to represent [a party] in a specific case;
(3)  one claimant with the authorisation of the other claimants;
(4)  individuals holding a university degree in law if they are representing their close relatives or spouse (partner)...
Other individuals may act as representatives together with those specified in paragraphs 1(1) and 1(2)...
...
Notices and other court documents shall be served by the means and procedure established by this Code without a return receipt being returned to the court...
Parties to the proceedings shall be notified by summons or notice of the time and place of a hearing or specific procedural steps. After a party to the proceedings has been properly served with a summons, he shall be notified of the other hearings by notice...
A summons or notice must be served on parties to the proceedings by the procedure established in Articles 117 to 132 of this Code and by such date that they have sufficient time to arrange to attend court and prepare for the case...
A court shall be entitled to adjourn proceedings in the cases set forth by this Code as well as in cases where a case cannot be heard because a translator/interpreter cannot appear or a counterclaim has been filed, or new evidence is required or for other important reasons (sickness absence, holidays, business trips, other business, participation of a party’s representative in other cases and other similar excuses are not generally considered important reasons)...
A court must suspend the proceedings:
...
(3)  if a specific case cannot be heard until other pending civil, criminal or administrative proceedings are decided.
...
If a defendant fails to appear in court because he was not duly notified of the time and place and he does not have a representative, the court shall adjourn the hearing. A hearing shall also be adjourned in cases where a defendant is conducting the case through his representative but fails to appear in court because neither he nor his representative were duly notified of the time and place of the hearing. The hearing may also be deferred at the request of the defendant or his representative, if they provide documents justifying their absence prior to [it starting] and the court accepts their reasons for non-appearance as important (sickness absence, holidays, business trips, other business, participation of a party’s representative in other cases and other similar excuses are not generally considered important reasons). In any other cases the court shall, at the request of the claimant, pass a default judgment. If a claimant does not request a default judgment, the court may either leave the claim unexamined or decide it on the merits in accordance with the general rules of litigation...
...
The parties to the proceedings shall be notified of the place and time of the hearing of an appeal case. If the case is being heard [in writing], the parties to the proceedings shall not be invited to the hearing and [it] shall take place in their absence. In the event of an oral hearing, the parties to the proceedings shall be summoned to the hearing but the case may still be heard in their absence...
A panel of judges may decide an appeal [in writing] if:
(1)  the court of first instance which accepted the appeal was required to refuse to accept it...
(2)  it is established that there are grounds for the judgment of the court of first instance to be declared invalid...
At the request of an appellant, an appeal may be decided in writing if the other parties to the proceedings did not object to the appeal in their responses.
...
Cassation appeals may be submitted by a lawyer. Employees of a legal entity holding a university degree in law may submit a cassation appeal on behalf of the legal entity. If the applicant is an individual holding a university degree in law, he may submit a cassation appeal himself...
An application to reopen the proceedings can be submitted within three months from of the date the applicant became aware or had to become aware of the circumstances providing the grounds for reopening the proceedings.
...”
At the material time, the relevant parts of the State Guaranteed Legal Aid Act provided:
“...
Primary legal aid – legal information, legal consultations provided in accordance with this [Act] and preparing documents for State institutions, excluding procedural documents. Such legal aid also covers advice on settling disputes out-of-court, actions on friendly settlements of disputes and preparing friendly settlement agreements.
State guaranteed legal aid – State guaranteed defence and representation in the procedure of cases.
...
...
Secondary legal aid shall not be granted if:
...
4)  the request concerns a claim directly related to the applicant’s commercial or independent professional activities...”
...
...Legal Aid Service decisions may be appealed against in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Administrative Procedure Act...”
At the material time, the relevant part of Article 7 of the Companies Act, in force until 2004, provided:
“An individual company belongs to one individual as his or her property or to several individuals as their joint property... An individual company does not have the rights of a legal entity and its property is inseparable from the owner’s property. The owner is liable for the obligations of an individual company with all his or her personal property...”
At the material time, the relevant part of Article 2 of the Individual Companies Act, in force since 2004, provided:
“1.  An individual company is a private legal entity with unlimited liability...”
The Supreme Court has noted on several occasions that an individual company is a private legal entity with unlimited liability, and that if it does not have sufficient assets to fulfil its obligations the owner has to account for them from his own personal assets (for example, decisions of 20 July 2010 (no. 3K-3-337/2010) and 7 December 2012 (no. 3K-7-400)).
Article 47 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, which was proclaimed on 7 December 2000 and came into force on 1 December 2009, provides:
“...
Legal aid shall be made available to those who lack sufficient resources in so far as such aid is necessary to ensure effective access to justice.”
In its judgment in DEB Deutsche Energiehandels- und Beratungsgesellschaft mbH v. Germany (no C-279/09) of 22 December 2010, the Court of Justice of the European Union held that:
“40.  ...the right to an effective remedy before a court, enshrined in Article 47 of the Charter, is to be found under Title VI of that Charter, relating to justice, in which other procedural principles are established which apply to both natural and legal persons.
...
Similarly, the inclusion of the provision relating to the grant of legal aid in the article of the Charter relating to the right to an effective remedy indicates that the assessment of the need to grant that aid must be made on the basis of the right of the actual person whose rights and freedoms as guaranteed by EU law have been violated, rather than on the basis of the public interest of society, even if that interest may be one of the criteria for assessing the need for the aid.
The other provisions of EU law ... do not make provision for legal aid to be granted to legal persons. However, no conclusion of general application can be drawn from this, since it is apparent, first, from the scope of Directive 2003/8 and, second, from the jurisdiction of the General Court and of the Civil Service Tribunal that those provisions relate to specific categories of litigation.
The Court of Justice of the European Union also held that:
“52.  It is apparent from the examination of the caselaw of the European Court of Human Rights that the grant of legal aid to legal persons is not in principle impossible, but must be assessed in the light of the applicable rules and the situation of the company concerned.
The subject matter of the litigation could be taken into consideration, in particular, its economic importance.
For the purposes of taking account of the financial situation of an applicant, where that applicant was a legal entity, consideration could be given, inter alia, to the form of the company (whether a capital company or partnership, limited liability company or otherwise), the financial situation of its shareholders, the assets of the company, the manner in which it was set up and, more specifically, the relationship between the resources allocated to it and the intended activity.”