The case originated in an application (no. 22457/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Ms Dragica Božić (“the applicant”), on 4 July 2000.
The applicant was represented by Mrs M. Savić, a lawyer practising in . The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs Š. Stažnik.
On 25 November 2004 the Court declared the application partly inadmissible and decided to communicate the complaints concerning the length of the proceedings and the lack of remedies in that respect to the Government. Applying Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time.
The applicant, Mrs Dragica Božić, is a Croatian national, who was born in 1943 and currently lives in .
On 27 September 1991 the Croatian Pension Fund, Sisak Office (Republički fond mirovinskog i invalidskog osiguranja, Područna služba u Sisku – the Sisak Office) issued a decision granting the applicant the right to a widow’s (family) pension as of 6 August 1991. However, no payments were made until 1 August 1997.
On 18 September 1997 the applicant instituted administrative proceedings in order to recover the pension instalments due.
On 14 June 1999 the Sisak Office dismissed her request. It found that the payment of her pension was stopped between 6 August 1991 and 31 July 1997 since during that period the applicant had resided in the occupied areas of  and her address had been unknown. On 9 July 1999 the applicant appealed against that decision.
On 19 June 2000 the Croatian Pension Fund, Central Office (Hrvatski zavod za mirovinsko osiguranje, Središnja služba – the Central Office) quashed the first-instance decision for factual errors and remitted the case.
In the resumed proceedings, the Sisak Office dismissed the applicant’s request on 9 October 2000. The applicant appealed.
On 9 April 2001 the Central Office again quashed the first-instance decision and remitted the case.
On 22 August 2001 the Sisak Office for the third time dismissed the applicant’s request. The applicant appealed.
On 15 November 2001 the Central Office for the third time quashed the first-instance decision for factual shortcomings and remitted the case. It instructed the Sisak Office to enquire whether the applicant had received a pension from the authorities that had exercised control over the occupied territory.
In the subsequent proceedings, on 16 May 2002 the applicant lodged an appeal for failure to respond under the Administrative Procedure Act (see paragraph 21 below) since the Sisak Office did not render a decision within the statutory time-limit of two months. Given that the Central Office also failed to decide on this appeal within the statutory time-limit of two months, on 17 December 2002 the applicant brought an action for failure to respond (see paragraph 22 below) in the Administrative Court (Upravni sud Republike Hrvatske). The applicant subsequently withdrew this action since in January 2003 the first-instance decision had been rendered.
On 29 January 2003 the Sisak Office accepted the applicant’s request in part. It awarded her the pension instalments as of 1 October 1994 and dismissed her request for the instalments due prior to that date. The applicant appealed.
On 20 May 2003 the Central Office dismissed the applicant’s appeal.
On 1 July 2003 the applicant brought an administrative action in the  challenging that decision.
On 27 January 2005 the  gave judgment dismissing the applicant’s claim.
“In the determination of his rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law.”
Section 63
“(1) The Constitutional Court shall examine a constitutional complaint whether or not all legal remedies have been exhausted if the competent court fails to decide a claim concerning the individual’s rights and obligations or a criminal charge against him or her within a reasonable time ...
(2) If a constitutional complaint ... under paragraph 1 of this section is upheld, the  shall set a time-limit within which the competent court must decide the case on the merits...
(3) In a decision issued under paragraph 2 of this section, the  shall assess appropriate compensation for the applicant for the violation of his or her constitutional rights ... The compensation shall be paid out of the State budget within three months from the date a request for payment is lodged.”
The ’s practice