The case originated in an application (no. 1089/09) against the Republic of Moldova and the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Moldovan nationals, Mr Ruslan Pocasovschi and Mr Ion Mihăilă (“the applicants”), on 19 December 2008. While initially the applicants’ representative indicated that they intended to submit the application also in respect of 141 other applicants, they did not submit any details about such other applicants. The case before the Court thus concerns only the two applicants mentioned above.
The applicants were represented by Mr A. Briceac and Mr T. Cârnaț. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V. Grosu.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that they had been held in inhuman conditions of detention and that the civil proceedings which they had brought had been excessively long.
On 13 October 2009 the application was communicated to the Governments.
The applicants were born in 1975 and 1976 and live in Cahul and Cetireni respectively.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicants were convicted by Moldovan courts and, at the time of the events, were serving their sentences in prison no. 8 situated in the town of Tighina (Bender), in the Transdniestrian region of the Republic of Moldova. The town is situated in the security zone under the control of peacekeepers from Moldova, Russia and the self-proclaimed “Moldavian Republic of Transdniestria” (“MRT”). Prison no. 8 is under the exclusive control of the Moldovan authorities. By October 2003 some 236 people were detained there; some of them, such as the applicants, were ill with tuberculosis.
On 23 September 2002 the Bender local administration, which is subordinated to the “MRT” authorities, disconnected prison no. 8 from the electricity, water and heating supplies. As a result, the detainees were deprived of conditions of basic hygiene, and the food they received did not meet the minimum standards of quality.
The prison authorities informed the Moldovan Ministry of Justice, the President’s Office, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), the Red Cross and the Council of Europe, as well as local human rights organisations, with a view to obtaining assistance in resolving the problem arising from the disconnection from the town’s utilities network.
On 12 August 2003 the Bender prosecutor’s office (which forms part of the official Moldovan authorities) informed the Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Moldova (“the CHDOM”), for which the applicant’s representative worked, that, as a result of pressure from the OSCE, the Bender authorities had reconnected the prison to the electricity and water supply systems on 23 February 2003. On 10 July 2003 the last of the people who were ill with tuberculosis were transferred to a newly-built hospital wing in Pruncul prison hospital, situated in Moldova. According to the head of prison no. 8, some 236 healthy detainees, including the applicants, remained in the prison after that date. However, also on 10 July 2003, the local authorities disconnected prison no. 8 from the electricity and water supply systems again, without any warning. The “MRT” authorities insisted that the prison needed to be closed down.
On 15 September 2004 Mr Pocasovschi (the first applicant) was transferred to another prison. He was released on parole on 14 April 2005. Mr Mihăilă (the second applicant) was transferred to another prison on 1 March 2004 and was released on parole on 28 March 2005.
On 21 July 2003 the applicants’ representatives asked the Moldovan Prosecutor General’s Office to initiate criminal proceedings against those responsible for disconnecting prison no. 8 from the utilities systems. On 12 August 2003 the Bender prosecutor’s office replied in general terms, describing the difficult situation with regard to prison no. 8 and the unsuccessful negotiations with the local authorities.
On 29 August 2003 the CHDOM asked the Bender District Court (which is part of the Moldovan court system) to order the prosecutor’s office to remedy the human rights violations taking place in prison no. 8.
On 7 October 2003 the head of prison no. 8 informed the court that, owing to insufficient access to water and electricity, detainees in his institution could not receive appropriate medical assistance or food of a sufficient standard, or maintain proper hygiene.
On 31 October 2003 the Bender District Court ordered the prosecutor’s office to initiate criminal proceedings against those responsible for disconnecting prison no. 8 from the utilities supply. That decision was upheld by the Bender Court of Appeal on 18 December 2003.
According to the Moldovan Government, on 18 November 2003 the Bender prosecutor’s office contacted the “MRT” authorities with a view to prosecuting those responsible for disconnecting prison no. 8 from the utilities. It also informed the Joint Control Commission (see Ilaşcu and Others v. Moldova and Russia ([GC], no. 48787/99, § 90, ECHR 2004VII) of the need to include the subject on its agenda. On 20 December 2003 the “MRT” prosecutor’s office refused to open a criminal investigation on the ground that no crime had been committed.
On 19 January 2004 the relatives of two of the detainees made another complaint to the CHDOM regarding the inhuman conditions of detention in prison no. 8. That letter was forwarded to the Moldovan Ministry of Justice, the President of the Republic of Moldova and the Prosecutor General’s Office, along with a request to take all necessary steps to immediately improve the conditions of detention.
On 1 March 2004 the CHDOM asked the Bender prosecutor’s office what action had been taken pursuant to the above-mentioned court decisions. On 12 March 2004 the Bender prosecutor’s office replied that all the material was at the Prosecutor General’s Office, which was dealing with the case.
On 15 March 2004 the Ministry of Justice informed the CHDOM that the State was making all necessary efforts to ensure acceptable conditions of detention at prison no. 8, and that, at that time, the conditions of detention at that prison did not differ from those at other prisons in the Republic of Moldova.
On 20 April 2004 the Prosecutor General’s Office informed the CHDOM that it had lodged an extraordinary appeal with the Supreme Court of Justice against the decisions of 31 October 2003 and 18 December 2003. On 3 August 2004 the Supreme Court of Justice upheld those decisions.
On 1 June 2009 the CHDOM asked the Prosecutor General’s Office what actions had been undertaken after the judgment of the Supreme Court of Justice of 3 August 2004. On 14 July 2009 the Bender Prosecutor’s Office replied that the actions of the “MRT” authorities could not be investigated by the Moldovan authorities as long as the “MRT” authorities de facto controlled the territory of the “MRT”.
On 15 March 2004, on behalf of 141 detainees in prison no. 8, including the applicants, the CHDOM lodged a civil action against the Ministry of Justice, asking for the finding of a violation of the rights guaranteed under Article 3 of the Convention. The detainees had authorised the organisation to act on their behalf. The CHDOM also asked for an improvement in the conditions of detention and for the payment of compensation in the amount of 15,000 Moldovan lei (MDL – approximately 1,000 euros (EUR) at the time) for each detainee.
On 16 and 22 April 2004 the President of the Bender District Court asked the Supreme Court of Justice to decide whether the case should be examined by another court. On 19 May 2004 the Supreme Court of Justice rejected the request and left the case with the Bender District Court.
On 18 June 2004 the Bender District Court decided to transfer the case to the Buiucani District Court in Chişinău, in accordance with territorial competence principles. The claimants (the detainees) and their representatives were not consulted. On 22 June 2004 the CHDOM challenged that decision. On 14 July 2004 the Bender Court of Appeal set aside the decision of 18 June 2004 and ordered the urgent examination of the case by the Bender District Court.
On 28 December 2004 the Bender District Court declined to examine the claim because it did not satisfy legal requirements. On 1 February 2005 the Bender Court of Appeal set aside that decision.
After February 2005 many of the 141 detainees who were plaintiffs in the above-mentioned civil action were transferred to other prisons in various parts of the country, which made it more difficult for the CHDOM to obtain confirmation of each individual’s power of attorney, as requested by the Bender District Court. In such circumstances, the CHDOM selected nine cases (including those of the applicants in the present case) with which to continue the proceedings. Since the individuals concerned were also detained in separate prisons, the CHDOM made an application for their cases to be examined separately, an application which the Bender District Court refused on 11 November 2005.
On 26 April 2006 the Bender District Court rejected the CHDOM’s application to summon as defendants the individuals from the relevant local “MRT” authorities in Bender responsible for violating the detainees’ rights. On an unknown date in June 2006 the Bender Court of Appeal set aside that decision and ordered the summoning as defendants of A.P., A.M. and V.M., the heads of the relevant local “MRT” authorities in Bender. According to the applicants, none of these individuals was summoned by the Bender District Court.
On 15 December 2006 the judge who had been examining the case withdrew from it. On 18 May 2007 the judge who had taken over the case also withdrew from it. Subsequently, all other judges of the Bender District Court withdrew, allegedly for fear of persecution by the “MRT” authorities. As a result, the Bender Court of Appeal was asked to decide which other court could examine the case. On 13 November 2007 the Bender Court of Appeal decided that the case should be examined by the Anenii-Noi District Court.
On 26 December 2007 the Anenii-Noi District Court declined to examine the claim because it did not fulfil certain legal requirements. It found in particular that there was a lack of valid powers of attorney in favour of the CHDOM.
On 6 March 2008 the CHDOM lodged a reformulated court action in accordance with the legal requirements. It also asked for the Russian Government to be summoned as a defendant in the case, as it had de facto control over the territory of the “MRT”. It claimed EUR 10,000 and EUR 7,000 respectively for the breach of the applicants’ rights. On the same date the Anenii-Noi District Court declined to examine the claim because the powers of attorney issued by the detainees in favour of the CHDOM had expired.
On 20 May 2008 the Bender Court of Appeal set aside the decision of 6 March 2008, noting that, in the applicants’ cases, the powers of attorney had been renewed.
On 18 June 2008 the Anenii-Noi District Court adjourned the hearing because of the absence of a representative of the Ministry of Justice. The same thing occurred on 29 October 2008. The court also informed the CHDOM that, in a letter dated 2 July 2007, the Ministry of Justice had informed the court that a representative of the Russian Federation could only be summoned via the Ministry of Justice.
On 30 December 2008 the Anenii-Noi District Court adopted a judgment in which it allowed the applicants’ claims in part. It awarded each of them damages in the amount of EUR 200, to be paid by the Moldovan Ministry of Finance, and EUR 500, to be paid by the Russian Ministry of Finance.
On 30 June 2009 the Bender Court of Appeal quashed that judgment in part. It found that, following the prison’s disconnection from the utilities, the prison administration had no longer been able to offer food or medical treatment for tuberculosis which was of an adequate quality; there had been no access to showers, a very poor situation concerning personal hygiene, and only two hours of electricity per day, ensured by a low-power generator. None of the complaints made to the State authorities had resulted in an improvement in the conditions of detention until much later, as established in 2008. The court acknowledged a breach of the applicants’ right not to be held in inhuman conditions of detention, and increased the award in favour of each of them to MDL 20,000 (EUR 1,266 at the time). It also found that the Russian Federation could not be a defendant in Moldovan courts unless it expressly agreed to that, which was not the case here.
On 27 April 2010 the Supreme Court of Justice accepted the applicants’ appeal on points of law in part, and amended the judgment of the lower court. It analysed in detail the length of the civil proceedings (between 22 March 2004 and the date of adopting its own judgment on 27 April 2010), the complexity of the case, how the parties and the courts had contributed to the length of the proceedings, as well as the significant interest at stake for the applicants. The court found that, despite the applicants’ representatives’ actions contributing to the overall length of the proceedings (twenty-six out of the sixty-seven months), a breach of the right to a trial within a reasonable time had taken place, requiring additional compensation which it set at MDL 6,000 (approximately EUR 358 at the time). It did not amend the remainder of the lower court’s judgment.
The Moldovan Government submitted a long list of actions concerning their efforts to assert their sovereignty over the “MRT” territory and ensure that human rights were observed in the region. They also submitted copies of documents concerning prison no. 8 in Tighina/Bender specifically, raising in particular the issue of the prison being disconnected from utilities within the framework of the “5+2” negotiations process (between the OSCE, Russia, Ukraine, the European Union and the USA, in addition to Moldova and the “MRT”) and with various international organisations.
Relevant reports of various inter-governmental and non-governmental organisations concerning the situation in the “MRT” have been summarised in Mozer v. the Republic of Moldova and Russia [GC] (no. 11138/10, §§ 61-68, ECHR 2016).