The case originated in an application (no. 12377/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Nikolay Ivanovich Kabkov (“the applicant”), on 13 March 2003.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, the former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 15 March 2006 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1933 and lives in the town of  in the Moscow Region.
In 1988 the applicant gave up his post in the Zagorskiy engineering plant in order to be appointed to a similar position in a car manufacturing enterprise, ATP-11 (“ATP-11”). The latter refused to appoint the applicant to the position sought.
On an unspecified date in 1988 the applicant sued ATP-11, seeking that it complied with the agreement for his appointment to the post.
On 4 January 1989 the  dismissed his claims. The  upheld the judgment on 2 February 1989. On 4 May 1989 the Presidium of the  quashed the judgments by way of supervisory review and remitted the case for a new examination.
By a judgment of 27 June 1989, the  rejected the applicant’s claims. On 14 July 1989 the  upheld the judgment.
On 7 June 1990 the Supreme Court of the  (“the RSFSR Supreme Court”) quashed the judgments of 27 June and 14 July 1989 and remitted the case to the  for a fresh examination.
On 28 December 1990 Judge M. of the  listed a hearing for 9 January 1991.
At a hearing of 23 January 1991 the applicant amended his claims and claimed compensation for forced absence from work due to the ATP-11’s unlawful refusal to appoint him to the post.
On 7 May 1991 judge M. instituted criminal proceedings against the applicant on suspicion that he had stolen the case file concerning his employment dispute.
On 1 November 1991 the deputy prosecutor of the Moscow Regional prosecutor’s office informed the applicant that there were no reasons to set aside the decision of 7 May 1991. He also noted that the local justice department had been ordered to take immediate measures to restore the materials of the case file in respect of the applicant’s employment dispute.
On 19 March 1998 the Mytishchi Town Court of the Moscow Region acquitted the applicant for lack of evidence. The judgment became final on 27 March 1998.
In the meantime, on 8 April 1992 the applicant requested the President of the  (renamed the  after the town of  had been renamed Sergiyev Posad) to restore the case file regarding his employment dispute and to pursue its examination of his claims against ATP-11. The applicant submitted the receipt card showing that the request had been received by the  on 14 April 1992. On 6 May 1992 the President informed the applicant that his employment claims would be adjudicated after the examination of the criminal case against him.
On 1 June 1993 and 1 March 1994 respectively the  forwarded to the  repeated requests by the applicant for restoration of the case file (заявление о восстановлении утраченного судебного производства) with a view to proceeding with the examination of his employment dispute, further to the decision of 7 June 1990. Those requests were accompanied by the documents from the file preserved by the applicant. In its letter of 1 March 1994 the court noted that in case of dismissal of the applicant’s request to restore the case file the courts were to advise the applicant on his right to re-submit his employment dispute to the courts by means of ordinary civil proceedings. It appears that no action was taken in response to the above requests.
By decision of 1 April 1994, the  refused to examine the applicant’s requests to restore the case file, as formulated in his application of 20 January 1994 and a telegram of 26 March 1994 respectively. The court referred to the ongoing criminal proceedings and held that it could not examine the applicant’s requests until his exculpation.
On 13 October 1994 the Presidium of the  quashed the decision of 1 April 1994 and remitted the matter to the  for a fresh examination.
By letter of 20 February 1995, the Supreme Court of the  advised the applicant that the Presidium of the  had forwarded his request for restoration of the case file to the  for a fresh examination.
On 25 September 1996 the  forwarded to the President of the  a complaint by the applicant about the failure to examine his request for restoration of the case file, as ordered by the decision of 13 October 1994. The  noted that, according to the ’s registry, the related proceedings were still pending before the .
On 5 May 1998 the Convention entered into force in respect of .
On 6 July 1998 the  forwarded to the  a further complaint by the applicant about the failure to examine his requests for restoration of the case file. It ordered the  to take all necessary measures with a view to pursuing the examination of the applicant’s request.
By decision of 10 November 1998, the  refused to restore the case file concerning the applicant’s employment dispute. The court noted that it had returned to the applicant the documents lodged in March 1994 after the decision of 1 April 1994 had become legally binding. The applicant had not complied with the court’s requests to re-submit them. Instead of rectifying the shortcomings, the applicant had chosen to complain to higher courts, declaring that the documents were already with the . In the absence of the relevant documents and any intention on the part of the applicant to submit them, it had to terminate the proceedings. It advised the applicant that it was open to him to re-submit his employment dispute to the .
It appears that the applicant was not present at the hearing and was not served with a copy of the decision of 11 November 1998. The decision was not appealed against and became final on 22 November 1998.
On 10 February 2002 the applicant renewed his request to the  to restore his case file and to adjudicate his employment dispute.
By a decision of 26 August 2002 the  dismissed the applicant’s request. It noted that the applicant had asked it to restore the file and had submitted copies of documents related to his employment dispute. However, those documents had not been duly certified. They had been partly typewritten and partly handwritten by the applicant, which cast doubt on their authenticity. The applicant had not submitted any other documents and the court itself had been unable to obtain any documents. ATP-11 had been declared insolvent. Eleven years had passed since the case file had been stolen and the applicant had requested to restore it only in 2002. It was impossible to examine authentic written exhibits (evidence) related to the applicant’s labour action. The court finally noted that it was open to the applicant to re-submit his employment dispute to the .
On 14 October 2002 the  upheld the decision. It appears that the applicant was provided with both decisions in due time.
Article 99 of the 1964 Code of Civil Procedure, as in force at the material time, provided that civil cases were to be prepared for a hearing no later than seven days after the action had been lodged with the court. In exceptional cases, this period could be extended for up to twenty days. Civil cases were to be examined no later than one month after the preparation for the hearing had been completed.
Annex No. 2 to the 1964 Code of Civil Procedure, as in force at the material time, provided that courts were to restore lost case files on their own initiative, upon a request from any of the parties to the case or a prosecutor (Article 1). A request to restore the case file was to be lodged with the court which had examined the case on the merits (Article 3). It was to contain detailed information about the case and to be accompanied by all relevant documents or their copies from the file, preserved by the interested person, even if they were not duly certified (Article 4).
In examining the request, the court was to use the remaining documents, documents handed over from the case file to third persons or organisations, and copies of those documents and other certificates relevant to the case. It could also examine as witnesses persons who could provide information on procedural steps taken in the course of the proceedings, including members of the court, when necessary (Article 5).
If the materials accumulated during the proceedings were insufficient for an adequate restoration of the case file, the court terminated the proceedings by means of a decision (определение). In that case it was open to the interested person to re-submit his/her civil claims to the courts by way of ordinary proceedings (Article 6).