The case originated in an application (no. 73270/01) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a stateless person, Mr Vitali Pihlak (“the applicant”), on 8 August 2000.
The applicant was represented before the Court by Ms K. Mägi, a lawyer practicing in . The Estonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs M. Hion, Director of the Human Rights Division of the Legal Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and Mr E. Harremoes, Special Adviser to the Mission of the Republic of Estonia to the Council of Europe.
The applicant alleged that the length of his detention on remand had been in breach of Article 5 § 3 of the Convention.
The application was allocated to the Fourth Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
By a decision of 20 January 2004 the Court declared the application admissible.
On 1 November 2004 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1), and the case was allocated to the newly composed Fourth Section of the Court.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1972 and lives in Harjumaa.
In April and May 1997 the Tartu Police instituted six criminal investigations relating to several offences of burglary, the forgery of a passport and the unlawful keeping of a firearm. The applicant, one of the suspects, could not be found. On 26 May 1997 the police declared him to be a wanted person. On 7 July 1997 a judge of the Tallinn City Court (Tallinna Linnakohus) authorised the police to take the applicant into custody for two months when he was located. On 27 October 1997 the applicant was caught and taken into custody. On 23 December 1997 the City Court authorised the applicant’s detention until 20 January 1998. However, on 29 December 1997 the City Court granted his request for release on bail. The amount of the bail was set at 42,000 kroons (€ 2,684).
On 12 September 1998 the applicant was taken into police custody on suspicion of having on the same day committed a burglary with three other persons.
The next day the applicant’s arrest was approved by a judge of the Tallinn City Court who authorised the applicant’s detention for 10 days, i.e. until 22 September 1998. The court noted that the applicant had a prior criminal conviction and that he was suspected of having committed a new crime at a time when he had been released on bail in another criminal case (see paragraph 9 above) against him, which was pending before it.
On 22 September 1998 the applicant was formally charged with burglary. On the same day the City Court prolonged his detention until 22 November 1998 on the ground that he had a prior criminal conviction and could re-offend, if released.
In his appeal against the decision the applicant argued that the reasons referred to by the court were inadequate to justify his detention. He had a fixed place of residence and there was no reason to believe that he could commit new offences. Moreover, the reference to his prior conviction was irrelevant, since it was no longer on his criminal record.
On 13 October 1998 the Tallinn Court of Appeal (Tallinna Ringkonnakohus) dismissed the applicant’s appeal. It considered that, although the applicant’s criminal record had been expunged, the fact of his conviction of theft in 1995 was still a factor relevant to his character. It also found it significant that the applicant had allegedly committed a new offence while he had been released on bail in other charges.
On 19 November 1998 the City Court extended the applicant’s detention until 22 January 1999 for reasons identical to those contained in its previous prolongation order of 22 September 1998.
Following the completion of the preliminary investigation on 13 January 1999, the City Court, by a decision of 20 January 1999, committed the applicant for trial and left unchanged the preventive custody measure. It joined to this case another criminal case against the applicant which concerned further acts of burglary, committed in a group of persons, as well as falsification of a document and unlawful possession of a firearm.
At a hearing before the City Court on 19 February 1999 the applicant requested his release from custody, arguing that his health had deteriorated and that he had difficulty eating without proper dentures which had been broken by a police officer at the time of his arrest. His request was refused on the ground of the danger of his re-offending if released.
As one of the co-defendant’s had fallen ill, the City Court adjourned the trial hearing.
At a hearing on 12 April 1999 the City Court refused another request by the applicant for release from custody, referring to the applicant’s prior criminal conviction and his continued criminal activity when he had been released on bail in another criminal case against him. There was thus reason to believe that the applicant would commit further offences if released. The court adjourned the trial hearing due to the ill-health of one of the co-defendants which prevented him from attending.
The applicant’s further requests for release were rejected by the City Court on the same grounds by decisions of 26 May 1999, 22 September 1999, 1 December 1999, 2 February 2000, 30 March 2000 and 31 May 2000. On these dates the trial hearing was adjourned due to the absence of victims, witnesses, defence counsel or co-defendants.
On 4 October 2000 the City Court granted the applicant’s request for release, noting that the applicant had already been in custody for over two years, that he had a fixed place of residence and that the parties had not agreed to sever the charges against the applicant from the rest of the case.
From the end of the year 2000 until the end of year 2003 the trial hearing was adjourned on several occasions for various reasons.
On 22 December 2003, in summary proceedings, the City Court convicted the applicant of burglary, unlawful possession of a firearm and falsification of a document and sentenced him to 2 years, 2 months and 27 days’ imprisonment. The sentence was considered as having been served during the two periods the applicant had spent in pre-trial detention.
According to Article 35-1 §§ 1 and 2 and Article 37 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1961, as in force at the material time, the accused and his defence lawyer have the right to submit applications and file appeals relating to the criminal proceedings.
Article 68 § 1 of the Code stipulates that in the choice of preventive measure, there shall be taken into account the seriousness of the committed criminal offence, the personality of the suspect, accused, or accused at trial, the possibility that the suspect, accused, or accused at trial may abscond from the investigation or from the court proceedings or may impede the establishment of the truth, and the state of health, age, marital status and other facts concerning the suspect, accused or accused at trial which may be relevant to the application of a preventive measure.
Article 69 of the Code provides that a prohibition on leaving a place of residence may be imposed on a suspect, accused or accused at trial, i.e. he or she may be obliged to give a written commitment not to leave his or her permanent or temporary residence without the permission of a preliminary investigator, prosecutor or court. If the suspect, accused or accused at trial violates such a commitment, a more severe preventive measure may be applied with regard to him or her, a consequence of which the suspect, accused or accused at trial shall be warned upon the obtaining of his or her signature.
Article 71-1 § 1 of the Code stipulates that a judge may, at the request of an accused, replace the preventive custody measure with bail.
According to Article 73 of the Code, a preventive custody measure may be applied in respect of a suspect, accused or accused at trial in order to prevent them from evading the criminal proceedings or committing a new offence, as well as to ensure the enforcement of a court judgment (§ 1).
Permission to take a suspect or accused into custody is given by a county or city court judge on the basis of a reasoned request from an investigator (§ 2).
A person taken into custody has the right to request his or her interrogation by a county or city court judge with the participation of defence counsel (§ 4).
A county or city court judge must give a reasoned ruling on the grant or refusal of a preventive custody measure. The judge must sign the ruling and certify it with the court seal (§ 5).
Extensions of the period of custody are effected under the provisions which regulate the taking of a person into custody (§ 5-1).
Article 78 of the Code stipulates that an investigator, prosecutor or court may annul a preventive measure if there is no further need for its application, or may alter the preventive measure and choose a new preventive measure (§ 1).
A preventive measure applied in respect of an accused at trial may be altered or annulled by the trial court or a higher court (§ 3).
Under Article 189 of the Code, when committing the accused for trial, a court must examine whether a preventive measure has been correctly applied.
Article 222 of the Code empowers a court to amend or annul, in the course of the court proceedings, preventive measures previously applied with regard to the accused at trial.