The case originated in an application (no. 41916/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Macedonian national, Mr Boris Stojanovski (“the applicant”), on 26 October 2004.
The applicant was represented by Mr B. Grozdanovski, a lawyer practising in . The Macedonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs R. Lazareska Gerovska.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the proceedings had been unreasonably long and that he had been denied the right of access to a court.
On 2 February 2009 the President of the Fifth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1983 and lives in .
On 20 February 1994 the applicant, a minor at the time, was injured in a fight with Mr T.P. and Mr N.Z. (“the defendants”).
On 10 February 1995 an investigating judge discontinued the investigation after the public prosecutor had stayed the prosecution. On 20 February 1995 the applicant took over the prosecution as a subsidiary complainant. On 24 April 1997 the public prosecutor joined and took over the prosecution. Prior to that date, the trial court had set five hearings and obtained an expert opinion, according to which the applicant had sustained serious bodily injuries.
Thirteen hearings were rescheduled between 18 August 1997 and 11 December 1998 because of the absence of the defendants or the expert. On 11 June 1999 an alternative expert report was drawn up regarding the nature and severity of the injuries sustained by the applicant.
On 10 January 2000 the Skopje Court of First Instance (“the trial court”) found the defendants guilty of causing grievous bodily harm and sentenced them to a suspended prison term. It found that they had hit the applicant on the head, as a result of which he had sustained concussion (потрес на мозог). The court further advised the applicant, under section 101 of the Criminal Proceedings Act (see paragraph 22 below) to pursue a compensation claim which he had made in the course of the proceedings by means of a separate civil action before the civil courts. It was noted that this latter claim had not been specified.
On 6 July 2000 the Skopje Court of Appeal allowed the defendants' appeals and quashed the trial court's decision.
On 12 February 2002 the Forensic Institute submitted to the court another expert opinion which stated that the applicant had sustained concussion, a serious injury.
On 19 November 2002 the trial court convicted the defendants again and sentenced them to a suspended prison term. It reiterated its earlier decision as regards the applicant's claim for reparation of the pecuniary and non-pecuniary loss related to the injury, namely, that he should pursue it in separate civil proceedings.
At a public hearing held on 10 July 2003, the Skopje Court of Appeal quashed this decision and remitted the case for fresh consideration.
On 18 March 2004 the trial court discontinued the proceedings because the prosecution had become time-barred. It further advised the applicant that he could claim compensation by means of a separate civil action before the civil courts. No appeal having been submitted, this decision became final on 14 May 2004.
During the proceedings, the applicant complained to many State institutions about the way the proceedings in question had been conducted.
Section 12 (3) of the Civil Proceedings Act of 1998, as applicable at the material time, provided that civil courts were bound by decisions given by criminal courts finding an accused guilty, in respect of the commission of the offence and the convict's criminal responsibility.
Section 197 enumerates grounds under which civil proceedings are suspended ipso jure. Under section 198 (2), the civil court may suspend proceedings if the decision depended on whether an offence had been committed, who the perpetrator was and if he or she was guilty.
Under section 55 of the Criminal Proceedings Act, during the investigation the victim is entitled to propose evidence relevant for establishing the truth and determination of his or her compensation claim (имотноправно барање). At the trial, the victim can propose evidence, question the accused, witnesses and experts, give statements and make additional proposals.
Section 96 provides that a compensation claim related to a criminal offence is to be decided in criminal proceedings, unless it significantly delays those proceedings.
Under section 98 (2) and (3), a compensation claim may be submitted in criminal proceedings before they are concluded at first instance. It should be detailed and supported by evidence.
Under section 100, the court can question the accused about the grounds of the compensation claim. If a decision on the compensation claim would significantly delay the proceedings, the court must confine itself to gathering evidence which would be impossible or significantly difficult to gather at a later stage.
Section 101 provides that the court decides on the compensation claim. If the court finds the accused guilty, the victim may be awarded full or partial compensation. In case of the latter, the court may advise him or her to seek the remainder in civil proceedings. The same applies if evidence taken in criminal proceedings is insufficient to have damages awarded (section 101 (2)).
In case of an acquittal or dismissal of the prosecution, if the proceedings are discontinued or the indictment is rejected, the court is to advise the victim to pursue his or her compensation claim in civil proceedings (section 101 (3)).
Section 195 provided for a right to pecuniary damages in case of bodily injury. Under section 200, the victim could seek non-pecuniary damages sustained on similar grounds.
Under section 376, a compensation claim became time-barred three years after the victim became aware of the damage and the person responsible. The absolute time-bar for compensation was five years after the occurrence of the damage.
If the damage occurred as a result of a criminal offence, a claim for compensation became time-barred after expiration of the time-bar for criminal prosecution, if the latter lasted longer (section 377).
The running of the time-bar was interrupted if a plaintiff brought an action before a court or competent authority with a view to determining or securing his or her claim (section 388).
Under section 390, if a court rejected an action for lack of competence or on another ground unrelated to the merits of the claim and if the plaintiff resubmitted that claim within 3 months after that decision had become final, it would be deemed that the time-bar had been interrupted with the first action. That applied if a court or competent authority advised the person concerned to pursue his or her claim by means of a separate civil action.
If the time-bar was interrupted by a claim having been submitted in other proceedings, it started running after the settlement of the dispute (section 392 (3)).
The Obligations Act of 2001 provides for the same rules of compensation, the time-bar and its interruption as those described in paragraphs 24-29 above (sections 184, 189, 365, 366, 377, 379 and 381 (3)).
With a decision confirmed at second level, civil proceedings in which the plaintiff claimed compensation for the injuries sustained by a third person were stayed pending the outcome of criminal proceedings against the defendant (П. бр. 3183/07).