The case originated in an application (no. 22875/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Andrey Viktorovich Romenskiy (“the applicant”), on 29 April 2002.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms O. Preobrazhenskaya and Mr N. Tsoy, lawyers practising in Moscow and . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev and subsequently by V. Milinchuk, former Representatives of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had not been tried by an impartial tribunal and that there had been a violation of the presumption of innocence in his case.
On 2 May 2006 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1984 and lives in the Krasnodar Region.
During the evening of 24 March 2001 the applicant, a minor at the time, was having a drink with his friends, K., V., and B.D. They then met up with a group of youths, including Z., B.C., B.B. and G., who were also under the influence of alcohol. The two groups started a quarrel which ended with a short fight. According to the applicant, when he and his friends left the scene of the fight nobody was seriously hurt. He just had some bruises on his face. However, it appears that during the fight or immediately afterwards G. was stabbed with a knife. He was taken to hospital, where he died.
On the next day the applicant was questioned, charged with the murder of G. and detained in custody pending the investigation. The police searched the scene of the incident, the applicant’s house, and seized his clothes. The clothes were then sent to a forensic expert, who concluded that red stains on the applicant’s jacket were from G.’s blood. Blood stains were also found on the shoes and clothes of K. and B.B., who were also arrested in connection with the incident but were later released and the charges against them dropped. The prosecution concluded that it was the applicant who had stabbed G.
According to the applicant, on 29 November 2001, shortly before the commencement of the trial in his case, he was beaten in the detention centre by one of the guards.
At the first hearing before the trial court, on 30 November 2001, the defence requested the court to release the applicant pending trial. The court refused, concluding as follows:
“[The application for release should be dismissed] on the ground that the applicant has committed a serious crime, he has not produced any document that would prove [that there exists] a danger to his life or health”.
At the trial the applicant pleaded not guilty. He did not deny that he had had a fight with G., but denied stabbing him with a knife. The defence requested the court to summon over a dozen witnesses. The court heard some of them but several witnesses were not summoned or failed to appear. The court questioned several witnesses to the incident. None of them had seen G. being stabbed. K. testified that before the incident of 24 March 2001 the applicant had shown him a home-made knife. He said that on leaving the scene of the incident, the applicant told him that he had stabbed G. with the knife. The court also heard the investigators in charge of the case and examined the record of the search of the scene of the incident, the results of the post-mortem examination of G.’s body, and the results of the forensic examination of the stains on the applicant’s jacket.
On 10 December 2001 the Dinskiy District Court found the applicant guilty of the murder of G. and sentenced him to six years’ imprisonment. The applicant submitted that it took the court no more than one hour and forty minutes to hear the applicant’s two legal representatives and his own final submissions, then to discuss, draft and deliver the judgment, which was three pages long.
The applicant appealed. The arguments by the defence were centred on the taking and interpretation of evidence in the proceedings. However, chapter 1 of the appeal brief stated: “The investigation and trial were incomplete, one-sided and tendentious, with an accusatory bias”. Point 1.3 of that chapter read as follows:
“1.3.  Yet, the most striking example of the partiality of the court and the accusatory bias of the proceedings was a ruling made by the court 10 days prior to the delivery of the judgment and before the end of the trial court’s examination of the evidence. In the ruling of 30.11.2001 the court predetermined the [applicant’s] guilt, finding that: ‘... [Mr] Romenskiy ha[d] committed a serious crime ...’ (trial hearing record, page 7)”.
On 27 March 2002 the , sitting as a court of appeal (кассационная инстанция), upheld the judgment. The court heard the parties and concluded that the applicant’s guilt had been sufficiently established at the trial. The  found that there had been no significant violations of the procedural or substantive law which would require a review of the judgment. The issue of the alleged impartiality was not analysed in explicit terms.
According to the applicant, he brought supervisory review appeal against his conviction, referring, inter alia, to partiality on the part of the judge. However, his arguments to that end were rejected without detailed reasoning, and the supervisory review of the judgment was refused.
Under the “old” Code of Criminal Procedure (CCrP), in force at the material time (the Code of Criminal Procedure of 27 October 1960, effective until 30 June 2002), a decision to order detention pending trial could only be taken by a prosecutor or a court (Articles 11, 89 and 96). In making the decision the relevant authority had to take into account, in particular, the gravity of the charge (Article 91). Amendments on 14 March 2001 repealed the provision that permitted the defendant’s placement in custody on the sole ground of the dangerousness of the criminal offence imputed to him.
A prosecutor’s order, or a court decision, ordering detention pending trial was to be reasoned and justified (Article 92). The judge had the power to rule on the defendant’s application for release, if submitted (Article 223). Such decision was to be delivered in the form of a procedural ruling (Article 261). Pursuant to a ruling of the Constitutional Court of 2 July 1998, all rulings having the effect of extending an applicant’s detention pending trial became appealable to a higher court, separately from the judgment on the merits. The time-limits for examination of appeals against procedural rulings rejecting an application for release were the same as those established for appeals against a judgment (Article 331 of the CCrP in fine).
Article 342 of the old Code specified the grounds for quashing or changing judgments on appeal, which are as follows: (i) a prejudicial or incomplete inquest, investigation or court examination; (ii) inconsistency between the facts of the case and the conclusions reached by the court; (iii) a grave violation of procedural law; (iv) misapplication of the [substantive] law; (v) inadequacy of the sentence with regard to the gravity of offence and the convict’s personality. Article 332 of the old Code stipulated that the appellate court was empowered to examine “the materials of the case and additional materials submitted [by the parties]”.