The case originated in 119 applications against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Ukrainian nationals and companies based in Ukraine and a Russian national, whose details are specified in the appended tables (“the applicants”).
In the course of the proceedings Mr Borovskyy (application no. 39477/07) died, and his wife, Ms Borovska expressed the wish to pursue the application.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr N. Kultchytskyy, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applications, which mainly concern non-enforcement of domestic decisions given in the applicants’ favour and excessive delays in the enforcement of decisions, were communicated to the Government on various dates.
On various dates the Government submitted to the Court a number of unilateral declarations aimed at resolving the non-enforcement issues raised in seventeen applications (the applications concerned are specified in the appended tables). The Government requested the Court to strike the applications concerned out of the list of cases pursuant to Article 37 § 1 (c) of the Convention on the basis of the declarations. The Court examined the declarations and decided to reject the Government’s request.
The Russian Government, having been informed of their right to intervene in the proceedings in respect of the applicant in application no. 12172/08 (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 of the Rules of Court), indicated that they did not wish to exercise that right.
On the dates set out in the appended table the domestic courts and commissions on labour disputes delivered decisions according to which the applicants were entitled to various pecuniary amounts and/or to have certain actions taken in their favour. The decisions became final and thus enforceable. However, the applicants were unable to secure the enforcement of these decisions in full or in due time as a result of the national authorities’ failure to take action.
Some of the applicants also made submissions concerning factual and legal matters unrelated to the above non-enforcement issues.