The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission") on 16 October 1987, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 para. 1 and Article 47 (art. 32-1, art. 47) of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ("the Convention"). The case originated in an application (no. 10486/83) against  lodged with the Commission on 27 October 1982 under Article 25 (art. 25) by a Danish citizen, Mr Mogens Hauschildt.
The Commission’s request referred to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48) and to the declaration whereby  recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46) (art. 46). The purpose of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether or not the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1).
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 para. 3 (d) of the Rules of Court, the applicant stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings pending before the Court and designated the lawyer who would represent him (Rule 30).
The Chamber to be constituted included, as ex officio members, Mr J. Gersing, the elected judge of Danish nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr R. Ryssdal, the President of the Court (Rule 21 para. 3 (b)). On 30 November 1987, the President drew by lot, in the presence of the Registrar, the names of the five other members, namely Mr J. Pinheiro Farinha, Mr R. Macdonald, Mr R. Bernhardt, Mr A. Spielmann and Mr J. De Meyer (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 para. 4) (art. 43). Subsequently, Professor B. Gomard was appointed by the Government of Denmark ("the Government") on 1 August 1988 to sit as an ad hoc judge in place of Mr Gersing, who had died, and Mr C. Russo replaced Mr Pinheiro Farinha, who was prevented from taking part in the consideration of the case (Rules 22 para. 1, 23 para. 1 and 24 para. 1).
Mr Ryssdal assumed the office of President of the Chamber (Rule 21 para. 5) and, through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Government, the Delegate of the Commission and the applicant’s lawyer on the need for a written procedure (Rule 37 para. 1). Thereafter, in accordance with the President’s orders and directions, the registry received on 29 April 1988 the applicant’s memorial and on 16 May 1988 the Government’s memorial.
By letter of 4 August 1988, the Secretary to the Commission informed the Registrar that the Delegate would submit his observations at the hearing.
Having consulted, through the Registrar, the representatives who would be appearing before the Court, the President directed on 4 August 1988 that the oral proceedings should open on 26 September 1988 (Rule 38).
The hearing took place in public at the , , on the appointed day. Immediately before it opened, the Chamber held a preparatory meeting, in the course of which it decided to relinquish jurisdiction forthwith in favour of the plenary Court (Rule 50).
There appeared before the Court:
- for the Government
- for the Commission
- for the applicant
The Court heard addresses by Mr Lehmann and Mr Foighel for the Government, by Mr Danelius for the Commission and by Mr Robertson and Mr Reindel for the applicant, as well as their replies to its questions. The Agent of the Government and counsel for the applicant filed several documents during the hearing.
On various dates between 26 September 1988 and 27 January 1989, the registry received the applicant’s claims under Article 50 (art. 50) of the Convention and the observations of the Government and the Commission thereon.
The applicant, Mr Mogens Hauschildt, who is a Danish citizen born in 1941, currently resides in .
In 1974, he established a company, Scandinavian Capital Exchange PLC ("SCE"), which traded as a bullion dealer and also provided financial services. SCE became the largest bullion dealer in Scandinavia, with associated companies in , , the , the  and . The applicant was appointed its managing director.
Over the years and until the end of 1979, difficulties arose between SCE and the Danish National Bank, the Internal Revenue Service and the Ministry of Trade. They concerned the flow of money to and from SCE and its associated companies abroad.
On 30 January 1980 the Internal Revenue Service forwarded a complaint to the police in which it stated that the activities of the applicant and SCE seemed to involve violations of the Danish tax laws and the Penal Code.
After obtaining a warrant from a court, the police arrested the applicant, seized all available documents at the seat of the company and closed its business on 31 January 1980.
The applicant was brought before the Copenhagen City Court (Københavns byret) the following day and charged with fraud and tax evasion. The court directed that he should be kept under arrest for three consecutive periods of twenty-four hours; no objection was raised.
On 2 February 1980, after hearing the prosecution and the defence, the City Court held that the charges were not ill-founded and remanded the applicant in custody in solitary confinement under sections 762 and 770(3) of the Administration of Justice Act (Retsplejeloven - "the Act"; see paragraphs 33 and 36 below).
As a result of successive decisions, a number of which were taken by Judge Claus Larsen, Mr Hauschildt was held in detention on remand until the public trial began before the City Court on 27 April 1981 (see paragraphs 19-21 below). He also spent some time in solitary confinement (31 January to 27 August 1980).
During the investigation stage, the police seized further documents and property. Inquiries were also carried out in the , the , , ,  and the . In accordance with the European Convention of 20 April 1959 on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters, the judge of the City Court on several occasions authorised the prosecution to seek co-operation from other European countries in securing documents as well as in other matters (see paragraph 22 below).
On 4 February 1981 the indictment, which ran to 86 pages, was served on Mr Hauschildt. He was charged with fraud and embezzlement on eight counts involving approximately 45 million Danish crowns.
The trial at first instance began before the City Court, sitting with one professional judge, Judge Larsen, and two lay judges, on 27 April 1981. According to the applicant, he had complained about the presiding judge before the trial, but no formal request was made on the matter. At the trial he was advised by his lawyers that section 60(2) of the Act debarred any challenge of the judge on the basis of the pre-trial decisions that he had made (see paragraphs 20-22 and 28 below).
In the course of over 130 court sittings at the trial the City Court heard some 150 witnesses as well as the applicant and examined a substantial number of documents. Furthermore, opinions from appointed experts, in particular accountants, were taken into consideration. The court also issued numerous orders concerning the remand in custody and solitary confinement of the applicant, the sending of commissions rogatory and other procedural matters (see paragraph 24 below).
The City Court, with Judge Larsen presiding, gave judgment on 1 November 1982. It found Mr Hauschildt guilty on all counts and sentenced him to seven years’ imprisonment.
The applicant appealed to the High Court of Eastern Denmark (Østre Landsret). This court sat with three professional judges and three lay judges. Its jurisdiction extended to both the law and the facts, and involved a trial de novo.
The hearing of the appeal began on 15 August 1983. Before the appeal hearing, the applicant had raised with the presiding judge an objection against one of the judges on the ground of his involvement in a City Court decision to seize the applicant’s correspondence and assets. However, counsel for the defence refused to argue this point on the basis of section 60(2) of the Act, and Mr Hauschildt withdrew the objection.
On 2 March 1984 the High Court found the applicant guilty on six of the eight counts and sentenced him to five years’ imprisonment. The extensive character of the fraud was treated as an aggravating factor. On the other hand, the court took into account the fact that the applicant had been held in custody on remand since 31 January 1980, and considered this detention harsher than regular imprisonment. Mr Hauschildt was released on the same day.
The applicant’s subsequent application for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court (Højesteret) was rejected by the Ministry of Justice on 4 May 1984.
As already mentioned (see paragraph 11 above), the City Court judge had decided on 2 February 1980 to remand Mr Hauschildt in custody in solitary confinement. In the judge’s opinion, there were reasons to believe that the applicant, if at large, would abscond or impede the investigation (section 762(1) nos. 1 and 3 and section 770(3) of the Act; see paragraphs 33 and 36 below). As justification for the detention he listed the following elements:
(1) the circumstance that the applicant had lived outside  until 1976 and at the time of his arrest was planning to move to ;
(2) his economic interests abroad;
(3) the importance of the case;
(4) the risk of his obstructing the investigation by exerting influence on persons in  and abroad.
In accordance with section 767 of the Act, the applicant’s continued detention on remand was subject to regular judicial control carried out at maximum intervals of four weeks. The elements set out in the initial decision of 2 February 1980, which had been taken by Judge Rasmussen, were the basis for the applicant’s detention until 10 April 1980.
On 10 April the City Court judge, Mr Larsen, who was subsequently to preside over the trial court that heard the applicant’s case (see paragraph 13 above), also relied on section 762(1) no. 2 as a ground for his remand in custody (danger of his committing new crimes; see paragraph 33 below). The reason prompting that decision was the fact that the applicant had, whilst in custody, secretly communicated with his wife and asked her to remove money from certain bank accounts as well as certain personal property. Subsequently, on 30 April, the same judge ordered her detention on remand and the stopping of a letter written by the applicant.
At a later stage, when ruling on 5 September 1980 on an appeal against an order of further remand in custody, the High Court referred in addition to sub-section 2 of section 762 (see paragraph 33 below), since the investigations carried out by the police at that time indicated a possible loss by the injured parties of approximately 19,5 million Danish crowns. From 24 September on, Judge Larsen also relied additionally on this sub-section.
The applicant’s detention on remand continued to be based on each of the three paragraphs of sub-section (1) and on sub-section (2) of section 762 (see paragraph 33 below) until 17 August 1982 when paragraph 3 of sub-section (1) was no longer relied on.
As from the applicant’s arrest on 31 January 1980 and until the trial started on 27 April 1981, police investigations and his continuing detention on remand necessitated decisions to be taken by the City Court sitting with one professional judge. A total of approximately forty court sittings were held in connection with the case during this period, twenty of which were concerned with remand in custody and, from 31 January to 27 August 1980, also with the question of solitary confinement. Fifteen of these decisions were taken by Judge Larsen (10 April, 30 April, 28 May, 25 June, 20 August, 27 August, 24 September, 15 October, 12 November, 3 December and 10 December 1980 and 4 February, 25 February, 11 March and 8 April 1981). On five of these occasions he ordered prolongation of the applicant’s solitary confinement (10 April, 30 April, 28 May, 25 June and 20 August 1980). On 27 August 1980, however, he terminated the solitary confinement.
During this period, the City Court decided on three occasions (5 March, 16 June and 13 August), on application by the police, to request the co-operation of other countries in securing documents and in other matters (see paragraph 12 above). Two of these decisions were taken by Judge Larsen (16 June and 13 August 1980).
The City Court judge was furthermore called on to rule on a number of other procedural matters such as the seizure of the applicant’s property and documents, his contacts with the press, access to police reports, visits in prison, payment of defence counsel fees and correspondence. Besides the order of 30 April 1980 to detain Mr Hauschildt’s wife on remand (see paragraph 20 above), Judge Larsen gave directions on 28 May 1980 as to the stopping of another of the applicant’s letters, on 12 November 1980 as to the seizure of a certain amount of money which allegedly belonged to the applicant, on 4 February 1981 as to a change of defence counsel, and finally on 11 March 1981 as to the applicant’s access to certain parts of the police files. These rulings were delivered at the request either of the prosecutor or of the defence counsel.
Mr Hauschildt brought various decisions taken by the City Court judge before the High Court sitting on appeal with three professional judges. On five occasions the High Court was called upon to inquire into the applicant’s continued remand in custody. Altogether thirteen different judges participated in these decisions, none of whom was subsequently involved in the appeal proceedings regarding conviction and sentence. The same applied to the six judges who heard appeals on other procedural matters.
During Mr Hauschildt’s trial, from 27 April 1981 to 1 November 1982 (see paragraphs 13-15 above), the City Court, sitting with Judge Larsen as presiding judge and two lay judges, was also required to give rulings on a number of procedural matters. In particular, the court prolonged the applicant’s detention on remand twenty-three times on the basis of section 762(1) and (2). Except on two occasions, these orders were made by Judge Larsen and, on four, he was joined by the two lay judges. Furthermore, from 2 July to 7 October 1981, the applicant was kept in solitary confinement at the request of the prosecuting authorities. Although the first order to this effect was made by another judge, Judge Larsen on two occasions prolonged the solitary confinement. In addition, on five occasions, he authorised the seeking of the co-operation of other countries.
The applicant entered nineteen appeals against these various rulings to the High Court. On twelve occasions, the High Court upheld the decision of the City Court concerning remand in custody. Fourteen judges participated in these judgments, none of whom was subsequently involved in the hearing of the applicant’s appeal against conviction and sentence. The applicant’s other appeals related to matters such as the appointment of defence counsel, the hearing of further witnesses, the issue of search warrants, custody in solitary confinement and travel expenses for defence counsel. Twelve different judges took part in these decisions. On 14 July 1981 three High Court judges upheld the order continuing the applicant’s solitary confinement, one of whom also sat on the court for the hearing of the applicant’s appeal against judgment.
According to Danish law, the applicant was still considered as being in custody on remand during the appeal proceedings (see paragraphs 16-17 above). The High Court had accordingly to review the detention at least every four weeks. Out of the nineteen renewals ordered, ten were ordered before the hearing opened, whereas the remaining nine were ordered during the sittings. With a few exceptions all decisions concerning detention on remand were adopted by the same judges as took part in the proceedings on appeal. During the hearing (15 August 1983 to 2 March 1984), the professional judges were joined by three lay judges.
The above-mentioned rulings of the High Court were based on section 762(1) no. 1 and 762(2) of the Act (see paragraph 33 below). The court attached particular importance to the gravity of the charges and to the fact that the applicant had lived abroad and still had substantial economic interests abroad.
The applicant twice obtained leave from the Ministry of Justice to bring the issue of his continued detention on remand before the Supreme Court. On 26 January 1983 the Supreme Court upheld the decision of the High Court, while considering that the detention should also be based on section 762(1) no. 2 (see paragraph 33 below). In fact, some of the offences for which the applicant had been convicted by the City Court had been committed whilst he had been in custody on remand. On 9 December 1983 the Supreme Court directed that the detention should continue but be based solely on section 762(1) nos. 1 and 2 (see paragraph 33 below). The majority of the court found that the public interest no longer required the applicant to be kept in custody under section 762(2).
The challenge of a judge is governed by sections 60 to 63 of the Act:
Section 60
"(1) No one may act as a judge in a case where he,
is himself a party to the case, or has an interest in its outcome, or, if it is a criminal case, has suffered injury as a result of the criminal offence;
is related by blood or marriage to one of the parties in a civil case or with the accused in a criminal case, whether in lineal ascent or descent or collaterally up to and including first cousins, or is the spouse, guardian, adoptive or foster parent or adoptive or foster child of one of the parties or of the accused;
is married, or related by blood or marriage in lineal ascent or descent or collaterally up to and including first cousins, to a lawyer or other person representing one of the parties in a civil case or, in a criminal case, to the injured party or his representative or to any public prosecutor or police officer appearing in such a case or to the accused’s defence counsel;
has appeared as a witness or as an expert (syn- og skønsmand) in the case, or, if the case is a civil one, has acted in it as a lawyer or otherwise as representative of one of the parties, or, if the case is a criminal one, as a police officer, public prosecutor, defence counsel or other representative of the injured party;
has dealt with the case as a judge in the lower instance, or, if it is a criminal case, as member of the jury or as lay judge.
(2)  The fact that the judge may previously have had to deal with a case as a result of his holding several official functions shall not disqualify him, when there is no ground, in the circumstances of the case, to presume that he has any special interest in the outcome of the case."
Section 61
"In the situations mentioned in the preceding section, the judge shall, if he sits as a single judge, withdraw from sitting on the court by a decision pronounced by himself. If he sits on the court together with other judges, he shall inform the court of the circumstances which according to the preceding section may disqualify him. Likewise, the other judges on the court, whenever aware of such circumstances, are entitled and have the duty to raise the question of disqualification, whereafter the question is decided by the court, without the judge in question being excluded from taking part in the decision."
Section 62
"(1) The parties can not only demand that a judge withdraw from sitting in the instances referred to in section 60 but may also object to a judge hearing a case when other circumstances are capable of raising doubt about his complete impartiality. In such instances the judge, too, if he fears that the parties cannot trust him fully, may withdraw from sitting even when no objection is lodged against him. Where a case is heard by several judges, any one of them may raise the question whether any of the judges on the bench should step down on account of the circumstances described above.
(2) The questions which might arise under this section shall be decided in the same manner as is laid down in section 61 in regard to the situations enumerated in section 60."
Section 63
"The question whether or not a judge should remain on the bench, which when raised by one of the parties in civil matters is treated as other procedural objections, should as far as possible be raised before the beginning of the oral hearing. This question may be decided without the parties having been given the opportunity to submit comments."
According to the Government, no case-law on section 60(2) had been established by the Supreme Court at the time when the applicant’s case was pending before the Danish courts. However, by a ruling of 12 March 1987, the Supreme Court held that if a judge has directed the remand in custody of a person charged with a criminal offence, this shall not in itself be deemed to disqualify the judge from taking part in the subsequent trial and delivery of judgment.
In connection with an amendment extending the application of section 762(2) (see paragraph 35 below), section 60 was amended on 10 June 1987 by the Danish Parliament. Sub-section (2) as amended now provides that "no one shall act as a judge in the trial if, at an earlier stage of the proceedings, he has ordered the person concerned to be remanded into custody solely under section 762(2), unless the case is tried as a case in which the accused pleads guilty."
This amendment came into force on 1 July 1987.
In , the investigation is carried out by the prosecuting authorities, with the assistance of the police, and not by a judge. The functions of the police at the investigation stage are regulated by sections 742 and 743 of the Act, which provide:
Section 742
"(1) Information about criminal offences shall be submitted to the police.
 (2) The police shall set in motion an investigation either on the basis of such information or on their own initiative where there is a reasonable ground for believing that a criminal offence which is subject to public prosecution has been committed."
Section 743
"The aim of the investigation is to clarify whether the requirements for establishing criminal responsibility or for imposing any other sanction under criminal law are fulfilled and to produce information to be used in the determination of the case as well as to prepare the case for trial."
Section 746 of the Act governs the role of the court:
"The court shall settle disputes concerning the lawfulness of measures of investigation taken by the police as well as those concerning the rights of the suspect and the defence counsel, including requests from the defence counsel or the suspect concerning the carrying out of further investigation measures. The decision shall be taken on request by order of the court."
Arrest and detention on remand are dealt with in sections 760 and 762 of the Act:
Section 760
"(1) Any person who is taken into custody shall be released as soon as the reason for the arrest is no longer present. The time of his release shall appear in the report.
 (2)  Where the person taken into custody has not been released at an earlier stage he shall be brought before a judge within 24 hours after his arrest. The time of his arrest and of his appearance in court shall appear in the court transcript."
Section 762
"(1)  A suspect may be detained on remand when there is a justified reason to believe that he has committed an offence which is subject to public prosecution, provided the offence may under the law result in imprisonment for one year and six months or more and if
according to information received concerning the suspect’s situation there is specific reason to believe that he will evade prosecution or execution of judgment, or
according to information received concerning the suspect’s situation there is specific reason to fear that, if at large, he will commit a new offence of the nature described above, or
in view of the circumstances of the case there is specific reason to believe that the suspect will impede the investigation, in particular by removing evidence or by warning or influencing others.
(2) A suspect may furthermore be detained on remand when there is a ‘particularly confirmed suspicion’ [translation supplied by the Government of the Danish phrase saerlig bestyrket mistanke] that he has committed an offence which is subject to public prosecution and which may under the law result in imprisonment for six years or more and when respect for the public interest according to the information received about the gravity of the case is judged to require that the suspect should not be at liberty.
(3) Detention on remand may not be imposed if the offence can be expected to result in a fine or in light imprisonment (haefte) or if the deprivation of liberty will be disproportionate to the interference with the suspect’s situation, the importance of the case and the outcome expected if the suspect is found guilty."
Sub-section 2 of section 762 is applicable even in the absence of any of the conditions set out in sub-section 1. Section 762(2) was first inserted in the Act in 1935, following an aggravated rape case. In the Parliamentary record concerning this amendment (Rigsdagstidende, 1934-35 Part B, col. 2159), it is stated:
"When everyone assumes that the accused is guilty and therefore anticipates serious criminal prosecution against him, it may in the circumstances be highly objectionable that people, in their business and social lives, still have to observe and endure his moving around freely. Even though his guilt and its consequences have not yet been established by final judgment, the impression may be given of a lack of seriousness and consistency in the enforcement of the law, which may be likely to confuse the concept of justice."
Section 762(2) was amended in 1987 in order to extend its application to certain crimes of violence which were expected to entail a minimum of sixty days’ imprisonment. In reply to a criticism in an editorial in the newspaper Politiken, the Danish Minister of Justice wrote on 30 December 1986:
"In so far as it ... has been suggested that the Bill opens possibilities for the imprisonment of innocent persons, I find reason to stress that my proposed Bill makes it a condition that there is a particularly confirmed suspicion [the Minister’s emphasis] that the accused has committed the crime before he can be remanded in custody. Thus there has to be a very high degree of clarity with regard to the question of guilt before the provision can be applied and this is the very means of ensuring that innocent persons are not imprisoned."
Solitary confinement is governed by section 770(3) of the Act, which at the relevant time read as follows:
"On application by the police the court may decide that the detainee shall be totally or partially isolated if the purpose of the detention on remand so requires."
This provision was amended on 6 June 1984.
Mr Hauschildt first wrote to the Commission on 26 August 1980. In this and further communications registered as application no. 10486/83, he referred to Articles 3, 5, 6, 7 and 10 (art. 3, art. 5, art. 6, art. 7, art. 10) of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 4 (P4-1). As regards Article 6 (art. 6), he claimed that he did not receive a fair trial by an impartial tribunal within a reasonable time; in support of this contention, he pointed out, inter alia, that the presiding judge of the City Court and the High Court judges, who had respectively convicted him and examined his appeal, had taken before and during his trials numerous decisions regarding his detention on remand and other procedural matters.
On 9 October 1986 the Commission declared the application admissible as regards this last complaint but inadmissible in all other respects.
In its report adopted on 16 July 1987, the Commission expressed the opinion that there had been no violation of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) of the Convention (nine votes to seven). The full text of the Commission’s opinion and of the collective dissenting opinion contained in the report is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.