The case originated in an application (no. 46575/09) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Maltese nationals, Mr Joseph Bellizzi, Jonathan Belizzi and Ms Tiziana Bellizzi (“the applicants”), on 15 August 2009.
The applicants were represented by Dr T. Azzopardi, a lawyer practising in Valetta. The Maltese Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Dr Silvio Camilleri, Attorney General.
The applicants particularly alleged that there had been a violation of Article 6 of the Convention in view of the lack of impartiality of the  and an interference with their property rights contrary to Article 1 of Protocol No.1 to the Convention and Article 14 of the Convention.
On 1 February 2010 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
Mr Vincent De Gaetano, the judge elected in respect of , was unable to sit in the case (Rule 28). Accordingly the President of the Chamber decided to appoint Judge David Scicluna to sit as an ad hoc judge (Rule 29 § 1(b)).
The applicants were born in 1960, 1988 and 1991 respectively and live in . The second and third applicants lodged their application in their capacity as heirs of their late mother, Marianne Bellizzi.
The first applicant is a full-time boatman who earns a living from his boat, which he has moored at berth 15 of the Wied iz-Zurrieq Pier for over twenty years.
The first applicant’s family had made use of the berth for many years on the basis of an encroachment permit issued to the first applicant’s uncle (MB) on 10 June 1970. Such usage had been tolerated by the State in the absence of legislation regulating such matters. In a judgment of 21 March 1970 liquidating the movable assets bequeathed by the first applicant’s grandparents, it was held that the said berth should be left for the common use of the first applicant’s father and uncle. In the event that there would not be sufficient space to moor both of their boats, mooring would be done on a first-come first-served basis. This practice was respected by the first applicant and his cousin, X (a part-time boatman since 1975), as successors to their late parents, following the first applicant’s taking up full-time boatmanship in 1981.
Notwithstanding the above arrangement, the permit continued to be issued in the name of the first applicant’s uncle MB. The latter passed away in 1983. In 1986 when the Commissioner of Lands (“”) became aware of this, he revoked the encroachment permit and did not issue a new one in anyone else’s name.
In 1992 X (MB’s son) wrote to the COL, informing him that his father had died in 1983 and requesting that the encroachment permit be issued in his name. The  replied that the permit had been revoked with effect from 1986.
Between 1991 (when the Malta Maritime Authority (“MMA”) took over the powers of the ) and 1995, neither the applicant nor his cousin attempted to regularise their position and made no requests to be allocated the berth.
On 21 June 1995 X was invited to apply for a temporary mooring permit and was told that there would be no objection to its issuance. On 26 June 1995 he applied to the MMA for a temporary mooring permit. One day later, on 27 June 1995, he was granted a temporary mooring permit for his sole use.
On 18 July 1995 the first applicant also applied for a permit. His application was rejected on the basis that a permit in respect of that berth had already been issued and that it would not be possible to issue two permits for the same berth.
His cousin having refused to share the berth with him, the first applicant and his wife lodged civil proceedings. While these proceedings were pending the first applicant’s wife died. Consequently, the second and third applicants intervened in the proceedings in their capacity as children and heirs of the deceased claimant.
According to the Government, in the meantime the first applicant made alternative arrangements and continued operating his boat in Wied iz-Zurrieq as he was and is still licensed to do to date by the Authority for Transport (successor to the MMA).
On 30 April 1999 the  found against the applicants, holding that it was the MMA which issued permits and that the latter was not bound by previous inheritance rights in respect of alleged permits for public land. Although various individuals had shared berths, it was a matter of policy not to issue more than one permit and once the MMA had acted within the parameters of the law it was not for the court to interfere with its decisions.
The applicants appealed.
On 5 June 2001 the Court of Appeal rejected their claims, holding that all previous permits and arrangements (which were moreover only customary and valid for as long as tolerated by the authorities) had terminated once the MMA was established. To determine their rights, individuals had been required to make an application within a specified time-limit, as X had done, but the applicant had failed to do so.
On 28 October 2002 the applicants instituted constitutional redress proceedings claiming violations of Article 1 of Protocol No.1 to the Convention, and Articles 6, 13 and 14 of the Convention. They emphasised that the court’s decisions had been based on a misconceived idea that there was a time-limit within which the first applicant had had to apply but had failed to do so. However, this alleged time-limit had had no legal basis.
On 6 May 2008 the  (First Hall) in its constitutional jurisdiction held that the rights of use in respect of a berth undoubtedly constituted a possession and a civil right according to domestic case-law. It noted that the cousins had the same rights, derived in the same manner, and that nowhere was it established in the law that previous owners of such rights of use should be deprived of them. Moreover, to date, X had been the only person to have been granted such a permit in the area and there was no policy disallowing the issue of multiple permits for the same berth.
In the Civil Court’s view, it was even more worrying that the ordinary court decisions had been based on the fact that the applicant had applied outside the time-limit. In reality, no law had stipulated such a time-limit. In fact, there had not even been a call for such applications and the authority had to be reprimanded for its erroneous oral testimony, especially in cases with such serious implications for the individuals concerned as the present case. Indeed, the decision taken by one person in favour of X, without in any way considering the applicants’ rights as the MMA was duty bound to do, had been totally arbitrary. It followed that the applicants’ property rights had been breached and that there had been a violation of Article 1 of Protocol No.1 to the Convention.
For the same reasons the court found a violation of Article 6 of the Convention. It further found a violation of Article 14 in conjunction with Article 1 of Protocol No.1 to the Convention, in that although no one else in the area had applied for or had been granted a permit and although the cousins had the same rights, the MMA had privileged X to the first applicant’s disadvantage. In consequence of these findings it was not necessary to consider the complaint under Article 13. It ordered the revocation of X’s permit and the issuance of a permit in the name of both users.
On 27 February 2009, on appeal, the  reversed the first-instance judgment.
It considered that a situation where a State tolerated a series of events or customs did not create a right. Thus, the first applicant had neither a right to the berth nor any legitimate expectation and, therefore, no possession, and the relevant Article was not applicable. The same applied in respect of Article 13. However, on the basis of the 1970 judgment the applicant could have requested the enforcement of his cousin’s obligation towards him, but this had nothing to do with the MMA.
As to Article 6, the  held that the first-instance court had not been competent to review the merits of the case. Moreover, the applicant could have brought proceedings claiming that there had been false testimony and in consequence requested a retrial. As to the proceedings taken as a whole, it did not appear that they had been unfair. However, Article 6 had not been applicable to the case in issue in any event. Moreover, it considered that since the Court of Appeal had rejected his claim, holding that the applicant had lost his locus standi when he failed to apply for the said permit, and since this judgment had become res judicata, the applicant could no longer complain of an unfair trial.
It followed that since neither Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention nor Article 6 applied, Article 14 could not be called into question.
The applicant alleged that the Legal Secretary of the Office of the Chief Justice (the latter having presided over the proceedings in question) had drafted the relevant judgment and was one of the team of lawyers representing the MMA.
Use of moorings at Wied iz-Zurrieq had been regulated by “encroachment permits” until 1991. The permits were issued by the Commissioner of Lands as administrator of the Government’s immoveable property. The encroachment permits were of their very nature precarious in that they granted no rights to the foreshore and could be withdrawn at the discretion of the Government.
Act XXVII of 1991 established the Malta Maritime Authority, which has the power, inter alia, to prohibit, control or regulate the use by any person of a port or port facility. This authority is governed by Chapter 352 of the Laws of Malta, namely the Malta Maritime Authority Act.
Judicial assistants are employed either part-time or full-time. They are appointed by the President of Malta after selection by a panel consisting of judges and one member appointed by the Public Service Commission. Prior to commencing his or her duties, a judicial assistant has to take an oath of office before the Court of Appeal that he/she will act faithfully, honestly and to the best of his/her ability in the performance of his/her duties as a judicial assistant. Judicial assistants are assigned to a particular court (or, where more than one judge or magistrate sits in a court, to a particular judge or magistrate) by the Chief Justice. Once a judicial assistant is so assigned he/she acts under the direction and control of the court or of the particular judge or magistrate. In addition to any power lawfully assigned to him/her by such court, a judicial assistant has the power to order the attendance of any person for the purpose of giving evidence or to make an affidavit or a declaration, or to produce documents, at such place and time as he/she may specify in the order.
According to section 97A (3) and (4) of the Code of Organisation and Civil Procedure (the “COCP”), Chapter 12 of the Laws of Malta, the duties of judicial assistants include:
“ (3) (a) to assist in the judicial process and at the request of the court to participate in the proceedings pending before a court, including any research or other work required therefor, and for the purpose of carrying out such duties and exercise such powers as they may be required or authorised to perform by such court;
(b) to administer oaths;
(c) to take the testimony of any person who is produced as a witness in any proceedings;
(d) to take any affidavit on any matter, including a matter connected with any proceedings taken or intended to be taken before any court or any court or tribunal of civil jurisdiction established by law;
(e) to receive documents produced with any testimony, affidavit or declaration, including in particular a testimony, affidavit or declaration as is referred to in this Code;
(f) to hold such sittings as may be directed by the court, to meet with the advocates and legal procurators of the parties for the purpose of planning the management of the lawsuit, and to issue deadlines for the submission of evidence, pleadings or other judicial acts by the parties.
(4) In the performance of their functions judicial assistants shall be assigned to a court and shall act under the direction and control of the court before which the case is pending and shall, in addition to any power lawfully assigned to them by such court, have the power to order the attendance of any person for the purpose of giving evidence or to make an affidavit or a declaration, or to produce documents, at such place and time as they may specify in the order.”
Section 97C of the COCP provides as follows:
 “Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-article (2) of article 97B, where in proceedings before a judicial assistant a question arises relating to or connected with the same proceedings, that question shall in the first place be decided by the judicial assistant who shall without delay and in any case not later than three days from the date of the said decision, inform the court of the decision, and the decision of the judicial assistant shall be binding unless the court shall by decree, decide otherwise.
Section 97B of the COCP deals with (i) the oath to be taken by judicial assistants; and (ii) grounds of challenge, stating that the provisions of Sub-Title II of Title II of Book Third (regarding the challenge of judges and magistrates) shall apply to judicial assistants, except that the decision on any such matter shall be taken by the court before which the case is pending. In this respect, sections 734 and 735 of Book Third of the COCP, in so far as relevant, read as follows:
Section 734
“ (1) A judge may be challenged or abstain from sitting in a cause – (...)
(d) (i) if he had given advice, pleaded or written on the cause or on any other matter connected therewith or dependent thereon; (...)”
Section 735
“ (1) Any judge being aware of the existence in his respect of any of the grounds of challenge mentioned in the last preceding article, shall make a declaration to that effect previously to the trial of the cause, either verbally in open court, in which case a record of such declaration shall be entered in the proceedings of the cause, or in writing, in which case it shall be lodged in the registry before the day appointed for the trial of the cause, notice thereof being given to the parties.”
One of the advocates holding the post of judicial assistant performs the functions of the Legal Secretary to the Chief Justice.