The case concerns the length of proceedings and the alleged lack of an effective domestic procedure concerning the applicant’s claim of medical negligence against the staff of a public hospital in relation to the total loss of his sight in one eye and sight impairment in the other.
The applicant was born in 1989 and lives in Šibenik. He was represented by Mr Z. Čogelja, a lawyer practising in Šibenik.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In 1994 the applicant, who was five years old at the time, was diagnosed with darkening of his peripheral vision and cataracts, as a result of which he underwent eye surgery in a hospital in Zagreb (“the Hospital”). After his first surgery in August 1994, the applicant was again admitted to hospital owing to complications as a result of a severe cough he had developed in the meantime. He was operated on two more times in September and November 1994.
The applicant ultimately completely lost his sight in one eye and was left with the sight impaired in the other.
On 8 December 1999 the applicant lodged a civil action against the Hospital with the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court (Općinski građanski sud u Zagrebu – “the first-instance court”), claiming damages for alleged medical negligence.
The first hearing was held on 17 November 2000. The Hospital contested the claim.
On 4 July 2001 the first-instance court ordered an expert medical opinion, which was delivered on 24 September 2001. The relevant parts of that opinion read as follows:
“The medical documentation cited shows that [the applicant] has a congenital defect in both eyes and that ophthalmologists from S. sent him for surgery to the [Hospital], where, on 16 August 1994, he had the cataract in his left eye surgically removed and an artificial lens put in. The surgery and post-operative treatment went according to plan. He was urgently admitted to the same hospital on 7 September 1994 owing to the dislocation of the lens that had been put in his left eye, at which time the doctors diagnosed a respiratory infection accompanied by a severe cough, which was the most likely the cause of the lens dislocation. This was followed by the complications described in the cited medical documentation and the situation finally stabilised after two interventions at the Clinic for Ophthalmology in Antwerp.
The civil action stated that ‘the surgical procedure could not have been performed on [the applicant] according to professional standards, which is why the postoperative treatment was inadequate ...’. Dr P. from the Clinic for Ophthalmology in Antwerp provided the best response to this argument when he, in his report of 15 May 1995, found that the surgery had been necessary bearing in mind the age of the patient and the needs of vision development before the age of six. This also corresponds to the modern approach in ophthalmology that one eye should be treated before the age of six to have good or improved vision because in later life it is not possible to achieve good vision whether surgery is performed or not, owing to the development of the neural sense of sight. This medical opinion was validated by Dr C., ... Dr S. ... and Dr Z ...
In conclusion, I have established that there were no irregularities in the treatment of the [applicant] ... and that the surgical procedures that were carried out were necessary according to the latest developments in modern ophthalmology.”
On 27 September 2001 the first-instance court delivered the expert opinion to the parties and invited them to submit their comments.
A hearing set for 17 February 2003 was adjourned because the summons had not been served correctly on the applicant. The next hearing was held on 4 June 2003.
On 16 January 2004 the expert witness A.F., who had prepared the above opinion, informed the court that he no longer served as a permanent court expert witness.
At the hearing held on 19 April 2004, the first-instance court invited the applicant to set out his objections to the conclusions of the expert witness.
On 8 July 2004 the first-instance court forwarded the applicant’s objections to the expert witness.
On 19 July 2004 the expert witness rejected the applicant’s objections to his opinion and reiterated his conclusions (see paragraph 9 above). On 22 July 2004 the first-instance court forwarded his observations to the parties.
At the hearing held on 6 December 2006, the applicant proposed that the court hear his parents as witnesses. The first-instance court accepted this motion and the applicant’s parents were heard by the Šibenik Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Šibeniku) on 7 May 2007.
At the hearing held on 23 January 2008, the applicant requested that the court either obtain an opinion from the doctors who had treated him after the operations or, alternatively, a fresh medical expert assessment. The first-instance court accepted the applicant’s proposal to obtain a new expert opinion and on 7 July 2008 appointed another expert, Z.V.
On 7 September 2009 Z.V. informed the court that he was not able to carry out the expert assessment. At a hearing held on 8 February 2010, the court notified the parties about Z.V.’s unavailability. The applicant then asked that another expert witness, N.S., be appointed, which the court accepted.
N.S. submitted her expert opinion on 2 June 2010, the relevant parts of which read as follows:
“The [applicant] was examined at the age of five by an ophthalmologist in S., where he was diagnosed with cataracts in both eyes. For that reason, he was referred to [the Hospital], where doctors diagnosed congenital cataracts and poor vision in both eyes. After pre-operative preparations, surgery to remove the cataract in the left eye and fit a replacement lens was performed. The post-operative period was uneventful and [the applicant] was discharged with a topical treatment to be administered at home. The applicant was readmitted twenty-three days after the surgery owing to lens dislocation. While in hospital, the doctors diagnosed [the applicant] with a respiratory infection accompanied by a severe irritating cough. Additional surgery was performed to resolve the complications. The surgery that was performed and all subsequent operations were necessary to detect complications and improve visual function. The reports from other clinics clearly show that none of the ophthalmologists claimed that the operations were unnecessary. On the contrary, Dr P. emphasised that additional surgery had been necessary to resolve the complications in order for the child’s sight to develop. The most recent accepted views in ophthalmology regarding surgery on congenital cataracts are as follows: surgery should be performed as early as possible, which means in the first months of life, in order for vision to develop properly. [The applicant] was diagnosed with cataracts later than that, at the age of five. His vision was not able to develop properly until that point and the visual acuity achieved after surgery carried out so late is never the same as the expected visual acuity for a child of that age.
The subsequent complication in terms of a dislocation of the inserted lens can be linked to the diagnosed respiratory infection accompanied by a dry cough and strain which occurs while coughing, which posed a threat to the eye in the post-operative period. All further operations were performed to resolve the complications.
After examining [the applicant’s] medical records from the [Hospital], I found no omissions in the pre-operative preparation, the performed surgery or the postoperative period. The surgery performed was in line with the latest developments in ophthalmology and the expertise of the surgeon and the necessity of the surgery are undeniable.”
The applicant objected to that expert opinion on 12 July 2010. At the hearing held on 8 November 2010, the first-instance court heard N.S., who provided replies to the applicant’s previously submitted objections. At the end of the expert’s testimony, the applicant had no further questions. Instead, he reiterated his objections to her conclusions and proposed that the court hear the doctors who were currently treating him and obtain the reports on the operations performed on his eye. Alternatively, the applicant proposed that a fresh opinion be obtained from a team of experts. For reasons of procedural economy, and since there were no inconsistencies between the two expert opinions obtained in the case, the court dismissed the applicant’s requests and concluded the main hearing.
On 23 November 2010 the court dismissed the applicant’s claim on the grounds that the expert reports did not suggest any malpractice in the applicant’s medical treatment.
On 10 December 2010 the applicant appealed against the firstinstance judgment. His appeal was dismissed by the Zagreb County Court (Županijski sud u Zagrebu) on 5 April 2011.
The applicant then lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske), which dismissed it on 27 June 2012.
The applicant further lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske), complaining about the manner in which the lower courts had dealt with his case. On 17 January 2013 the Constitutional Court declared the applicant’s constitutional complaint inadmissible as manifestly ill-founded. The decision of the Constitutional Court was served on the applicant on 28 January 2013.
Meanwhile, on 19 November 2009 the applicant complained to the Zagreb County Court about the excessive length of the proceedings.
On 2 December 2010 the Zagreb County Court found a violation of the applicant’s right to a hearing within a reasonable time and awarded him 10,500 Croatian kunas (approximately 1,400 euros) in compensation. It also ordered the first-instance court to terminate the proceedings within twelve months following the service of its decision.
The relevant domestic law is set out in Marić v. Croatia, no. 50132/12, § 36, 12 June 2014, and in Jurica v. Croatia, no. 30376/13, §§ 45-60, 2 May 2017.