The case originated in an application (no. 28621/15) against the Republic of Slovenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Slovenian national, Ms Verena Devinar (“the applicant”), on 9 June 2015.
The applicant was represented by Mr I. Makuc, a lawyer practising in Tolmin. The Slovenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms J. Morela, State Attorney.
The applicant alleged that her right to a fair trial under Article 6 of the Convention had been violated.
On 2 March 2016 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1959 and lives in Nova Gorica.
The applicant was working as a cleaning lady when she allegedly developed serious medical complications in her left wrist, which could only partly have been addressed by surgery. This resulted in her using predominantly her right arm, which in turn resulted in the overburdening of that arm, giving rise to a number of medical problems. Because of these medical issues she was found, in 2006, to be incapable of further work and officially recognised as having a partial disability.
On 30 December 2011 the applicant applied to the Pensions and Disability Insurance Institute of the Republic of Slovenia (“the Institute”) for a disability allowance in respect of a physical impairment (nadomestilo za invalidnost – hereinafter “disability allowance”).
On 12 March 2012 the first-instance disability commission of the Institute, located in Nova Gorica, issued a report to the effect that the applicant was not suffering from any physical impairment stipulated in the Self-Management Agreement on the List of Physical Impairments (Samoupravni sporazum o seznamu telesnih okvar – hereinafter “the List”; see paragraph 22 below). The commission – composed of an occupational medicine specialist, an orthopaedic specialist and a physical medicine and rehabilitation physician – based its opinion on an examination of the medical records submitted by the applicant and a clinical examination of the applicant.
On 15 March 2012 the Nova Gorica unit of the Institute, relying on the opinion of the first-instance disability commission, dismissed the applicant’s application for a disability allowance. A copy of the first-instance disability commission’s opinion was attached to the decision. The applicant appealed.
On 15 May 2012 the second-instance disability commission of the Institute, located in Ljubljana, composed of an occupational medicine specialist and an orthopaedic specialist, examined the applicant’s medical file and again issued a report to the effect that no physical impairment stipulated in the List could be found.
On 7 June 2012 the Central Office of the Institute, referring to the conclusions of the second-instance disability commission, dismissed the applicant’s appeal. A copy of the second-instance disability commission’s opinion was attached to the decision.
On 12 July 2012 the applicant initiated court proceedings against the Institute before the Ljubljana Labour and Social Court seeking the annulment of the above-mentioned decisions taken by the Institute, arguing that the facts had been wrongly established, and that the procedure had not been properly conducted. She argued that because of the incapacity of her arms the functioning of her body was inhibited and greater efforts were required to satisfy her daily needs. She also argued that the opposing party should have more seriously examined all her medical problems. In her view her physical impairment amounted to at least 50% incapacity; however, the exact degree could only be determined by a medical expert. She accordingly proposed that a medical expert be appointed.
On 6 September 2013 the Ljubljana Labour and Social Court, sitting in a single-judge formation, dismissed the applicant’s application for a disability allowance. It observed that its role was to check whether the impugned administrative decisions had been issued in a procedure that had complied with the procedural rules, and had been based on a proper establishment of fact and proper application of the law. It furthermore observed that the claimed physical impairment was a legally relevant fact, whose degree of severity under the relevant legal provisions (see paragraph 22 below) had to be proved in order for entitlement to a disability allowance to be established. After taking into account the documents in the file and the hearing of the applicant, the court found that the Institute had correctly established the facts. Referring to the findings of the disability commissions and its own direct observation of the applicant at the hearing, it concluded that the impairment to the applicant’s health did not amount to a physical impairment within the meaning of the law.
Considering the above-mentioned findings sufficient to reach its conclusion, the court refused the applicant’s request for the appointment of a medical expert as unnecessary.
On 17 October 2013 the applicant lodged an appeal against the first-instance court’s finding. She argued that the impairment to both of her arms, her psychological illness and her headaches meant that the normal functioning of her organism was inhibited and that she had to exert greater efforts in order to perform daily tasks; that the List, which was out of date, could not possibly contain a complete list of all illnesses and injuries; that the first-instance court should not have relied on the opinions of the disability commissions and a doctor (opinions which the applicant had disputed); that the first-instance court should have appointed a medical expert, as requested by the applicant; that the applicant could not have explained all her medical issues at the hearing and that the court had not been in a position to assess the flexibility of her arms.
On 6 February 2014 the Higher Labour and Social Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal, finding that the facts had been sufficiently established and the substantive law applied correctly. It also found that the refusal of the applicant’s request for the appointment of an expert had not undermined the legality of the decision as that decision would not have been any different had an expert been appointed. The Higher Labour and Social Court further found the following:
The court furthermore found that physical impairments could not be determined contrary to what was provided in the List. Moreover, the question of whether a particular condition amounted to an impairment was different to the question of whether it amounted to a disability. In the applicant’s case, although she had a recognised disability, this fact alone – without any functional problems in respect of inflexibility of joints – could not suffice to categorise her condition as one of physical impairment. The Higher Labour and Social Court agreed with the court of first instance that the disability commissions in the pre-judicial administrative proceedings had made the right assessment when concluding that the applicant had not suffered from any physical impairment. It also pointed out that the court had not been obliged to appoint an independent expert if it had been possible to conclude from the disability commissions’ opinions that the Institute’s decisions had been well-founded, as had been so in the instant case.
The applicant lodged an application for leave to appeal on points of law. She argued that her right to a fair trial had not been respected because the court had refused to appoint a medical expert and had assessed the applicant’s condition itself, despite lacking the necessary medical knowledge. She had thereby been deprived of her only possibility to challenge the Institute’s decisions. The applicant also drew attention to the fact that in numerous cases court-appointed experts had found the disability commissions’ fact-finding to be erroneous. She moreover argued that the first-instance court should not have based its decision on the List.
On 10 June 2014 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s application, holding that there were no grounds for allowing an appeal on points of law.
On 21 July 2014 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint. She complained that the Supreme Court’s decision had not been reasoned. She further argued that she could not have explained all her medical issues at the hearing and that the court had not been in a position to assess the flexibility of her arms. Her only way of effectively challenging the Institute’s decision would have been by way of appointing an independent medical expert; as had been proved in the past, independent medical experts had often reached findings contrary to those of disability commissions. She invoked Article 22 (equal protection of rights) and Article 23 (the right to judicial protection) of the Constitution. She also reiterated her complaint about the reliance on the List.
On 10 December 2014 the Constitutional Court decided to not accept the applicant’s constitutional complaint for consideration, finding that it did not concern an important constitutional question or entail a violation of human rights which would have serious consequences for the applicant.
Under section 143 (1) of the Pensions and Invalidity Insurance Act (Zakon o pokojninskem in invalidskem zavarovanju, consolidated version published in the Official Gazette no. 109/06, with further amendments) “physical impairment” is defined as a loss, severe injury or significant incapacity of an insured person’s organs, as a result of which normal functioning of the body is inhibited and greater efforts are required to perform vital tasks. Under its third paragraph, the list of different types of physical impairment which render a person eligible for a disability allowance is to be set by the minister responsible for health matters. Until such a list is adopted by the minister, the Self-Management Agreement on the List of Physical Impairments (see paragraph 8 above), which was first adopted in 1983 and most recently amended in 1989, is used in domestic proceedings. Points 8 and 13 of its Chapter IV (“Upper limbs”), section B (“Functional disorders”), indicate what kind of shoulder joint and wrist functional disorders, respectively, are classified as physical impairments.
Under section 144 of the Pensions and Invalidity Insurance Act, as in force at material time, an insured person is under certain conditions entitled to a disability allowance in respect of a physical impairment, one of those conditions relating to the degree of severity of the physical impairment in question.
Decisions on entitlement to a disability allowance owing to physical impairment are made by the Institute in a two-level administrative procedure – at the first instance by a regional unit and at the second instance by the Central Office of the Institute.
For the relevant domestic law regarding court procedure in disputes concerning social-security rights, see Korošec v. Slovenia (no. 77212/12, §§  25-27, 8 October 2015).
Disability commissions assist the Institute in first- and second-instance proceedings by issuing opinions on disabilities and other matters relevant to decisions on the entitlement to rights arising from pensions and disability insurance.
Their organisation and work is regulated by the Rules on the organisation and the method of operation of the disability commissions and other expert bodies of the Pension and Disability Insurance Institute of Slovenia, as in force at material time (Pravilnik o organizaciji in načinu delovanja invalidskih komisij ter drugih izvedenskih organov Zavoda za pokojninsko in invalidsko zavarovanje Slovenije – hereinafter “the Rules”). Under section 17 of the Rules, disability commissions deliver their opinions in panels, the composition of which is decided by the president of the disability commission in question. Each president manages and organises the work of his disability commission. Each panel too has a president, who is appointed by the president of the relevant disability commission. The panel’s president is also the rapporteur in the case in question (section 43).
A medical doctor – who specialises in a particular discipline of medicine, holds a licence to practice from the Slovenian Medical Chamber, has at least two years of experience in his specialised discipline and is employed or self-employed as a doctor – can be appointed as an expert. A doctor specialising in occupational medicine, with at least four years of experience in his specialised discipline, and who is employed by the Institute, can be appointed as the president of a disability commission (section 5 of the Rules).
Experts are appointed by the management board of the Institute, after being nominated by the Director General of the Institute. Experts, except for those employed by the Institute (such as the disability commission’s president), are appointed for a period of four years, with the possibility of the renewal of their appointment period (section 4 of the Rules).
Under section 14 of the Rules, the expert bodies are obliged to obey the law, the Rules and other general acts of the Institute, the expert practice of the Institute, the guidelines and recommendations of the management, the ethical code and general and ethical principles of their profession, and the basic principles of the General Administrative Procedure Act. Section 15 further stipulates that experts have autonomy when at work and are bound by the professional rules and doctrines.
Under section 43, the first-instance disability commission’s panel should conduct an interview or examination of an insured person. The insured party can propose that he or she be also examined before the second-instance disability commission (section 56).
In its decision no. VIII Ips 3/2006 of 7 November 2006 the Supreme Court noted that the opinions of the disability commissions had the nature of expert opinions (izvedenških mnenj) only in pre-judicial proceedings within the Institute itself but not in judicial proceedings, where an expert opinion should be impartial; this meant that it could not be given by a party to the proceedings. In the case under consideration by the Supreme Court, the lower courts had treated the disability commission’s opinion as decisive evidence in determining the appellant’s ability to work and thereby upheld the decision of the opposing party (that is to say the Institute). The Supreme Court found that in respect of the nature of such opinions it had been inappropriate for the first-instance court to order an additional opinion from the disability commission and to dismiss the appellant’s application for the appointment of an independent expert. It further found it unacceptable that the lower courts had relied, in determining the relevant facts, on an opinion of the expert body of one of the parties to the proceedings. Since the claimant had explicitly opposed this and had requested the appointment of an independent expert, the first-instance court should have allowed her request. The Supreme Court also observed that there had been discrepancies in the medical documentation and that the question of what had been the category of the appellant’s disability had remained open. In its view, this question had not been properly addressed by the lower courts, which had instead relied on the additional opinion of the disability commission. In view of the foregoing, the Supreme Court found a violation of the appellant’s right to be heard and to participate in the proceedings.
On 19 October 2017 the Constitutional Court delivered decision No. Up-233/15. Referring to, inter alia, the principles set out in the case of Korošec, cited above, it found a violation of Article 22 of the Constitution (equal protection of rights). In particular, it considered arbitrary the lower courts’ finding that the disability commissions’ opinions constituted public certificates (javne listine) and that their accuracy was therefore to be presumed until disproved. It also found a violation of Article 22 on account of the lower courts’ conclusion that the complainant’s statements at the hearing and the opinions of the disability commissions had sufficed to establish that there had been no physical impairment. It noted in this connection that the Institute’s disability commissions were expert bodies of the Institute, which acted as one of the parties to the proceedings, and could not therefore be considered impartial (nepristranski). The Constitutional Court further noted that in the circumstances of the case the medical assessment had played a decisive role and that the lower courts had not had sufficient medical expertise to establish whether a physical impairment existed. Thus, by refusing the complainant’s request for the appointment of an independent medical expert the lower courts had divested the applicant of any possibility of an effective defence against the finding of the expert bodies of the opposing parties, which were decisive for the administrative decisions challenged in the domestic proceedings.
In the same case the Constitutional Court noted that there might be instances when a request for an independent expert had not been sufficiently substantiated. However, in the case under the consideration of the Constitutional Court the complainant’s request was based on the medical documentation, which he and his doctor had considered to have shown that his health had deteriorated and that he had consequently suffered from a physical impairment.