The case was referred to the Court, in accordance with the provisions applicable prior to the entry into force of Protocol No. 11 to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”), by the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) on 17 May 1999 (Article 5 § 4 of Protocol No. 11 and former Articles 47 and 48 of the Convention).
The case originated in an application (no. 26229/95) against the Republic of Poland lodged with the Commission under former Article 25 of the Convention by a Polish national, Józef Gawęda (“the applicant”), on 30 January 1994.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the Polish courts had refused to register the titles of two periodicals, preventing him thereby from publishing them.
The Commission declared the application partly admissible on 15 January 1996. In its report of 4 December 1998 (former Article 31 of the Convention), it expressed, by twenty-five votes to one, the opinion that there had been a violation of Article 10 of the Convention [Note by the Registry. The report is obtainable from the Registry].
The applicant was represented before the Court by Mr W. Grzyb, a lawyer practising in Żywiec. The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr K. Drzewicki, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. On 31 March 1999 a panel of the Grand Chamber determined that the case should be decided by one of the Sections of the Court (Rule 100 § 1 of the Rules of Court). It was thereupon assigned to the First Section. Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
On 9 September 1993 the Bielsko-Biała Regional Court dismissed the applicant's request for registration of the title of a periodical, The Social and Political Monthly – A European Moral Tribunal (Miesięcznik społeczno-polityczny, europejski sąd moralny) to be published in Kęty. The court considered that in accordance with the Press Act and the Ordinance of the Minister of Justice on the registration of periodicals, the name of a periodical should be relevant to its contents. The name as proposed by the applicant would suggest that a European institution had been established in Kęty, which was untrue and would be misleading to prospective buyers. Moreover, the proposed title would be disproportionate to the periodical's actual importance and readership as it was hardly conceivable that a periodical of a European dimension could be published in Kęty. The court went on to state:
“... the applicant stubbornly applies for registration of periodicals the titles of which would suggest the existence in Kęty of an institution of international character (such as the European Moral Tribunal or the World Tribunal of Morality), and when requested by the court to change the titles he declares that he will not do so.”
On 17 December 1993 the Katowice Court of Appeal dismissed an appeal by the applicant against this decision. The court stated, inter alia, that in the proceedings before the first-instance court the applicant had been requested to change the proposed title by deleting the term “European Moral Tribunal”, but he had refused to do so.
Subsequently, the applicant made a number of further applications for the registration of periodicals. He succeeded in obtaining four registrations.
On 6 May 1994 the Minister of Justice refused to grant leave for an extraordinary appeal against the decision of 17 December 1993, finding that it was in accordance with the law.
On 17 February 1994 the Bielsko-Biała Regional Court dismissed a new request by the applicant for registration of a periodical, Germany – A thousand-year-old enemy of Poland. The court noted that at a hearing on 17 February 1994 the applicant, when requested to change the proposed title so as to remove its negative character, had refused to do so. The court considered that registration of the periodical with the proposed title would be harmful to Polish-German reconciliation and detrimental to good cross-border relations.
The applicant appealed against this decision, submitting that it was incomprehensible and amounted to censorship.
On 12 April 1994 the Katowice Court of Appeal upheld the contested decision. The court observed that the title, as proposed by the applicant, suggested that the proposed periodical would concentrate unduly on negative aspects of Polish-German relations. The court considered that such a title would be in conflict with reality in that it would give an unbalanced picture of the relevant facts. The court further considered that the lower court had been justified in refusing registration on the ground that the title would be detrimental to Polish-German reconciliation and to good relations between Poland and Germany.
Section 20 of the Press Act of 26 January 1984 requires registration of a press title by the regional court as a prerequisite for publication of a periodical. A request for registration should contain the proposed title, the editor's address, the name of the editor-in-chief and other personal data, the name and address of the publishing house and information on how often the periodical would be published. The decision on registration is to be taken within thirty days of the date on which the request has been filed with the court. The court must refuse registration if the request does not contain the required information or if the proposed title would prejudice a right to protection of the title of any existing periodical. Section 45 of the Press Act provides that a person who publishes a periodical without the required registration is liable to a fine.
Section 23(a) of the Press Act authorises the Minister of Justice to issue an ordinance specifying the manner in which the press register should be run.
Section 5 of the Ordinance of the Minister of Justice on the registration of periodicals, as applicable at the material time, provided that registration was not possible if it would be “inconsistent with the regulations in force and with the real state of affairs” (“niezgodny z przepisami prawa lub z istniejącym stanem rzecz”).
On 1 November 1997 the ordinance was amended in that section 5 was deleted.