The case originated in an application (no. 19356/07) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by five Georgian nationals on 4 May 2007.
The applicants were represented by Mr N. Legashvili, a lawyer practising in Tbilisi. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights
The applicants alleged that the Russian authorities subjected them to inhuman and degrading treatment, in violation of Article 3 of the Convention, by unlawfully forcing them to terminate their travel to Georgia and to spend roughly two weeks in the city of Derbent, without any health care arrangements, accommodation, food, transport and logistical support. They also considered that the lack of an effective remedy against this treatment amounted to a violation of Article 13 of the Convention taken in conjunction with Article 3.
They furthermore alleged that on the one side they were victims of a collective expulsion, like thousands of other Georgians in the autumn of 2006, which amounted to a violation of Article 4 of Protocol No. 4 to the Convention, and on the other side their freedom to leave the Russian Federation was restricted in violation of Article 2 of Protocol No. 4 to the Convention by the Russian authorities in Derbent.
Lastly the applicants alleged that their expulsion and ill-treatment were discriminatory on the ground of their ethnic origin as Georgians and amounted to a violation of Article 14 of the Convention taken in conjunction with Articles 3 and 13 of the Convention and with Articles 2 and 4 of Protocol No. 4 to the Convention.
The application was allocated to the former Fifth Section of the Court. On 9 February 2010 a Chamber of the former Fifth Section decided to communicate the application to the Government for information and to adjourn its examination pending the outcome of the proceedings in the interState case Georgia v. Russia (I) [GC] (no. 13255/07).
On 5 February 2014 the President of the Court decided to allocate the applications to the former First Section, which, on 27 January 2015, decided to invite the Government to submit observations on the admissibility and merits of the application and to produce the relevant documents. The application was subsequently allocated to the Third Section.
The Government and the applicants each submitted observations on the admissibility and merits of the case. In addition, third-party comments were received from the Government of the Republic of Georgia (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 of the Rules of Court) and from the organisation Alliance Defending Freedom (ADF) International, which had been granted leave by the President of the Court to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The first applicant, Ms Lia Shioshvili, was born in 1977 and lives in Gurjaani (Georgia). She is the mother of the second, third, fourth and fifth applicant, all Georgian nationals and born respectively in 1995, 1997, 2000 and 2004.
During the period from the end of September 2006 to the end of January 2007 identity checks of Georgian nationals residing in Russia were carried out in the streets, markets and other workplaces as well as at their homes. Many were subsequently arrested and taken to police stations. After a period of custody in police stations, they were grouped together and taken by bus to a court, which summarily imposed administrative penalties on them and gave decisions ordering their administrative expulsion from Russian territory. Subsequently, some were taken to detention centres for foreigners where they were detained for varying periods of time, and then taken by bus to various airports in Moscow, and expelled to Georgia by aeroplane. Some of the Georgian nationals against whom expulsion orders were issued left the territory of the Russian Federation by their own means (for further details as to the background of the case see Georgia v. Russia (I), cited above, § 45).
On 29 May 1998 the first applicant, her husband and her two children arrived in the Russian Federation for the first time. At that time there was no visa requirement for Georgian citizens in place. In the subsequent years the first applicant, her husband and the children had been back and forth several times between the Russian Federation and Georgia.
In 2003 the first applicant and her children again entered the territory of the Russian Federation with a visa valid for one month. They settled together with their husband/father in the village of Karinskoye, in the Odintsovski district of Moscow city.
In September 2004 the first applicant gave birth to her fourth child, the fifth applicant. The first applicant did not apply for a birth certificate for the fifth applicant at that time, since she was unlawfully residing in Russia.
At the beginning of October 2006, the applicants moved to the city of Ruza in order to avoid expulsion.
On 18 October 2006 a police officer visited the applicants’ family home in Ruza and requested the first applicant to produce her identity papers. Owing to the absence of visa documents the officer asked all applicants to follow him to the local police station, where an administrative offence report was drawn up. The applicants left the police station after approximately 30 minutes. The police officer informed the first applicant that a court hearing concerning her case would take place soon. He further advised her to apply for a birth certificate for the fifth applicant.
On 25 October 2006 the Georgian Consulate in Moscow issued a temporary birth certificate for the fifth applicant, valid until 14 November 2006.
On 7 November 2006 a hearing before the Ruzskiy District Court of the Moscow Region took place, following which an expulsion decision was issued. The court only ordered the expulsion of the first applicant, even though mentioning in its decision that she was mother to four children. The hearing lasted about ten minutes and despite the first applicant’s limited knowledge of the Russian language, she was not assisted by an interpreter.
On 20 November 2006, after having received the expulsion decision of 7 November 2006 all five applicants left Moscow. Due to suspended air, rail, road, sea and postal communications between the Russian Federation and Georgia, the applicants took the train from Moscow to Baku (Azerbaijan). The first applicant was eight months pregnant at the material time and her four minor children were eleven, nine, six and two years old.
According to the applicants their train was stopped by Russian migration officers on 22 November 2006 at approximately 10.30 pm near the Russian/Azerbaijani border and all Georgian nationals were asked to get off the train with their belongings. The officers collected the applicants’ identity and travel documents and confiscated 400 USD from the first applicant, which allegedly had not been declared. The officers informed all the Georgians including the applicants, that there were various irregularities in their documents and that they could not continue their journey, whereas all nonGeorgians could resume their journey on the train.
The five applicants were then requested to walk with the other Georgian nationals to a bus, which went to Derbent. Two migration officers escorted the group but would not inform them of the authorities’ intention nor where the group was being taken. Due to the cold weather and her advanced pregnancy the walk and the bus ride were particular difficult for the first applicant. In particular, since she had to carry a suitcase and her youngest child. Her oral complaints to the officers about these circumstances were of no avail.
Once the group arrived in Derbent, the migration officers asked the group to accompany them to the migration service office. The first applicant was unable to continue walking and waited outside for two hours with her children. She was worried for the health of her minor children and for the unborn child.
On 23 November 2006, at about 3 am, the group was taken to Derbent train station for the night. They had to pay 500 rubles to the police officers, who guarded them, to be allowed to go to the toilet. No water or food was provided.
At daybreak, the police officers asked the group to go to the migration service office again, where they spent the whole day waiting outside at a temperature of 5o C.
In the evening the first applicant’s health deteriorated, her children were crying and coughing and no shelter, water or food was offered by the authorities. Finally, the group of Georgians rented an unheated, four-room basement flat in Derbent, for which the first applicant had to pay 200 rubles per day for her and the children. Three women and six children from the group of Georgians, including the applicants, settled in one room, which had four beds. The remaining three rooms were occupied by more than 20 Georgian men.
According to the applicants the migration officers regularly visited the flat, but the first applicant’s complaints about her worsening health were to no avail.
On 29 November 2006 the first applicant tried to cross the Russian/Azerbaijani border with her three eldest children, the second, third and fourth applicant. The fifth applicant stayed with the other Georgians, as her birth certificate had expired on 14 November 2006. However, they were stopped by the customs officers who indicated that the court’s expulsion decision only concerned the first applicant and not her children. They were subsequently sent back to Derbent.
The first applicant’s health worsened, she suffered from a cold and had a fever, became depressed and had repeated asthma attacks.
On 3 and 4 December 2006, after having gone back and forth to the migration service office, and with the help of an employee from the consulate service of the Georgian Embassy in Moscow, the first applicant finally obtained transit visa for her children and all other necessary documents, so that all five applicants could leave for Georgia.
Several national broadcasting television companies reported on the Georgians’ situation in Derbent on a daily basis between 1 and 7 December 2006.
According to the Government the border control services, which conducted immigration controls in the trains going to the Republic of Azerbaijan, did not bring any Georgian nationals to the migration services on 22 or 23 November 2006. However, on 23 November 2006 the name of the fifth applicant was registered by the Line Division of the Interior at Derbent station in the register of passengers put off trains. She was, however, registered as a Russian national. The other four applicants were not registered in the aforementioned register.
The Government further explained that according to the normal procedure persons, who are put off international trains, are invited to the Police Line Division to include their personal data in the register. These persons, however, are neither coerced to do so, nor accompanied on their route to the station, nor passed over to the migration service department.
Further investigations by the Russian authorities revealed, according to the Government, that the first applicant temporarily resided in a house in Derbent with the consent of the house owners. According to the testimony of the house owners the first applicant lived there free of charge, was not accompanied by children and no police officer or other official visited the first applicant in the house.
On 5 December 2006 a group of 30 Georgians, including the applicants, travelled to the Russian/Azerbaijani border in two buses that they had hired. At the border the customs officers checked the documents for several hours, while the applicants had to wait standing outside.
With another bus the group travelled through the city of Baku to the Azerbaijani/Georgian border. The last 5 kilometres to the border the applicants had to walk, as the bus driver had asked them to get off the bus: The first applicant and her youngest child, the fifth applicant, were able to take a taxi to the border, but the three other applicants had to continue walking; the temperature was below 3o C.
After having arrived in Georgia, the first applicant’s health was particularly bad. She suffered from a severe cough and fever, her right leg had grown numb and her general condition was extremely weak. Owing to her financial situation and the lack of health insurance the applicant did not visit a hospital right away. On 11 December 2006 a pregnancy examination showed that the pregnancy was progressing and that the fetus was well.
On 12 December 2006, the first applicant’s health worsened, she had an asthma attack and severe abdominal pain.
On 14 December 2006, the first applicant was taken to hospital where she gave birth to a stillborn child the next day.
According to the death certificate issued by the Ministry of Health and Social Affairs on 15 December 2006, the child died as a result of “intranatal hipoqsy” caused by a viral infection. The birth history no 364/12, issued on the same date, stated that “the stress experienced by the pregnant mother during the expulsion could be considered a reason for the child’s death”.
During the following months, the first applicant suffered from severe depression and panic attacks. Furthermore, the fourth applicant developed a very bad cough and caught pneumonia. The fifth applicant, the first applicant’s youngest child, was deeply affected psychologically by the expulsion: she was constantly crying and afraid of other people and diagnosed with “behavioral disorder”.
On 23 July 2008, the first applicant lodged a complaint with the General Prosecutor’s office of the Russian Federation. She directly mentioned violations of Articles 3 and 14 of the Convention and requested a thorough investigation and the punishment of those responsible.
On 9 October 2008, the first applicant’s representative received an answer, informing him that the complaint had been forwarded to the Prosecutor of Derbent and that he would be notified about further procedural actions taken in this respect.
However, he received no further information from the Russian authorities.
The relevant domestic law is set out in the Court’s judgment Georgia v. Russia (I) (cited above, §§ 75, 77).