The case concerns the applicant’s expulsion on alleged national-security grounds and the separation from his family. The applicant relied on Articles 6 and 8 of the Convention, as well as on Article 1 of Protocol No. 7.
The applicant was born in 1985. In 2015 he left Bulgaria and moved to Turkey. The applicant was represented by Ms I. Ivanova, a lawyer practising in Sofia.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mrs R. Nikolova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant arrived in Bulgaria in 2009. In 2013 he was granted asylum.
According to the applicant, and as indicated in declarations by Ms G.M. and a neighbour of the applicant’s, in 2010, soon after settling in Bulgaria, he started a relationship with Ms G.M., a Bulgarian national, and the couple lived together. In 2014 they had a son.
On 22 October 2015 the head of the National Security Service issued an order for the applicant’s expulsion on the grounds that his actions potentially posed a “serious threat to national security”. He also barred the applicant from entering or residing in Bulgaria for five years. The order referred to section 42(1)(2) of the 1998 Aliens Act (hereinafter “the Aliens Act”), taken in conjunction with sections 10(1)(1) and 44(1) (see paragraphs 12-15 below). No factual grounds were given, in accordance with section 46(3) of the Aliens Act. The order was based on the reasons set out in proposal no. T6-15115/22.10.2015 (“the proposal”). The content of the proposal was classified and as such it has not been submitted by the Government. The order further provided that it was to be brought to the attention of the applicant and was immediately enforceable, as provided by section 44(4)(3) of the Aliens Act. Finally, the order stated that it was subject to judicial review, in line with section 46(1) and (2) of the Aliens Act.
On 26 October 2015 the applicant applied for judicial review of the expulsion order. In particular, he pointed out in his application that no reasons had been given for the order and that the relevant factual circumstances had not been duly established. Furthermore, he argued that the measures against him breached his Convention rights, claiming that an expulsion to his home country of Syria would expose him to risk, in view of the armed conflict there, and that he would be separated from his family residing in Bulgaria.
In a final judgment of 30 May 2016, the Supreme Administrative Court dismissed the application for judicial review and held that the expulsion order was lawful as it had been issued by a competent authority and in accordance with the law. In particular, it found that the relevant facts had been correctly established in the administrative procedure that had led to the issuing of the order, namely that there were data showing that the applicant had been involved in activities related to the illegal transportation of foreign nationals. It is not apparent from that judgment that the applicant’s lawyer was given the opportunity to become familiar with the material in the case, including the classified content of the proposal (see paragraph 7 above). The court judgment did not contain replies to the applicant’s arguments relating to his family and private life.
Together with their observations before the Court, the Government submitted a letter sent by the Migration Directorate of the Ministry of Interior dated 3 May 2017 in response to the notification of the present application. According to that letter, on 19 November 2015 the applicant had signed a form for voluntary return, indicating Turkey as a safe third country of return. In addition, on 24 November 2015 he had signed a form renouncing his asylum status. The letter further stated that on 24 November 2015 the applicant had been taken to the Kapitan Andreevo border checkpoint with the assistance of the authorities, in order to be returned to Turkey for the enforcement of the expulsion order. Copies of the forms referred to in that letter have not been submitted to the Court.
On 14 December 2015 the Vice-President of the Republic of Bulgaria withdrew the asylum provided to the applicant.
The relevant domestic law and practice have been summarised in the Court’s judgment in Raza v. Bulgaria (no. 31465/08, §§ 30-36, 11 February 2010).
In 2013 an amendment to section 42(1) of the Aliens Act added a sub-paragraph 2, which provides that expulsion is necessary when the grounds under section 10(1), sub-paragraphs 1 to 4, are in place. Section 42(2) provides that the imposition of an involuntary administrative measure on a foreigner also withdraws the foreigner’s right to reside in the Republic of Bulgaria and imposes a ban on entry into and residence on the territories of the member States of the European Union. Pursuant to section 10(1)(1) of the Aliens Act, a foreigner is denied a visa or entry into the country when, by virtue of his or her actions, the foreigner has endangered or may endanger the international relations, safety or interests of the Bulgarian State or when there is intelligence that the person is acting against national security.
The new version of section 44(2), as amended in 2011, provides that, when imposing compulsory administrative measures, the competent authorities must take into account the length of the foreigner’s stay on the territory of the Republic of Bulgaria, the categories of vulnerable persons, the existence of proceedings under the Asylum and Refugees Act or proceedings to renew a residence or other permit, the family situation, and the existence of family, cultural and social ties with the person’s State of origin.
Pursuant to section 44(1), sub-paragraph 2, of the Aliens Act, if the factual grounds for imposing a specific compulsory administrative measure contain classified information, they are listed in a separate document prepared by the relevant officials under the 2002 Classified Information Protection Act.