The case originated in an application (no. 33370/96) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Turkish nationals, Mr Arap Yalgın, Mr Mehmet Murat Öner and Mr Muhtat Karakoca (“the applicants”), on 17 June 1996.
The applicants were represented by Mrs Oya Ersoy Ataman, a lawyer practising in Ankara (Turkey). The Turkish Government did not designate an Agent for the purposes of the proceedings before the Court.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the criminal proceedings brought against them had not been concluded within a “reasonable time”. The applicants Arap Yalgın and Muhtat Karakoca further submitted that their right to a fair hearing had been breached on account of their conviction by the Ankara Martial Law Court which lacked independence and impartiality. The applicants also maintained that they had been convicted on the basis of the statements they had made to the police under duress.
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
The application was allocated to the First Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1 of the Rules of Court. Mr Rıza Türmen, the judge elected in respect of Turkey, withdrew from sitting in the case (Rule 28). The Government accordingly appointed Mr Feyyaz Gölcüklü to sit as an ad hoc judge, in his place (Article 27 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 29 § 1).
By a decision of 11 January 2000, the Chamber retained the applicants’ complaints concerning their right to a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial tribunal and declared the remainder of their complaints inadmissible.
The applicants and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicants Muhtat Karakoca, Mehmet Murat Öner and Arap Yalgın were arrested by police officers from the Ankara Security Directorate on 20 November and 12 December 1980 and 6 March 1981 respectively. They were suspected of membership of an illegal organisation, the Dev-Yol (Revolutionary Way).
The Ankara Martial Law Court (sıkıyönetim mahkemesi) ordered Mr Öner and Mr Karakoca’s detention on remand on 27 January and 19 October 1981 respectively. On 11 May 1981 the court ordered Mr Yalgın’s release pending trial.
On 26 February 1982 the Military Public Prosecutor filed a bill of indictment with the Martial Law Court against the applicants and 720 other defendants. The public prosecutor accused the applicants of membership of an illegal armed organisation, namely the Dev-Yol, whose object was to undermine the constitutional order and replace it with a Marxist-Leninist regime. He further charged the applicants with having been involved in a number of crimes such as producing false identity cards, killings, bomb attacks and collecting money for the organisation. The prosecution called for the applicants to be sentenced pursuant to Article 146 of the Turkish Criminal Code.
On 1 February 1983 Mr Öner and on 16 June 1986 Mr Karakoca were released pending trial.
In a judgment of 19 July 1989 the Martial Law Court, composed of two civilian judges, two military judges and an army officer, convicted the applicants of membership of the Dev-Yol. The court sentenced Mr Yalgın to six years and eight months’ imprisonment and Mr Karakoca to seven years’ imprisonment under Article 146 § 3 of the Criminal Code. Mr Öner was sentenced under Article 168 § 2 of the Criminal Code to five years and six months’ imprisonment. The court held that the applicants should be permanently debarred from employment in public service and that they should be placed under judicial guardianship.
The applicants appealed to the Military Court of Cassation (askeri yargıtay).
Following promulgation of the Law of 27 December 1993, which abolished the jurisdiction of the martial law courts, the Court of Cassation (yargıtay) acquired jurisdiction over the cases and the files were transmitted to it.
On 27 December 1995 the Court of Cassation upheld Mr Karakoca’s and Mr Yalgın’s conviction. It reviewed Mr Yalgın’s case and held that he should be sentenced to five years’ imprisonment. The court however quashed Mr Öner’s conviction and decided that the criminal proceedings against him should be discontinued since the prosecution was time-barred.
Article 146 §§ 1 and 3 of the Turkish Criminal Code provides:
“Whosoever shall attempt to alter or amend in whole or in part the Constitution of the Turkish Republic or to effect a coup d’état against the Grand National Assembly formed under the Constitution or to prevent it by force from carrying out its functions shall be liable to the death penalty.
...
Accomplices to the crime specified in paragraph one, other than those specified in paragraph two, shall be punished by heavy imprisonment for not less that fifteen years and be disqualified to hold public office for life” 
Article 168 of the Criminal Code reads:
“Any person who, with the intention of committing the offences defined in Articles ..., forms an armed gang or organisation or takes leadership ... or command of such a gang or organisation or assumes some special responsibility within it shall be sentenced to not less than fifteen years’ imprisonment.
The other members of the gang or organisation shall be sentenced to not less than five and not more than fifteen years’ imprisonment.”
The provisions governing judicial organisation are worded as follows:
Article 138 §§ 1 and 2
“In the performance of their duties, judges shall be independent; they shall give judgment, according to their personal conviction, in accordance with the Constitution, statute and the law.
No organ, authority, officer or other person may give orders or instructions to courts or judges in the exercise of their judicial powers, nor send them circulars or make recommendations or suggestions to them.”
Article 139 § 1
“Judges ... shall not be removed from office or compelled to retire without their consent before the age prescribed by the Constitution ...”
Article 145
“... Martial law courts shall be responsible for dealing with offences under special laws committed by civilians against military personnel and offences committed against military personnel in the course of their duties or on scheduled premises.
The offences and persons falling within the jurisdiction of the martial law courts in time of war or under martial law, the composition of martial law courts and the appointment, where necessary, of judges and prosecutors from the ordinary courts to martial law courts shall be regulated by law.
The personal rights and obligations of military judges ... shall be regulated by law in accordance with the principles of the independence of the courts, the safeguards enjoyed by the judiciary and the requirements of military service. Relations between military judges and the commanders under whom they serve as regards their non-judicial duties shall also be regulated by law.”
Article 11 § 1
“The Ministry of defence shall convene a sufficient number of martial law courts in areas where martial law applies...”
Article 11 § 4
“Judicial advisers, military judges and military prosecutors attached to the martial law courts are appointed, with agreement of the Chief of Staff, from among the candidates nominated by a committee composed of the personnel director and the legal adviser to the Office of the Chief of Staff, the personnel director and the legal adviser to the army corps to which the judge in question belongs and finally the head of the Military Legal Service at the Ministry of Defence.”
Article 11 § 6
“The army officers serving on martial law courts are appointed, on the proposal of the Chief of Staff, according to the procedure for appointing military judges...”
Article 4
“The officers serving on the martial law courts and their substitutes shall be appointed, in December, by the commander or the superior of the military establishment within which a martial law court is formed, from among the officers of that establishment. The officers thus appointed are irremovable for one year.”
Article 12
“The suitability of military judges for promotion, priority within the same grade and progress up the career hierarchy is determined on the basis of assessments.
A)	There are three types of assessment certificate, which are the assessment certificate for generals, the assessment certificate for officers (sub-lieutenant - colonel) and the professional assessment certificate.
...
B)	The superiors in the hierarchy authorised to issue an assessment certificate for officers and to assess officers:
First superior in the hierarchy: the commander or superior of the military establishment to which the judge in question belongs and in which a martial law court is formed.
Second superior in the hierarchy: the commander or the superior immediately above the first superior in the hierarchy.
Third superior in the hierarchy: the commander or the superior immediately above the second superior in the hierarchy...”
Article 29
“The Minister of Defence may apply the following disciplinary sanctions to military judges, after hearing their defence:
-	Written warning...;
-	Rebuke...” 