The case originated in an application (no. 12748/06) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Hungarian national, Mr Tibor Panyik (“the applicant”), on 20 March 2006.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms G. Lanczner, a lawyer practising in Tatabánya. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr L. Höltzl, Agent, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice.
On 9 March 2010 the Court decided to communicate the applicant’s complaint concerning the impartiality of the  to the respondent Government. It declared the remainder of the applicant’s complaints inadmissible.
The applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Tata.
At the request of his former employer, on 7 November 2002 the Tata District Court issued a payment order in the amount of approximately 42,000 Hungarian forints (HUF) against the applicant, a lawyer. Following his objection to the order, the case continued as civil litigation.
On 17 December 2002 it was transferred to the Komárom District Court, as the judges of the geographically competent Tata District Court felt biased on account of the applicant’s legal practice being attached to their court.
The Komárom District Court found for the plaintiff on 19 April 2005. The applicant appealed.
In the proceedings before the , a panel of three judges, including judges Dr D. and Dr K., withdrew themselves from the case on 4 July 2005. According to their reasoning:
“In view of the fact that the respondent acts as a lawyer in the county, [and] we are in a work relationship, we find it justified for the sake of the impartial adjudication of the legal dispute that another county court proceeds in the case.”
The case was transferred to another panel of the same court.
On 11 October 2005 the applicant challenged this second panel for bias, and subsequently extended his request to the whole court. He observed that the panel president, Dr V., had already declared himself biased in two other cases against him due to their daily work relationship. In one of these proceedings, Dr D. had declared herself biased as well.
On 26 January 2006 the Győr Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s motion for bias. It pointed out that the judges of the panel had declared themselves impartial, along with two other judges of the court. Moreover, it argued that:
“... Bias may, however, only be based on such facts [and] circumstances from which it follows objectively [and] logically that an impartial judgment is not ensured. The reason adduced by the respondent against the declarations of the five judges stating their impartiality is not suitable to establish bias.”
The applicant subsequently lodged another complaint for bias against the presiding judge, Dr V. Despite the antecedents, Dr V. again maintained that he was impartial. Therefore, the  found that there was no obstacle to deliver judgment, but nevertheless ordered the transfer of the complaint to the appeal court. However, it was ultimately dealt with by another panel of the  (see paragraph 13 below).
On 14 March 2006 a three-member panel of the , with Dr V. acting as presiding judge, upheld the first-instance judgment. This decision was served on the applicant on 23 May 2006.
On 21 April 2006 another panel of the , presided by Dr D. and including Dr K., dismissed the applicant’s second motion for bias filed against Dr V. It argued that
“If the reason for disqualification according to section 13(1) e) of the Code of Civil Procedure is reported by a party and the judge does not consider himself partial in the case, then what needs to be ascertained is whether the actual existence of the reasons [and] facts reported to prove bias indeed justify the disqualification of the judge. ... [I]t is not of legal relevance that the judge previously, in a different type of case, agreed to his/her disqualification. As evidenced by the dispositions of the act, a judge is to be considered as biased if the objective adjudication of the given case may not be expected from him/her for some reason. The fact that the respondent already lodged motions of bias against the court or against certain judges of the court in several previous cases does not necessarily entail that the judges concerned become biased towards the party. In connection with the present case the respondent did not adduce any concrete ground or reason that the impartial adjudication of the present case could not be expected from the panel president. Considering moreover that the respondent did not lodge a motion for bias against the two [other] members of the panel, the  rejected the motion for disqualification (section 18 (1) of the Code of Civil Procedure).”
Section 13
“(1) Cannot participate as judge in the administration of the case and is disqualified thereof:
a) the party, the person authorised or obliged jointly with the party, those who fully or in part claim the subject of the action for themselves, or whose rights or obligations might be affected by the result of the action,
...
e) who cannot be expected to ascertain the case objectively due to other reasons”
Chapter XIV of the Code of Civil Procedure contains the dispositions relative to petition for review before the Supreme Court. According to section 271(2), petition for review is precluded in a property law case if the disputed value does not exceed HUF 1,000,000.