The case originated in an application (no. 33771/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Albanian national, Mr Ramazan Driza (“the applicant”), on 4 September 2002.
The applicant was represented by Mrs A. Driza-Maurer, his daughter and lawyer, who practises in . The Albanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Mr S. Puto and Mrs S. Mëneri, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant complained, in particular, of a violation of the fairness aspect of Article 6 § 1 and a failure to enforce a final judgment. He also complained of a violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention and, invoking Article 13, of the lack of an effective remedy for the aforementioned complaints.
On 5 July 2005 the Court decided to communicate the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1941 and lives in Tirana.
Administrative proceedings for the restitution of land
Ordinary proceedings
The application for supervisory review was examined by the Supreme Court (Joint Colleges). On 5 July 2001, approximately two and a half years after the final decision, the Supreme Court granted the application. On the same date, it quashed, by a majority, the judgments of 2 June 1998 and 17 December 1998 in favour of the applicant, and upheld the District Court’s decision of 10 October 1997 dismissing the applicant’s claims relating to the smaller plot of land. It found that the Commission’s decision had been based on a misinterpretation of the substantive law (Property Act 1993).
The applicant was neither informed of the supervisory-review proceedings nor invited to attend the hearings before the Supreme Court. He was not served with the Supreme Court’s judgment within the six-month time-limit for appealing and so did not appeal against it.
Of the fifteen Supreme Court judges who decided the case on 5 July 2001, three (B. C., N. SH. and M.S.) had been members of the panel which on 17 December 1998 had decided the merits of the case. A further three (Th. K., P.Z., and V.K.) had sat on the panel which on 7 December 2000 had decided the merits of the case in the proceedings concerning both plots of land (see paragraph 29 below). The first three judges were called upon to rule in the supervisory-review proceedings on their alleged misinterpretation of substantive law while the other three judges had to determine the merits of the case for the second time in the same proceedings.
Civil proceedings concerning the entire property (both plots of land)
The  proceedings
The applicant says that an apartment block has now been built on the larger plot of land by third parties and the apartments sold to, and occupied by, new owners. The smaller plot is occupied by temporary structures. The applicant has not received any compensation from the authorities.
The Albanian Constitution, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
Article 41
Article 42 § 2
Article 142 § 3
Article 131
Article 181
Under the Code of Civil Procedure 1996, which was in force at the material time, judgments became final in the following circumstances:
Article 451
“Court judgments shall become legally binding on the expiration of the time-limit for lodging an appeal if no such appeal has been lodged. If the judgment is not quashed on an appeal to a higher court, it shall become legally binding when the higher court delivers its decision...”
Pursuant to the provisions in force at the material time supervisory review (Rekurs në interes të ligjit) was an extraordinary remedy that enabled courts to reopen proceedings after a judgment had become final. Between 1996 and its abrogation by Law no. 8812 of 17 May 2001 the supervisory-review procedure underwent several legislative changes.
Section 473 – Review in the interests of the law (Law no. 8431 of 14 December 1998)
“Final judgments, decisions and rulings of the colleges of the Supreme Court shall be amenable to supervisory review in the interests of the law for the reasons set forth in section 472 (a), (b) and (c) on an application lodged by the parties to the proceedings within three years from the moment the decision becomes binding.
The application for supervisory review will firstly be examined by a preliminary review panel of five judges and then by the full Supreme Court (Joint Colleges). ... Judges of the Supreme Court who sat as members of the division that delivered the judgment, decision or ruling or of the preliminary review panel shall not sit on the panel that conducts the supervisory review of the final judgment...”
The Property Restitution and Compensation Act (Ligji për kthimin dhe kompensimin e pronës) has undergone several amendments during the past fourteen years. The main changes to the first Property Act of 1993 came about as a result of two laws which entered into force respectively in 2004 and 2006. The original Act and these two amending Acts will hereinafter be referred to as the “Property Act 1993” the “Property Act 2004” and the “Property Act 2006” respectively.
The relevant provisions of each of these laws can be summarised as follows:
Under the Property Act 1993 former owners of properties expropriated by the relevant regime and the legal heirs of such owners had the right to claim ownership of the original properties. Upon ownership being determined they were entitled either to the restitution of the original immovable property or to an award of compensation either in kind (up to a maximum of 10,000 sq. m) or in value if any of the following conditions was met: the alleged property (1) was pasture, meadow, forestry land, or agricultural or non-agricultural land; (2) was not subject to Law no. 7501 of 19 July 1991; (3) was currently State-owned; or (4) had been designated as suitable for construction and was situated within the boundaries of a city.
Section 16 of the Act provided for the following forms of compensation in respect of property which could not be returned: (a) State bonds, equivalent to the compensation owed, with a first option over shares in State enterprises being privatised by the Government or in other activities carried on through the granting of loans; (b) an equivalent plot of land or a building site near to an urban area, in accordance with the general urban-development regulations; and (c) an equivalent plot of land in a tourist zone, in accordance with the general urban-development regulations.
The Council of Ministers had power to define detailed rules for determining how such compensation should be provided and the applicable time-limits.
The 1993 Act also instituted the Commission on the Restitution of Properties and Compensation (Komisioni i Kthimit dhe Kompensimit të Pronave) as the competent administrative body to deal with former owners’ claims to restitution and compensation. However, it did not provide a time-limit within which a decision could be appealed against, so preventing it from even becoming binding.
The Property Act 2004, which repealed the previous version, provided for two forms of restitution of immovable property, namely the return, under certain circumstances, of the original property and compensation in the event of the authorities being unable to return the original property. Restitution was not limited in size. The Act provided for five forms of compensation: (a) property of the same kind; (b) property of any other kind; (c) shares in State-owned companies; (d) the value of a State-owned property in the course of privatisation, and (e) a sum of money corresponding to the value attributed to the property at the time of the decision (section 11). The Act instituted the State Committee on Property Restitution and Compensation (Komiteti Shteteror per Kthimin dhe Kompensimin e Pronave), composed of five members elected by Parliament. Its role was to decide on the lawfulness of district committees’ decisions on restitution and compensation claims (sections 15 and 17). The Council of Ministers was to establish the rules and the criteria to be applied (sections 13).
Section 19 provided for the enforcement of decisions awarding compensation within the first six months of each financial year. Following its entry into force, anyone entitled to claim restitution or compensation was required to lodge an application with the District Committee by 31 December 2007. The Act granted the Committee a discretion to decide which form of compensation should be granted, but applicants could express their preference in writing. An appeal lay against the District Committee’s decision to the State Committee (section 20) and to the district courts within thirty days of the date of issue of the Committee’s decision.
On 28 April 2005 Parliament enacted legislation setting out the method by which immovable property would be valued for compensation purposes. Its implementation was left to the State Committee on Property Restitution and Compensation, which was to issue the site plans allowing the properties to be valued.
In order to comply with the committee’s awards of pecuniary compensation, section 23 of the 2004 Act provided for the establishment of a ten-year Property Compensation Fund, whose aim was to provide financial support for such awards. The 2004 Act was examined by both the Constitutional and the Supreme Courts.
On 24 March 2005 the Supreme Court (Joint Colleges) concluded that the Property Act of 2004 had no retroactive effect and that its provisions could therefore not have any impact on property rights recognised by administrative or court decisions dating from before its entry into force.
On 17 July 2006 the Property Act 2004 was amended by the Property Act 2006, which entered into force on 17 August 2006. It provided, inter alia, for the establishment of the Agency for the Restitution of Properties and Compensation, a new body competent to decide restitution and compensation claims (section 15). The new law repealed sections 11 (2), 19 and 20 of the 2004 Act which, inter alia, laid down the procedure for the enforcement of compensation awards.
Law no. 8053 of 21 December 1995 conferred on former members of agricultural cooperatives the right to request the title to land they were farming.