The case originated in an application (no. 2141/03) against the Republic of Albania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by five Albanian nationals, Mrs Valeria Vrioni (Benusi), Mr Julian Benusi, Mrs Cecili Benusi, Mrs Hartina Benusi and Mrs Klara Benusi (“the applicants”), on 21 December 2002.
The applicants were represented by Ms L. Sula, a lawyer practising in Tirana. The Albanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their former Agents to the European Court of Human Rights, Mr S. Puto and Ms S. Meneri.
The applicants alleged that there had been a breach of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention on account of the quashing of a final decision in supervisory review proceedings and of the length of civil proceedings to which they had been a party. They also relied on Article 1 of Protocol No. 1, complaining of a violation of their right to the peaceful enjoyment of their possessions.
On 5 July 2005 the President of the Fourth Section of the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it was decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicants and the Government each filed written observations (Rule 59 § 1 of the Rules of Court). The parties replied in writing to each other’s observations. In addition, third-party comments were received from K.G’s heir, who had been given leave by the President to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 2).
Ordinary proceedings relating to the order granting title to the property
Supervisory review
First set of judicial proceedings relating to the Commission decision
“The proceedings were unfair on two counts:
Firstly, the Commission violated the rules on jurisdiction set forth in Article 36 of the Code of Civil Procedure. According to this provision the Commission, as a nonjudicial institution, was not empowered to examine this civil dispute and adopt a decision, in so far as the issue was pending before the courts.
Secondly, ... the Commission was not authorised to examine this issue, as it had been decided upon some years ago by the financial unit of Tirana municipality. In 1992 the financial unit, by means of a decision, awarded this part of the house to the heirs of ... [that is, the applicants].
...
Under these circumstances, the court considers the 1996 Commission decision to be null and void. As such, it cannot produce any effects, even though the financial unit of the  had previously addressed the issue and reached the same conclusion.
By ruling in favour of K.G., the District Court and the Court of Appeal denied the applicants their property rights and conducted an unfair trial.
The violation of this constitutional right, which occurred at the three instances, consisted in the violation of the salient procedural principle according to which final judicial rulings are binding on the court and the parties to the proceedings and cannot be reviewed unless they are quashed by a higher court, or other requests for judicial review or challenges by third parties are being examined.
... the courts that examined this action by the interested party were not mindful of the fact that the claims in question were also the subject of another action against the applicant. The District Court rejected the other action as ill-founded and its judgment was upheld by the Court of Appeal in December 1996, thus becoming final.
Despite the fact that the court does not consider the judgment in question to have the force of res judicata, in the light of the differences in the constituent elements of the actions, their object in the material sense was nevertheless the same, namely the challenging of the applicants’ property rights by the defendant ...
... the court was not empowered to examine the merits of the case and reach a different conclusion from that of the first court, since in the instant case it was not examining any special request for judicial review.”
Second set of judicial proceedings relating to the Commission decision
Second supervisory review
Article 42 § 2
“In the protection of his constitutional and legal rights, freedoms and interests, or in the case of a criminal charge brought against him, everyone has the right to a fair and public hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law.”
Article 131
“The  shall decide:
 ...
(f) in a ruling that shall be final, complaints by individuals alleging a violation of their constitutional right to a fair hearing, after all legal remedies for the protection of those rights have been exhausted.”
Article 451
“Court judgments shall become legally binding on expiry of the time-limit for lodging an appeal if no such appeal has been lodged. If the judgment is not quashed following an appeal to a higher court, it shall become legally binding when the higher court delivers its judgment...”
Article 473 – Review in the interests of the law (Law no. 8431 of 14 December 1998)
“Final judgments, decisions and rulings of the divisions of the Supreme Court shall be amenable to supervisory review in the interests of the law for the reasons set forth in section 472(a), (b) and (c) on an application lodged by the parties to the proceedings within three years from the date on which the decision becomes binding.
The application for supervisory review will first be examined by a preliminary review panel of five judges and then by the full Supreme Court (Joint Bench). ... Judges of the Supreme Court who sat as members of the division that delivered the judgment, decision or ruling or as members of the preliminary review panel shall not sit on the panel that conducts the supervisory review of the final judgment...”