The case concerns compensation for the alleged demolition of the applicant’s house, and the excessive length of the domestic proceedings.
The applicant was born in 1968 and lives in Odessa. She was represented by Ms K. Rovynska, a lawyer practising in Odessa.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In 1986 the local authorities authorised the applicant’s family to occupy a house located in the city of Odessa.
In 1994 the authorities included that property on a list of dilapidated houses. The plot of land on which the house was situated was being used by the Odessa State Academy of Construction and Architecture (“the OSACA”). Part of the plot of land used by the OSACA was subsequently leased to a construction company for the purpose of constructing multi-storey buildings.
In July 2001 the applicant’s family privatised the house.
In 2008 the OSACA registered several immovable properties as belonging to it, allegedly including the applicant’s family’s house, located on the plot of land in issue.
On 6 March 2014 the applicant’s family, in the course of a court dispute with the construction company, concluded a settlement agreement by which the family gave the ownership of the house to the construction company and received a flat in a newly constructed building in return. That agreement further included a general condition to the effect that the applicant’s family waived any claims in relation to the alleged violation of their property rights in that connection. The agreement was approved by the court and the proceedings were closed. The applicant did not appeal against that ruling.
On 14 August 2001 the applicant’s family instituted civil proceedings, arguing that the OSACA had prevented them from having access to their house.
On 25 March 2002 the OSACA instituted administrative proceedings against the Odessa municipal authorities and the applicant’s family, arguing, among other things, that the applicant’s family had no right to the house. On 29 April 2002 the Tsentralnyy District Court of Odessa delivered a preliminary ruling, issuing an attachment order in respect of the house. The civil proceedings instituted by the applicant’s family had been suspended pending the outcome of the administrative case. On 13 May 2008 the Prymorskyy District Court of Odessa dismissed the OSACA’s administrative claim as unfounded. On 25 February 2009 the Odessa Administrative Court of Appeal quashed that judgment and terminated the proceedings on the grounds that the dispute was outside the jurisdiction of the administrative courts. On 7 May 2009 the attachment order was lifted. On 9 December 2010 the Higher Administrative Court upheld the Administrative Court of Appeal’s finding that the case had to be closed for lack of jurisdiction.
In the resumed civil proceedings the applicant’s family updated their claims, arguing that, in addition to being prevented physically from having access to their property, the OSACA had groundlessly sought an attachment order in respect of the house, had registered the house as its own property in 2008 and had allegedly caused damage the house in the course of the construction works carried out on the plot of land. The applicant’s family claimed damages on that account.
On 6 July 2012 the Prymorskyy District Court of Odessa partly allowed the applicant’s family’s claims: (i) it ordered the OSACA not to prevent the applicant’s family from having “access to their house”, and (ii) it invalidated the OSACA’s ownership certificate of 2008 in respect of the house in dispute (see paragraph 7 above). The court then dismissed the claims for damages as unsubstantiated.
On 14 November 2012 the Odessa Regional Court of Appeal reviewed the case and found that all the claims by the applicant’s family had been unsubstantiated. As regards the OSACA’s obligation not to prevent the applicant from having access to the house, the Court of Appeal found that the applicant’s family had not been using the house because it was not “inhabitable”. The Court of Appeal further dismissed as unsubstantiated the claim for invalidation of the OSACA’s ownership certificate as that certificate had not in fact included the applicant’s family’s house.
On 17 April 2013 the Higher Specialised Court of Ukraine on Civil and Criminal Matters upheld the Court of Appeal’s decision of 14 November 2012.