The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) on 3 November 1998, and by Mrs Elena Carbonara, Mr Pasquale Carbonara, Mr Augusto Carbonara and Mr Costantino Ventura (“the applicants”) on 4 November 1998, in accordance with the provisions that applied before the entry into force of Protocol No. 11 to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”). On 29 January 1999, that is, outside the three-month time-limit laid down by former Articles 32 § 1 and 47 of the Convention, the Italian Government (“the Government”) sent a letter bringing the case before the Court.
The case originated in an application (no. 24638/94) against the Italian Republic lodged with the Commission under former Article 25 of the Convention by four Italian nationals on 25 May 1994. The applicants alleged an unjustified interference with their right to peaceful enjoyment of their possessions. The Commission (First Chamber) declared the application admissible on 22 October 1997. In its report of 1 July 1998 (former Article 31 of the Convention), it expressed the unanimous opinion that there had been a violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
Before the Court, the applicants were represented by the fourth applicant, a lawyer practising in Bari. The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr U. Leanza, and co-Agent, Mr V. Esposito.
On 14 January 1999 a panel of the Grand Chamber decided that the case should be examined by one of the sections of the Court (Rule 100 of the Rules of Court). The President of the Court allocated the case to the
Having consulted the parties, the Court decided that there was no need to hold a hearing (Rule 59 § 2 in fine). The parties each lodged two memorials.
The first three applicants and the fourth applicant's late mother owned agricultural land in Noicattaro. In 1963 the Noicattaro Town Council began the building of a school on adjoining land. While the works were under way, it became apparent that an additional plot of land would be needed to complete the construction.
By a decree issued on 27 May 1970, the Prefecture of Bari authorised the Noicattaro Town Council to take possession, under an expedited procedure, of 2,649 sq. m. of land belonging to the applicants for a maximum period of two years with a view to expropriating it in the public interest. The land was recorded on the cadastral register as “partita” no. 10653, folio no. 34, parcel no. 590.
On 30 June 1970 the Noicattaro Town Council took physical possession of the land and started the building works.
The case file shows that the school was not completed until 28 October 1972, by which time the authorised period of possession had expired.
The applicants say that they waited in vain for several years for their land to be formally expropriated and for compensation.
By a writ served on 3 May 1980 the applicants brought an action in damages against the Noicattaro Town Council before the Bari District Court. They submitted, inter alia, that the authorities were in possession of their land illegally as the authorised period had expired without any formal expropriation or the payment of compensation.
The respondent council argued, in particular, that the action in damages was time-barred.

13.  On 14 April 1989 the Bari District Court dismissed the objection raised by the council that the action in damages was time-barred, finding that the council had not stated when the works had been completed. Referring to the Court of Cassation's case-law on constructive expropriation (occupazione acquisitiva), the District Court said that the applicants' right of property had been extinguished on completion of the public works. However, since the transfer of property had been linked to the unlawful taking of possession of the land, the applicants were entitled to damages calculated on the basis of the market value of the land, namely 26,490,000 Italian lire (10,000 lire per sq. m.), which, with index-linking to the date the judgment was delivered, came to 68,900,000 lire, plus interest. 
On 21 July 1989 Noicattaro Town Council appealed against that judgment. It submitted in particular that the applicants' right to damages was time-barred.
In a judgment of 14 November 1990, the Bari Court of Appeal allowed the Noicattaro Town Council's appeal and declared that the applicants' right to damages was time-barred.
The Court of Appeal held that the works had been completed on 28 October 1972. As that was after the expiry of the two-year period stipulated by the Prefecture in its expedited possession order, it followed that the possession of the land was by then unlawful. However, under the constructive-expropriation rule, as established by the courts, the Noicattaro Town Council had acquired ownership of the land from the date the building works were completed. Since the council had acquired the property unlawfully, the applicants were entitled to seek damages; however, in the instant case, the applicants' right to damages was time-barred because the five-year limitation period had started to run from the date of completion of the works.
On 22 January 1992 the applicants appealed to the Court of Cassation. They argued that the retrospective application of the constructive-expropriation rule established by the Court of Cassation in 1983, coupled with the retrospective application of a limitation period, infringed both their right of property and the non-discrimination principle, as guaranteed by the Constitution. Up to 1983, landowners had retained ownership throughout the period of unlawful occupation of their land. Accordingly, although a five-year limitation period applied to actions in damages, the fact that the effects of the unlawful occupation were permanent meant that the landowner was entitled to seek damages at any time, as the occupation of the land remained unlawful. However, after 1983, owners deprived of their land by the authorities lost ownership from the
In a judgment of 1 April 1993, lodged at the registry on 26 November 1993, the Court of Cassation dismissed the applicants' appeal. As regards which limitation period was applicable, it observed that on 22 November 1992 the full court of the Court of Cassation had resolved that issue finally, holding that the five-year period must apply. In the instant case, the applicant's right to damages was therefore time-barred. As to the complaint that the retrospective application of the constructive-expropriation rule and the five-year limitation period was unconstitutional, since it infringed the applicants' right to the peaceful enjoyment of their possessions and the non-discrimination principle, the Court of Cassation held that it was manifestly ill-founded.
This statute governs the expedited expropriation procedure, which permits authorities to start building before expropriation. Once a scheme has been declared to be in the public interest and the plans adopted, the authorities may make an expedited possession order, for a limited period not exceeding five years, in respect of the land to be expropriated. The order will lapse if physical possession of the land is not taken within three months after its issue. After the land has been possessed, a formal expropriation order must be made and compensation paid.
During the 1970s, a number of local authorities took possession of land using the expedited procedure but failed subsequently to issue an expropriation order. The Italian courts were confronted with cases in which the landowner had de facto lost use of the land as it had been possessed and building works in the public interest had been undertaken. The question arose whether the mere fact that works had been carried out meant that the owner had also lost title to the land.
There was a substantial divergence in the decisions of the Court of Cassation over the effects of carrying out building works in the public interest on land where possession had been taken unlawfully. Unlawful possession means possession that is unlawful from the start, in other words obtained without authority, or that is initially authorised but subsequently became unlawful, either because the authority is quashed or because possession continues beyond the authorised period without an expropriation order being made.
Under one line of case-law, the owner of land that had been possessed by the authorities did not lose ownership after completion of the works in the public interest. However, he could not request reinstatement of the land; his only remedy was to bring an action in damages for wrongful possession. No limitation period applied to such actions as the unlawful nature of the possession was continuing. The authorities could at any time issue a formal expropriation order. If they did so, the action in damages was transformed into a dispute over the compensation for expropriation, with damages for the loss of enjoyment of the land being due only for the period prior to the making of the expropriation order (see, among other authorities, the judgments of the Court of Cassation nos. 2341 of 1982; 4741 of 1981; and 6452 and 6308 of 1980).
Under a second line, the landowner did not lose property in the land and could request its reinstatement if the authorities had acted other than in the public interest (see, for example, the Court of Cassation's judgments nos. 1578 of 1976 and 5679 of 1980).
Under a third line, an owner dispossessed by the authorities automatically lost title to the land as soon as it had been altered irreversibly, that is to say on completion of the works in the public interest. He was entitled to claim damages (the sole authority is the Court of Cassation's judgment no. 3243 of 1979).
In a judgment of 16 February 1983, the Court of Cassation, sitting as a full court, resolved the conflict between the case-law authorities and adopted the third solution. In so doing, it established the constructive-expropriation rule (accessione invertita or occupazione acquisitiva). Under the rule, the public authorities acquire title to the land from the outset before formal expropriation if, after taking possession of the land and irrespective of whether such possession is lawful, the works in the public interest are performed. If, initially, the land is possessed without authority, the transfer of property takes place when the works in the public interest are completed.
Case-law after the Court of Cassation's judgment no. 1464 of 1983
Initially, it was held that no limitation period applied, since possession of the land without title was a continuing unlawful act (see paragraph 22 above). In its judgment no. 1464 of 1983, the Court of Cassation stated that the right to compensation was subject to a five-year limitation period (see paragraph 25 above). Subsequently, the First Division of the Court of Cassation said that a ten-year limitation period should apply (judgments nos. 7952 of 1991 and 10979 of 1992). On 22 November 1992 the full court of the Court of Cassation decided the issue finally, holding that the limitation period is five years and starts to run from the date the land is irreversibly altered.
Recent developments in the case-law show that the mechanism whereby carrying out building works in the public interest operates to transfer property in the land to the authorities is subject to exceptions.
In its judgment no. 874 of 1996, the Consiglio di Stato stated that there was no constructive expropriation where resolutions of the authorities and an expedited possession order had been quashed by the administrative courts, as otherwise the judicial decision would be devoid of purpose.
In judgment no. 1907 of 1997, the Court of Cassation, sitting as a full court, said that the authorities did not acquire ownership of the land if their resolutions and the declaration that expropriation was in the public interest were deemed to have been null and void from the outset. In such cases, the owner retained title to the land and could claim restitutio in integrum. In the alternative, he could seek damages. The unlawful nature of
In judgment no. 6515 of 1997, the Court of Cassation, sitting as a full court, said that there was no transfer of property where the declaration that expropriation was in the public interest had been annulled by the administrative courts. In such cases, therefore, the constructive-expropriation rule did not apply. The owner, who retained ownership of the land, was entitled to claim restitutio in integrum. If he brought an action in damages, that entailed a waiver of his right to restitutio in integrum. The five-year prescription period started to run from the date when the decision of the administrative court became final.
In judgment no. 148 of 1998, the First Division of the Court of Cassation followed the decision of the full court and held that there was no transfer of property by constructive expropriation where the declaration that the building works were in the public interest was deemed to have been invalid from the outset.
In this judgment, the Constitutional Court was called upon to decide firstly whether the constructive-expropriation rule was compatible with the Constitution. The court declared that question inadmissible on the ground that it had jurisdiction to examine statutory provisions only, not rules established by the courts. Secondly, it held that the application to an action for compensation of the five-year limitation period laid down by Article 2043 of the Civil Code for claims in tort was compatible with the Constitution. The fact that the authorities had become owners of the land by taking advantage of their own unlawful conduct did not pose any difficulty under the Constitution, since the public interest in the preservation of works for the public good outweighed the individual's interest in the right of property.
Under the Court of Cassation's case-law on constructive expropriations, compensation in full, that is to say damages for the deprivation of the land, is due to the owner in consideration for the loss of ownership caused by the unlawful taking of possession.
The Finance Law of 1992 (Article 5 bis of Legislative Decree no. 333 of 11 July 1992) superseded that case-law by providing that the compensation payable on constructive expropriations could not exceed the amount due on formal expropriations. In judgment no. 369 of 1996, the Constitutional Court declared that provision unconstitutional.
Under Finance Law no. 662 of 1996, which amended the provision that had been declared unconstitutional, compensation in full cannot be awarded for dispossessions effected before 30 September 1996. In such cases, compensation cannot exceed such amount, plus 10%, but without applying the 40% reduction, as would have been payable on a formal expropriation (one-half of the sum of the market value plus the income from the land, less 40%). In a judgment no. 148 of 30 April 1999, the Constitutional Court held that that provision was compatible with the Constitution. However, in the same decision, it said that compensation in full, up to the market value of the land, could be claimed where the dispossession and deprivation of the land were not in the public interest.