The case originated in an application (no. 14411/16) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a stateless person, Mr Igor Oskirko (“the applicant”), on 9 March 2016.
The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Bubnytė.
On 13 September 2017 the complaints under Article 3 of the Convention concerning the applicant’s conditions of detention and the complaints under Articles 8 and 14 of the Convention concerning his inability to receive long-term conjugal visits were communicated to the Government, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. On 18 April 2018 the parties were asked to submit further observations in writing (Rule 54 § 2 (c) of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was born in 1973 and is detained in Kybartai.
On 22 December 2011 the applicant was arrested and taken to Klaipėda police station, where he was detained for various periods until 5 March 2013, for 130 days in total. For twenty-two days the applicant had between 3.25 and 4 square metres of personal space at his disposal; for the remaining period he had more than 4 square metres of personal space, sometimes even up to 9.36 square metres.
On 4 January 2012 the applicant was taken to Šiauliai Remand Prison, where he was detained for various periods until 13 March 2013. No information concerning separate cells, their sizes and the number of inmates has been provided to the Court.
On 4 March 2013 the applicant was convicted of murder and sentenced to twelve years’ imprisonment. On 11 October 2013 the Court of Appeal rejected an appeal by the applicant and the judgment became final.
On 13 March 2013 the applicant was taken to Lukiškės Remand Prison to serve his sentence, and was detained there until 23 December 2015, when he was transferred to Kybartai Correctional Facility.
According to the documents in the Court’s possession, the conditions of the applicant’s detention were as follows. Between 13 March 2013 and 5 May 2014 the applicant was held in five different cells: nos. 88A, 93, 111, 223 and 228 and he was detained there for 419 days in total. For 316.5 days the applicant was alone in the cells, the plot of which varied between 6.83 and 7.94 square metres. For the remaining period he had between 3.82 and 3.87 square metres of personal space, except for one evening, when he had 2.48 square metres of personal space at his disposal.
The applicant submitted two schemes of different cells in Lukiškės Remand Prison. It is indicated in the schemes that the toilets were separated from the rest of the cells by partitions but that they were visible from the entrance of the cell. The Government have not provided any information regarding this matter.
On 3 June 2014 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court. He asked the court to oblige Lukiškės Remand Prison to immediately terminate his inhuman and degrading treatment, transfer him to a cell where he would have no less than 4 square metres of personal space (not including space for the toilet and the furniture), and award him 86,886 euros (EUR) in compensation. He complained regarding overcrowding, low temperatures, damp, the lack of proper partitions between toilets and cells, the fact that he was held with convicted inmates who were serving sentences for grave crimes, the insufficient nutritional value of the food, the fact that he could only shower once a week for fifteen minutes, and the lack of time spent in the open air. He also complained about the lack of long-term visits in Lukiškės Remand Prison from 23 November 2011 until October 2013, and claimed that consequently he had separated from his partner.
The applicant further complained regarding his conditions of detention in Klaipėda police station between 23 December 2011 and 5 March 2013. He complained regarding overcrowding, the lack of ventilation, damp, low temperatures, the lack of proper partitions between toilets and cells, the lack of time spent in the open air, the fact that the shower had only been available once a week for fifteen minutes, the insufficient nutritional value of the food, the fact that there had been no long-term or short-term visits, and the fact that there were no separate cells for non-smokers and inmates who had tuberculosis or HIV.
He also complained regarding his conditions of detention in Šiauliai Remand Prison between 4 January 2012 and 13 March 2013. He complained regarding overcrowding, low temperatures during the winter and high temperatures during the summer, insufficient ventilation, the fact that he could only shower once a week, the lack of proper partitions between toilets and cells, and the fact that there had been no long-term visits.
On 26 January 2015 the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court allowed the applicant’s claim in part. The court held that he had spent 419 days in Lukiškės Remand Prison, and had had more than 3.6 square metres of personal space at his disposal for 418 days. On one evening the applicant had had 2.48 square metres of personal space at his disposal. The court further held that the partition between the toilet and the cell of 1.5 < metres in height did not constitute sufficient implementation of national hygiene norms and the standards of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT). The other complaints by the applicant (regarding high temperatures in the summer, damp, a lack of proper ventilation, mould, a lack of cleaning materials, not having enough time to shower, the low energy value of the food, and having insufficient time outside) were dismissed as unsubstantiated. As regards long-term visits, the court held that the applicant could not receive them, as he was a remand prisoner and not a convicted inmate.
As regards Šiauliai Remand Prison, the court held that the applicant had spent 296 days there. The court further held that he had had insufficient personal space in the cells for 283 days (insufficient cell space had been unquestionably proved in respect of forty-eight days, and for the remaining 235 days the applicant had had a varying amount of personal space at his disposal) and found that the lack of proper partition walls between toilets and cells had breached both domestic requirements and the standards of the CPT. The court also found that the air temperature in cell no. 9 had been 0.19˚C lower than the standard. As regards long-term visits, the court held that the applicant had not been entitled to them, in accordance with domestic law.
With regard to Klaipėda police station, the court found that the applicant had had insufficient personal space (less than 5 square metres) for fiftyseven days, and that the partition wall between the toilet and the cell, which was 1.2 and 1.3 metres in height in different cells, had been too low and had not satisfied the standards of the domestic law or the CPT. In relation to visits, the court held that people did not have a right to receive any visits from their relatives when they were transferred to police stations temporarily.
As a result, the court awarded the applicant compensation of EUR 1,200 from Šiauliai Remand Prison and EUR 200 from Klaipėda police station.
The applicant lodged an appeal against that decision, but on 10 November 2015 the Supreme Administrative Court upheld the first-instance decision. The court only noted that with regard to Klaipėda police station, the first-instance court had miscalculated the time that the applicant had spent in overcrowded cells and stated that he had had less than 5 square metres of personal space for eighty-three days. However, the higher court found that for twenty-six days he had had between 4.77 and 4.84 square metres of personal space, which was less than the domestic requirement at the time (see paragraph 18 below). However, the court held that for those twenty-six days the deviation from the domestic norms had not been significant and thus it agreed with the first-instance decision.
From the information available to the Court, it appears that the applicant never asked the prison administration if he could receive longterm conjugal visits from his partner, and although short-term visits were available to him, he only used his right to receive them once, on 26 June 2013. Two other short-term visits were changed into phone calls (the visits of 12 June 2015 and 29 October 2015).
For the relevant domestic law and practice and international material on conditions of detention, see Mironovas and Others v. Lithuania (nos. 40828/12 and 6 others, §§ 50-69, 8 December 2015).
During its latest visit to Lithuania from 5 to 15 September 2016, the CPT again visited Lukiškės Remand Prison. In its report, published on 1 February 2018, the CPT noted:
“As regards regimes, the Committee once again calls upon the Lithuanian authorities to take decisive steps to develop programmes of activities for both sentenced and remand prisoners. The current situation where more than half of sentenced prisoners have no meaningful activities certainly does not contribute to their social rehabilitation ...
...
Turning to the regime in remand prisons, it remained impoverished even though remand prisoners were now allowed to attend secondary education. This notwithstanding, remand prisoners continued to be locked up in their cells for up to 22-23 hours per day.
At Lukiškės Prison, the delegation noted that material conditions were in general better than during the 2012 visit due to continuous efforts of the management to renovate parts of the prison. However, a number of unrenovated cells were still dilapidated, humid and lacking adequate ventilation; proper access to daylight was problematic throughout the prison due to small windows. Despite the decrease of population, some cells were overcrowded and did not provide 4 m2 of living space per inmate.
The Committee wishes to reiterate that ensuring that sentenced prisoners are engaged in purposeful activities of a varied nature (work, preferably with vocational value; education; sport; recreation/association) is not only an essential part of rehabilitation and re-socialisation, but it also contributes to the establishment of a more secure environment within prisons. Moreover, remand prisoners should also, as far as possible, be offered work and other structured activities.
The CPT once again calls upon the Lithuanian authorities to take decisive steps to develop programmes of activities for both sentenced and remand prisoners. The aim should be to ensure that prisoners are able to spend a reasonable part of the day (8 hours or more) outside their cells, engaged in purposeful activities of a varied nature (work, education, sport, etc.) tailored to the needs of each category of prisoner (adult remand or sentenced prisoners, inmates serving life sentences, female prisoners, etc.).
At Lukiškės Prison, the delegation was informed of plans to adapt parts of the adjoining premises of the former Prison Hospital for organised activities such as work, schooling and sports. The Committee would like to be informed whether these plans have now been implemented and if so, how many remand prisoners participate in the aforementioned activities.”
Rules on equipment and maintenance of correctional facilities (Dėl pataisos įstaigų įrengimo ir eksploatavimo taisyklių patvirtinimo), approved by the order No. V-82 of 3 March 2011 of the Director of the Prison Department, provided that if it was not possible to equip a cell with a separate sanitary unit, the existing unit had to be separated from the rest of the cell by a partition of at least 1.5 metres in height and it had to be covered with surface that was easily cleaned and protected against humidity and disinfection products (Point 16.5).
Rules on activities of territorial police stations (Teritorinių policijos įstaigų areštinių veiklos taisyklės), approved by the order No. 5-V-356 of 29 May 2007 of the Police Commissioner General, provided that a person held in a cell of a police station had to have no less than 5 square metres of personal space.
For the relevant domestic law and practice as regards visits, see Varnas v. Lithuania (no. 42615/06, §§ 58-61, 9 July 2013) and Čiapas v. Lithuania, ((dec.), no. 62564/13, §§ 10-14, 4 July 2017).
In a case unrelated to that of the applicant, the Supreme Administrative Court relied on the Court’s interpretation in the case of Varnas (cited above) and awarded the relevant applicant compensation of EUR 2,000 for both his conditions of detention and the lack of long-term conjugal visits (decision of 19 April 2016, no. A-618-552/2016).
In another case unrelated to that of the applicant, the Supreme Administrative Court also relied on the Court’s interpretation in the case of Varnas (cited above) and held that public administrative authorities should rely on Article 8 of the Convention. The Supreme Administrative Court acknowledged that the refusal on the basis of domestic law to grant conjugal visits to pre-trial detainees was not justified by objective and reasonable grounds to treat pre-trial detainees and convicted inmates differently. As a result, the Supreme Administrative Court awarded the applicant in that case compensation of EUR 1,000 (decision of 8 September 2016, no. A850662/2016).