The case originated in an application (no. 29281/95) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Halil İbrahim Arı (“the applicant”), on 22 August 1995.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr Zeki Tavşancıl, a lawyer practising in Ankara (Turkey). The Turkish Government did not designate an Agent for the purposes of the proceedings before the Court.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the criminal proceedings brought against him had not been concluded within a “reasonable time” and that his right to a fair hearing had been breached on account of his conviction by the Ankara Martial Law Court which lacked independence and impartiality. He further submitted that he had been convicted on the basis of the statements he had made to the police under duress and that his political opinions had constituted the basis for his conviction.
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
The application was allocated to the First Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1 of the Rules of Court. Mr Rıza Türmen, the judge elected in respect of Turkey, withdrew from sitting in the case (Rule 28). The Government accordingly appointed Mr Feyyaz Gölcüklü to sit as an ad hoc judge, in his place (Article 27 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 29 § 1).
By a decision of 11 January 2000, the Chamber retained the applicant’s complaints concerning his right to a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial tribunal and declared the remainder of his complaints inadmissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
On 11 June 1981 police officers from the Bursa Security Directorate arrested the applicant on suspicion of membership of an illegal organisation, the Dev-Yol (Revolutionary Way).
On 27 July 1981 the applicant was brought to the Sivas Public Prosecutor’s office where he conceded the accusations against him and explained his role in the Dev-Yol.
On 3 September 1981, following his transfer to Ankara, the applicant was questioned by police officers at the Ankara Security Directorate. He confirmed his statements concerning his involvement in the activities of the Dev-Yol.
On 16 September 1981 the applicant was taken to the Ankara Military Public Prosecutor’s office where the statements he had made at the Ankara Security Directorate were read to him. He made some amendments to his statements and confirmed that they were true. He explained in detail his involvement in the Dev-Yol.
On 18 September 1981 the Ankara Martial Law Court (sıkıyönetim mahkemesi) remanded the applicant in custody.
On 26 February 1982 the Military Public Prosecutor filed a bill of indictment with the Martial Law Court against the applicant and 722 other defendants. The Public Prosecutor accused the applicant of membership of an illegal armed organisation, namely the Dev-Yol, whose object was to undermine the constitutional order and replace it with a Marxist-Leninist regime. The Public Prosecutor alleged that the applicant had been involved in numerous illegal activities of the Dev-Yol, such as collection of money for expenditures of the organisation, supplying weapons to the organisation and giving orders to the militants under his command for robberies, murder and bombings. He maintained that the applicant had also been involved in the armed clashes with the police and opponent groups and had organised illegal meetings in Bursa.
The prosecution sought the death penalty under Article 146 § 1 of the Turkish Criminal Code.
In the meantime, the Ankara Martial Law Court decided that the criminal proceedings brought against the applicant by the Gölcük Martial Law Public Prosecutor’s office on 30 October 1981 and the Erzincan Military Public Prosecutor’s office on 23 December 1981 should be joined to the criminal proceedings instituted by the Ankara Military Public Prosecutor’s office.
On 18 March 1987 the Martial Law Court ordered the applicant’s release pending trial.
In a judgment of 19 July 1989 the Martial Law Court, composed of two civilian judges, two military judges and an army officer, convicted the applicant of membership of an illegal organisation, the Dev-Yol, and of having a leading role in that organisation. It sentenced him to 13 years and 4 months’ imprisonment, debarred him from employment in the civil service and placed him under judicial guardianship for offences under Articles 59 and 168 § 1 of the Turkish Criminal Code and Article 17 of Law no. 1402. The court acquitted the applicant of the other charges.
The applicant lodged an appeal with the Military Court of Cassation (askeri yargıtay).
Following promulgation of the Law of 27 December 1993, which abolished the jurisdiction of the martial law courts, the Court of Cassation (yargıtay) acquired jurisdiction over the case and the file was transmitted to it.
On 27 December 1995 the Court of Cassation quashed the applicant’s sentence. It held that the Martial Law Court had wrongly applied Article 17 of Law no. 1402 to the applicant’s case. It considered however that this error did not require the re-trial of the applicant. The court revised the judgment of the Martial Law Court and sentenced the applicant to 10 years’ imprisonment.
Article 146 § 1 of the Turkish Criminal Code provides:
“Whosoever shall attempt to alter or amend in whole or in part the Constitution of the Turkish Republic or to effect a coup d’état against the Grand National Assembly formed under the Constitution or to prevent it by force from carrying out its functions shall be liable to the death penalty.”
Article 168 of the Criminal Code reads:
“Any person who, with the intention of committing the offences defined in Articles ..., forms an armed gang or organisation or takes leadership ... or command of such a gang or organisation or assumes some special responsibility within it shall be sentenced to not less than fifteen years’ imprisonment.
The other members of the gang or organisation shall be sentenced to not less than five and not more than fifteen years’ imprisonment.”
The provisions governing judicial organisation are worded as follows:
Article 138 §§  1 and 2
“In the performance of their duties, judges shall be independent; they shall give judgment, according to their personal conviction, in accordance with the Constitution, statute and the law.
No organ, authority, officer or other person may give orders or instructions to courts or judges in the exercise of their judicial powers, nor send them circulars or make recommendations or suggestions to them.”
Article 139 § 1
“Judges ... shall not be removed from office or compelled to retire without their consent before the age prescribed by the Constitution ...”
Article 145
“... Martial law courts shall be responsible for dealing with offences under special laws committed by civilians against military personnel and offences committed against military personnel in the course of their duties or on scheduled premises.
The offences and persons falling within the jurisdiction of the martial law courts in time of war or under martial law, the composition of martial law courts and the appointment, where necessary, of judges and prosecutors from the ordinary courts to martial law courts shall be regulated by law.
The personal rights and obligations of military judges ... shall be regulated by law in accordance with the principles of the independence of the courts, the safeguards enjoyed by the judiciary and the requirements of military service. Relations between military judges and the commanders under whom they serve as regards their non-judicial duties shall also be regulated by law.”
Article 11 § 1
“The Ministry of defence shall convene a sufficient number of martial law courts in areas where martial law applies...”
Article 11 § 4
“Judicial advisers, military judges and military prosecutors attached to the martial law courts are appointed, with agreement of the Chief of Staff, from among the candidates nominated by a committee composed of the personnel director and the legal adviser to the Office of the Chief of Staff, the personnel director and the legal adviser to the army corps to which the judge in question belongs and finally the head of the Military Legal Service at the Ministry of Defence.”
Article 11 § 6
“The army officers serving on martial law courts are appointed, on the proposal of the Chief of Staff, according to the procedure for appointing military judges...”
Article 4
“The officers serving on the martial law courts and their substitutes shall be appointed, in December, by the commander or the superior of the military establishment within which a martial law court is formed, from among the officers of that establishment. The officers thus appointed are irremovable for one year.”
Article 12
“The suitability of military judges for promotion, priority within the same grade and progress up the career hierarchy is determined on the basis of assessments.
A)	There are three types of assessment certificate, which are the assessment certificate for generals, the assessment certificate for officers (sub-lieutenant - colonel) and the professional assessment certificate.
...
B)	The superiors in the hierarchy authorised to issue an assessment certificate for officers and to assess officers:
First superior in the hierarchy: the commander or superior of the military establishment to which the judge in question belongs and in which a martial law court is formed.
Second superior in the hierarchy: the commander or the superior immediately above the first superior in the hierarchy.
Third superior in the hierarchy: the commander or the superior immediately above the second superior in the hierarchy...”
Article 29
“The Minister of Defence may apply the following disciplinary sanctions to military judges, after hearing their defence:
-	Written warning...;
-	Rebuke...” 