The case originated in an application (no. 49972/16) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Maksim Andreyevich Dyagilev (“the applicant”), on 12 August 2016.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Peredruk and Mr S. Golubok, lawyers practising in St Petersburg. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant complained, in particular, that an application lodged by him to be assigned to civilian service instead of compulsory military service had been dismissed.
On 29 June 2017 notice of the complaint was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. The parties submitted written observations on the admissibility and the merits.
On 1 September 2017 the Vice-President of the Section granted the Movement of Conscientious Objectors (Движение сознательных отказчиков) leave to intervene as a third party in the proceedings, in accordance with Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1990 and lives in St Petersburg.
In 2014 the applicant graduated with a master’s degree in philosophy from the Herzen State Pedagogical University of Russia (РГПУ им. А. И. Герцена). He then became liable to be called up for military service.
At the end of August 2014, in an attempt to find what he described as “a lawful way to avoid military service”, the applicant attended a legal seminar organised by the Committee of Soldiers’ Mothers (Комитет солдатских матерей) in St Petersburg. He submitted that his participation in the seminar had finally allowed him to understand his adherence to pacifist philosophy.
On 4 September 2014 the applicant applied to the local military commissariat to be assigned to civilian service instead of compulsory military service. In support of his application, the applicant attached his curriculum vitae and a letter of recommendation from his place of work.
His application was examined by a military recruitment commission composed of seven members: a deputy head of the administration of the Frunzenskiy district of St Petersburg (the president of the commission); a head of the military commissariat of the Frunzenskiy district of St Petersburg; the secretary of the commission (an employee of the military commissariat); a medical officer of the military commissariat responsible for the medical certification of individuals liable to be called up for military service; a deputy head of the local department of neighbourhood and juvenile police; a head of the educational department of the administration of the Frunzenskiy district of St Petersburg; and a deputy head of the employment office of the Frunzenskiy district of St Petersburg.
On 25 November 2014 the applicant’s application was dismissed. According to the minutes of the relevant meeting of the commission, the documents and information provided by the applicant were not sufficiently persuasive for it to conclude that he was a genuine pacifist.
On the following day the applicant brought a court action challenging that decision. The applicant attached his curriculum vitae and a letter of recommendation.
On 9 February 2015, while the judicial proceedings were still pending, the applicant lodged a second application to be assigned to civilian service instead of military service. That application was rejected as repetitive without having been considered on the merits.
On 25 February 2015 the Frunzenskiy District Court of St Petersburg dismissed a complaint lodged by the applicant, reasoning as follows:
“[The] court does not determine the existence of humanist or pacifist convictions from the personal file of the conscript, since [such convictions] are not mentioned in his curriculum vitae or [letter of recommendation from his place of work]. His views regarding the impossibility of his performing military service should have been formed over a period of time ... spontaneously crystallised convictions cannot serve as grounds for requesting permission to perform alternative civilian service.
Considering all the items of evidence provided and their intertwined nature, the court finds the circumstances relied on by the applicant to be not proven.”
On 12 August 2015 the St Petersburg City Court upheld the judgment of 25 February 2015 on appeal. The applicant did not participate in the appeal hearing for unspecified reasons. He did not adduce any new evidence before the appeal court. The relevant parts of the judgment read as follows:
“... the right to have compulsory military service replaced with its civilian alternative does not imply that a citizen can unconditionally choose between the military and civilian types of service, and it does not mean that an individual’s negative attitude towards military service in itself ... guarantees the right to have compulsory military service replaced.
This position is also reflected in the practice of the European Court of Human Rights, which has stated that only when opposition to military service is motivated by a serious and insurmountable conflict between the obligation to serve in the army and a person’s conscience or his deeply and genuinely held religious or other beliefs does it constitute a conviction or belief of sufficient cogency, seriousness, cohesion and importance to attract the guarantees of Article 9 [of the Convention] ...
[The court] finds that it is not sufficient for a citizen to simply indicate that his personal convictions conflict with his obligation to serve in the army in order to have compulsory military service replaced.
An individual must substantiate such an assertion, indicate the reasons and circumstances that impelled him to ask for the replacement [of military by civilian service], list facts confirming those of his deep beliefs that conflict with the [the obligation to perform] military service, and adduce relevant evidence.
...
As can be seen from the facts of the case, [the applicant] ... presented his curriculum vitae, in which he listed his main periods of education, ... stated that his beliefs about human beings and their place in the world had been formed under the influence of several philosophers, and [stated] that his views on the army and the military way of life had been affected by his brother’s stories about his own army service. According to the applicant, his convictions had finally crystallised after he had attended a legal seminar organised by the Committee of Soldiers’ Mothers in St Petersburg.
A personal reference given to the applicant [by his employer] listed both his negative and positive qualities; however, like his curriculum vitae, it did not contain information demonstrating the existence of any deep convictions preventing him from performing military service.
[The applicant] did not present any additional information [...] before either the military recruitment commission, the first instance or the appeal court.
[The applicant] has failed to prove ... the existence of a serious and insurmountable conflict between the obligation to serve in the army and his convictions ...
...
[The applicant] was given an opportunity to bring to the attention of the military recruitment commission arguments [supporting] the existence of [his] convictions or religious beliefs ... However, no convictions objectively preventing him from performing compulsory military service were established.”
Subsequent cassation appeals lodged by the applicant were dismissed on 3 November 2015 by the St Petersburg City Court and on 24 March 2016 by the Supreme Court. The cassation courts fully endorsed the appeal court’s reasoning.
Article 59 of the Constitution reads, in the relevant part, as follows:
“1. The defence of the Fatherland shall be the duty and obligation of citizens of the Russian Federation.
...
A citizen of the Russian Federation shall have the right to replace military service with alternative civilian service in the case that his convictions or religious beliefs preclude military service, and also in other cases provided by the federal law.”
Alternative civilian service in Russia is regulated by the Civilian Service Act, Law No. 113-FZ of 25 July 2002 (Федеральный закон от 25.07.2002 N 113-ФЗ «Об альтернативной гражданской службе»).
Section 2 of the Act provides that all citizens are entitled to have compulsory military service replaced by its civilian alternative if their personal convictions or religious beliefs conflict with the duty to perform military service.
Section 10(1) sets out a process by which citizens are assigned to alternative civilian service: an application is lodged for the replacement of military service by civilian service; the application is examined by a military recruitment commission; a medical examination is carried out; and the individual concerned is dispatched to his or her assigned duty station.
Section 11(1) indicates, inter alia, that individuals are to lodge such applications at least six months before the beginning of their scheduled draft service. Those who enjoy draft deferments (such as for the purpose of university studies) are to lodge their applications within ten days of such deferment coming to an end.
Under section 11(1) (in fine), individuals have to substantiate that their beliefs are in conflict with the duty to perform military service.
An application for the replacement of military service must indicate the reasons and circumstances prompting an individual to lodge it. The request should be accompanied by a curriculum vitae and a personal reference from that individual’s place of work and/or study. Other documents may be attached to the application, and the individual may give the names of persons willing to testify in support of his application (section 11 (2)).
Section 12 provides that the military recruitment commission should only examine an application for the replacement of military service in the presence of an applicant. The military recruitment commission should consider: oral statements made by an applicant, together with statements by any individuals who have agreed to testify in support of his application; documents provided; and any additional material obtained by the commission. Decisions on applications are to be adopted by a simple majority. Two-thirds of the members of the military recruitment commission must be present in order to constitute a quorum. An application may be dismissed if, inter alia, the documents and other material submitted do not prove that the applicant’s personal convictions or beliefs are in conflict with the obligation to serve in the army. Where an application for the replacement of civilian service by military service is dismissed, the commission must produce a reasoned decision and provide a copy thereof to the applicant.
All decisions adopted by the military recruitment commission may be challenged before the courts of general jurisdiction under Chapter 22 of the Code of Administrative Procedure. A disputed decision is automatically suspended pending the adoption of a final judgment by a domestic court (section 15).
Section 25 § 1 of the Compulsory Military Service Act, Law No. 53FZ of 28 March 2002 (Федеральный закон от 28.03.1998 N 53-ФЗ «О воинской обязанности и военной службе») provides that as a general rule the military draft takes place twice a year: from 1 April until 15 July and from 1 October until 15 December.
A military recruitment commission consists of: the head or a deputy head of a municipal entity, who serves as the president of the military recruitment commission; an officer of a military commissariat, who serves as the deputy president of the military recruitment commission; the secretary of the commission; a medical officer responsible for the medical certification of individuals liable to be called up for military service; a representative of a local internal affairs agency (орган внутренних дел – a police body); a representative of an “education governing agency” (орган, осуществляющий управление в сфере образования); and a representative of an employment office (section 27(1).
Under section 27(2) of the Act, representatives of other agencies and organisations may sit on a military recruitment commission.
Under Article 186 § 1, a judgment becomes final upon the expiry of the time-limit set for parties to lodge an appeal, if that judgment has not been appealed against. Under Article 298 § 1, parties have one month to lodge an appeal from the moment of adoption of a judgment.
Article 186 § 2 provides that where an appeal has been lodged, a judgment enters into force on the day on which it is upheld by the appeal court. In the event that the appeal court quashes or modifies the firstinstance judgment and adopts a new decision, the latter enters into force immediately.
Chapter 22 of the Code of Administrative Procedure governs proceedings whereby individuals challenge decisions and acts by (or inaction on the part of) the public authorities.
Under Article 226 § 8, domestic courts examine the lawfulness of a challenged decision (or act/failure to act). Courts are not bound by arguments raised by claimants and are required to fully examine matters listed in paragraphs 9 and 10 of the same Article. In particular, courts must assess whether the rights and freedoms of a claimant were breached, whether domestic authorities acted ultra vires, and whether the requirements regarding (i) the grounds for a contested decision (or act/failure to act) and (ii) the procedure by that decision was adopted were observed.
Courts are empowered to rule a decision or act (or failure to act) challenged before them unlawful, in full or in part. In such a case a court may, where necessary, indicate steps required to be made by the relevant authorities in order to remedy a breach of the domestic law and the rights and freedoms of a claimant (Article 227 § 2).
The Decree lays down procedural arrangements for the organisation of biannual military drafts. Section 22 of the Decree provides that at the end of a draft period a military recruitment commission, inter alia, must cancel all those of its military conscription decisions that have subsequently been overturned during that period by a regional military recruitment commission or a court.
The Decree is furthermore complemented by Order of the Minister of Defence no. 400 of 2 October 2007, which specified the procedure to be followed in respect of its implementation. Section 7 of annex no. 33 to the Order provides that upon the end of a draft period all unimplemented military conscription decisions are to be revoked by a regional military recruitment commission.
Examining the compatibility of section 11 of the Civilian Service Act with the Constitution, the Constitutional Court ruled as follows:
“[It] is not possible to limit by means of procedural rules an individual’s freedom of conscience and religion and, accordingly, his right [to be assigned to] alternative civilian service .... Therefore, section 11 of the Civilian Service Act ... cannot be interpreted as laying down time-limits ... that cannot be renewed for good reasons.”
On 9 April 1987 the Committee of Ministers adopted Recommendation No. R (87) 8 to Member States Regarding Conscientious Objection to Compulsory Military Service, which laid down, inter alia, the following basic principles:
“A.  Basic principle
Anyone liable to conscription for military service who, for compelling reasons of conscience, refuses to be involved in the use of arms, shall have the right to be released from the obligation to perform such service, under the conditions set out hereafter. Such persons may be liable to perform alternative service;
Procedure
States may lay down a suitable procedure for the examination of applications for conscientious objector status or accept a declaration by the person concerned giving his reasons;
With a view to the effective application of the principles and rules of this recommendation, persons liable to conscription shall be informed in advance of their rights. For this purpose, the state shall provide them with all relevant information directly or allow the private organisations concerned to furnish that information;
Applications for conscientious objector status shall be made in ways and within time-limits to be determined having due regard to the requirement that the procedure for the examination of an application should, as a rule, be completed before the individual concerned is actually conscripted into the armed forces;
The examination of applications shall include all the necessary guarantees for a fair procedure;
An applicant shall have the right to appeal against the decision at first instance;
The appeal authority shall be separate from the military administration and composed in such a manner as to ensure its independence.”