The case concerns restrictions imposed by the authorities on the location, time and manner of conduct of several public events. The applicants also complained about being unlawfully arrested and convicted of various administrative offences.
The applicants’ details are set out in the appended table.
The Russian Government (“ the Government” ) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The three applicants in the present case were involved in a number of public events in 2007-2008 in Rostov-na-Donu, where they all reside. Some of the applications lodged by them concern the same events, while others are unrelated, but similar in substance. The main details of the complaints under Articles 10 and 11 of the Convention are summarised in the text below. These and further repetitive complaints, under Articles 3, 5 and 6 of the Convention, are also detailed in the Appendix.
The applicant in the present application is Mr Nagibin. On 22 June 2007 the Justice of the Peace of the 4th Circuit of the Pervomayskiy District of RostovnaDonu found the applicant guilty of a breach of public order, an administrative offence under Article 20.1 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Offences. The judge based her decision on the strength of the evidence produced by the police: reports by the officers and statements by two witnesses who had signed their statements attesting that the applicant used foul language and verbally assaulted them. The applicant was sentenced to nine days’ administrative imprisonment. The judge rejected the applicant’s request to question the prosecution witnesses.
On 27 June 2007 the Pervomayskiy District Court of RostovnaDonu rejected the applicant’s appeal in a summary fashion.
The applicant in the present application is Mr Nagibin. At about 3 p.m. on 12 December 2006 the applicant, on leaving his home, was apprehended by police officers from the Organised Crime Unit of the Rostov Regional Police Directorate. They brought him to the Pervomayskiy district police station.
According to the police, the applicant was stopped for an identity check but resisted and attempted to flee.
At the police station a report on an administrative offence under Article 19.3 of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”) (failure to comply with lawful demands of a police officer) was drawn up.
The applicant remained in custody on the premises of the police station until 3 p.m. on the following day. He did not receive any food, he was not taken outdoors. The cell measured approximately 2 square metres and accommodated the applicant and one other person; it was not equipped with a bed.
On 13 December 2006 the applicant was brought before the Justice of the Peace of the 5th Court Circuit of the Pervomayskiy District of RostovnaDonu. The judge dismissed the case and returned the file to the police as the applicant was a member of the district electoral commission.
On 13 February 2007 the police discontinued the administrative proceedings against the applicant upon expiry of the statutory prescription period.
The applicant complained to a court that he had been unlawfully deprived of his liberty and of the poor condition of his detention.
In those proceedings the court established that on 12 December 2006 the police officers had stopped Mr Nagibin to check his identity and to conduct explanatory and preventive discussions. The police officers’ testimonies were rendered in the judgment as follows:
“Having received operative information on the preparation by National-Bolsheviks of an unlawful march in Moscow, known as the ‘Dissenters’ March’, they were requested to conduct explanatory and preventive discussions (разъяснительнопрофилактические беседы) with the prospective participants to the march, including Mr Nagibin. However, since they did not know him and only disposed of his verbal description, on 12 December 2006 they arrived at Mr Nagibin’s residence and, as he was not at home, waited for him in the street. Once they saw a man who matched the description, they approached him, introduced themselves and asked him for identity documents. The man refused, pushed them away and attempted to flee, which actions aroused suspicions as to the lawfulness of his conduct. As he had offered resistance, Mr Nagibin was placed in a car and brought to the Pervomayskiy district police station ...”
On 6 April 2007 the Pervomayskiy District Court of RostovnaDonu gave judgment, by which it rejected the applicant’s claims. It found that the police officers had acted within their competence because they had the right, under section 11 §§ 2 and 15 of the Police Act, to check the identity papers of individuals who were suspected of a criminal or administrative offence. The applicant’s overnight detention had been lawful because the Code of Administrative Offences permitted detention for up to forty-eight hours.
On 6 June 2007 the Rostov Regional Court upheld the judgment on appeal.
The applicant attempted to complain about the decision to conduct “preventive discussions” for the purpose of dissuading prospective participants from taking part in mass gatherings. However, by decision of 18 July 2007, upheld on appeal on 17 November 2007, the Pervomayskiy District Court refused to examine his complaint, finding that the issues raised therein had already been determined in the judgment of 6 April 2007.
In November 2007 Mr Nagibin (the applicant in the present application) and Mr Ye. notified the RostovnaDonu town administration of their intention to hold a static demonstration (“picket”, пикетирование) to protest against the authorities’ decision to exclude the “Different Russia” (Drugaya Rossiya) party from participating in the parliamentary election.
They received a reply stating that if they intended to campaign for the candidates of the association not listed on the electoral ballots they would violate the law and requesting them to submit a notification in which the purpose of the event would be formulated in compliance with the law.
On 24 November 2007 Mr Nagibin proceeded with the demonstration. He was apprehended as his passport was found to be defiled with unauthorised pen writing and the police officers intended to draft the relevant record of the administrative offence at the police station. The applicant refused to follow them, explaining that he was a participant in the picket. He was, however, brought to a police station and charged with noncompliance with a lawful order of a police officer (Article 19.3 § 1 of the CAO).
On 2 December 2007 the applicant was convicted of the administrative offence on the basis of the police report and oral testimony of the officer, Mr Kh. The applicant was sentenced to three days of administrative imprisonment. The court credited the period from 5.20 p.m. on 24 November 2007 until 10.45 a.m. on 26 November 2007 to the time to be served. The applicant appealed.
On 11 January 2008 the Pervomayskiy District Court upheld the conviction.
On 18 February 2008 the applicant challenged the town administration’s rejection of his picket notification before a court.
On 7 March 2008 the Pervomayskiy District Court found that there had been no breach of the applicant’s right to hold a picket because the town administration had not prohibited the event and the applicant had actually begun picketing but had been detained and brought to administrative liability for an unrelated offence. On 23 April 2008 the Rostov Regional Court upheld that judgment on appeal.
The first applicant in this application is Mr Nagibin, the second applicant is Mr Batyy.
On 19 June 2007 Mr Nagibin, together with Mr Ye., notified the RostovnaDonu town administration of their intention to hold a meeting of some three hundred participants on Sovetov Square from 5 p.m. to 6 p.m. on 30 June 2007, followed by the “Dissenters’ March” (Марш несогласных) along Sadovaya and Sovetskaya Streets and another meeting at Karl Marx Square until 7.30 p.m.
On 20 June 2007 the town administration informed Mr Nagibin that the contemplated events had not been sufficiently prepared. In particular, they did not indicate which side of Sadovaya and Sovetskaya Streets the march would take place and where the participants would cross the streets.
On 21 September 2007 both applicants and Mr Ye. complained to a court about the town administration’s de facto refusal of their application to hold a march.
On 8 October 2007 the Pervomayskiy District Court of RostovnaDonu found in their favour.
Following the town administration’s appeal, on 21 November 2007 the RostovnaDonu Regional Court reversed the District Court’s decision. It held that the administration’s response had not prohibited the meeting or prevented the organisers from submitting more detailed information on its route and venue. The organisers, however, did not make use of this possibility. Additionally, the Regional Court determined, without referring to specific dates, that the complainants had missed the three-month timelimit for appealing against the administration’s decision.
The applicant in this application, Mr Nikolayev, on various dates notified the RostovnaDonu town administration of his intention to hold public events at different locations (see appended table). However, the town administration imposed restrictions as to the location of the public event on each occasion.
The applicant contested the town administration’s replies before the domestic courts (for details of those proceedings see appended table).
On 24 November 2007 the applicant and Mr S. intended to take part in the event which had been organised by Mr Nagibin and Mr Ye. (see paragraph 19 above, the facts relating to application no. 37565/08).
At 3.15 p.m. three police officers in uniform and two persons in civilian clothing approached Mr Nikolayev while he was standing near a kiosk. He was told to follow them to the district police station, claiming that “his driver’s licence was a forgery, his cell phone had been stolen, and he looked like a wanted criminal”.
Mr Nikolayev was brought to the Kirovskiy district police station. He was charged with a breach of public order, an offence under Article 20.1 § 1 of the CAO. According to the report, on 24 November 2007 he had sworn obscenely, disobeyed police orders, pushed the policemen away and attempted to flee. The arrest record noted that Mr Nikolayev had been arrested with a view to ensure administrative proceedings.
He was placed into a temporary detention cell where he remained until 10.35 a.m. on 26 November 2007. According to the applicant, the cell measured 1.4 by 1.5 metres (2.1 square metres) and was equipped with two short and narrow benches. The applicant shared it with three other persons. Access to drinking water or a toilet was only possible outside, at the discretion of police officers. The cell was not heated.
In the morning of 26 November 2007 Mr Nikolayev was brought before the Justice of the Peace of the 2nd Circuit of the Kirovskiy District of RostovnaDonu. The applicant was found guilty as charged and sentenced to ten days’ administrative imprisonment. The judge based the decision on three identical reports by officers Mr G., Mr Sh. and Mr N. who had claimed to have heard Mr Nikolayev saying obscenities, and two identical typewritten statements by Mr S. and Mr A. who stated that they had seen two men swearing and ignoring the police rebukes. The judge had heard the officers G., Sh. and N. and also Mr A. who had confirmed their pre-trial testimonies. Mr S. had showed up in court but he had not been allowed to testify because he had had no identity documents on his person.
The applicant appealed. On 30 November 2007 the Kirovskiy District Court rejected the applicant’s appeal in a summary fashion. However, it reduced the term of imprisonment to eight days.
The applicant in the present application is Mr Nagibin. The facts of the case are related to the facts in application no. 37565/08 (see above).
The applicant was apprehended on 24 November 2007 and brought to the Kirovskiy district police station in RostovnaDonu, where he stayed until 26 November 2007.
On 26 November 2007 the applicant was brought to the Justice of the Peace of the Kirovskiy District. The same day the judge adjourned the hearing, and the applicant was released.
When convicting the applicant of an administrative offence and sentencing him to three days’ imprisonment, the judge held that his detention from 5.20 p.m. on 24 November to 10.45 a.m. on 26 November 2007 should be credited to the time to be served (see paragraph 22 above).
On an unspecified date the applicant brought a judicial complaint against the police station. He argued that the following periods should also be included in the period of his detention: from 3.10 p.m. until 5.20 p.m. on 24 November 2007 (the time from his factual arrest until his transfer to the police station was completed) and from 10.45 a.m. until 5.20 p.m. on 26 November 2007 (the time when the applicant was transferred to the judge and waited for the hearing).
On 14 March 2008 the Pervomayskiy District Court of RostovnaDonu rejected the applicant’s complaint. It noted that the CAO distinguished between the transfer (Article 27.2 § 1, “доставление”) which was the act of transfer by convoy of an individual to a police station in order to prepare a report on an administrative offence, and “administrative detention” (Article 27.3 § 1, “административное задержание”) which was a short-time restriction on the liberty of the offender effected for the purpose of a correct and diligent examination of the administrative case. Relying on the testimony by the police officers, the District Court found that the applicant had been subjected to the transfer until 5.20 p.m. on 24 November 2007 and he had been free to move around the police station and had not been held there by force. Likewise, on 26 November 2007 the applicant had not been restricted in his liberty while being on the premises of the Justice of the Peace. He had been able to confer with his lawyer and other individuals.
On 23 April 2008 the Rostov Regional Court upheld the District Court’s judgment, reproducing its text verbatim.
From 24 to 26 November 2007 the applicant in this case (Mr Nagibin) was held in the administrative-detention cell located on the premises of the Kirovskiy district police station in RostovnaDonu (see application no. 57374/08 above). The cell measured 3.5 square metres. The applicant shared it with three to five detainees. It was equipped with one bed, thirty centimetres wide and too short for an adult, and detainees took turns to sleep on the floor. There was no natural light and no possibility for outdoor exercise.
The applicant complained before the domestic courts about the poor conditions of his detention. Following several rounds of examination, on 27 May 2010 the Rostov Regional Court found that the applicant was unlawfully deprived of proper meals and a sleeping place during his detention. The domestic courts established, inter alia, that the applicant was kept in a cell which measured 3.5 square meters with three other persons.
On 8 December 2008 Mr Nagibin and Mr Ye. notified the Rostovna–Donu town administration of their intention to hold a picket on the Russian Constitution Day (12 December). The picket was to take place in front of the building of the Presidential Envoy to the Southern Federal District on Bolshaya Sadovaya Street or across the road on Sovetov Square.
On the same day and on 10 December 2008 the town administration replied that the applicant had to hold the picket in another area, in front of the Sports Palace.
On 30 June 2010 the Supreme Court of Russia, following a request by the Ombudsman, held that the replies of the town administration of 8 and 10 December 2008 were unlawful.
In his observations of 6 November 2011 the applicant withdrew his complaint under Article 11 of the Convention concerning the alleged restriction on the location of the public event.
At 5.20 p.m. on 12 December 2008 the applicant (Mr Nagibin) came to Voroshilovskiy Drive for a solitary demonstration. He carried a sandwich board and distributed leaflets to passers-by.
At approximately 5.40 p.m. two police officers apprehended him. He was taken to the Kirovskiy district police station The applicant was charged with a breach of public order and verbal assaults, an administrative offence under Article 20.1 § 1 of the CAO. The administrative arrest record read that the applicant had been arrested to ensure administrative trial, identify the offender and to draft the administrative offence record. The applicant noted in that record that he had been in a solo demonstration when the police arrested him and contested the lawfulness of this arrest.
On 13 December 2008 the Justice of the Peace of the 6th Court Circuit of the Kirovskiy District found the applicant guilty as charged. On the basis of submissions by several witnesses and two police officers, the judge established in general terms that the applicant had used foul language in a public space. The text of the judgment did not specify which particular words the applicant had pronounced. The judge did not address the applicant’s arguments that he had not used foul language, but rather had been making a solo demonstration when the police officers came and ordered him to stop the unlawful demonstration. The judge sentenced the applicant to three days’ administrative imprisonment, to be calculated from 7.35 p.m. on 12 December 2008. The applicant appealed, arguing that, inter alia, the judge had not taken into account the fact that he had been picketing.
On 12 January 2009 the Pervomayskiy District Court of RostovnaDonu upheld the applicant’s conviction.
On 25 March 2009 the Pervomayskiy District Court rejected the applicant’s claim for inclusion of the time period from 5.48 p.m. to 7.35 p.m. on 12 December 2008 in the period of his detention. It held that it was not reliably shown that the applicant had been detained at 5.48 p.m. On 28 May 2009 the Rostov Regional Court upheld that decision on appeal.
The applicant in the present application is Mr Nagibin. He complained to a court about poor conditions of his detention in the night from 12 to 13 December 2008 on the premises of the Kirovskiy district police station (see application no. 39189/09 above). He argued that he had no sleeping place, that on 13 December 2008 he was transported in an unheated minivan for more than two hours. He also submitted that he had not received any food on that day.
On 25 March 2009 the Pervomayskiy District Court rejected his complaints. It found that the applicant had been provided with a sleeping place on a bench and bed linen. He had been given packed food provisions on 12 and on 13 December 2008. As to the transport conditions, the District Court accepted the police representative’s submission that the car had been “specifically equipped” for transporting people.
On 28 May 2009 the Rostov Regional Court upheld the judgment on appeal.
Appendix