The case originated in an application (no. 50332/12) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Hazni Bayam (“the applicant”), on 30 May 2012.
The applicant was represented by Ms Ç. Altuntaş, a lawyer practising in Mersin. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 5 September 2013 the application was declared partly inadmissible and the complaints concerning the effectiveness of the procedure by which the applicant could challenge the lawfulness of his detention, and the restriction on his access to the investigation file were communicated to the Government.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant, who was born in 1992, was detained at the Gaziantep Prison at the time when the application was lodged.
On 26 December 2011 the Mersin Magistrates’ Court decided to restrict access to the file regarding an ongoing investigation against a terrorist organisation.
On 29 December 2011 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of being a member of a terrorist organisation and making its propaganda.
On the same day the applicant’s police statement was taken at the Anti-Terror Branch of the Mersin Security Directorate, in the presence of his lawyer. He was mainly questioned about several records of telephone conversations as well as allegations about the burning of vehicles and throwing Molotov cocktails. He was questioned at length about the telephone conversations that had been intercepted. The police read out the transcripts of the telephone conversations and asked the applicant to comment on them. He was further asked questions about the incriminating statements of one of his co-accused. The applicant used his right to remain silent.
On 30 December 2011 the Mersin Magistrates’ Court ordered the applicant’s detention on remand.
On 16 March 2012 the applicant’s representative lodged an objection against the decision on the applicant’s detention, and requested his release. She also asked the court to lift the restriction of access to the investigation file. On 19 March 2012 the Mersin Magistrates’ Court dismissed the objection, without holding a hearing. The applicant’s representative filed a further objection against that decision.
On 26 March 2012 the Mersin Assize Court dismissed the objection on the basis of the case file, without holding a hearing.
On 20 April 2012 the Mersin Magistrates’ Court ex officio examined the applicant’s detention on remand on the basis of the case-file and decided to extend it.
On 10 September 2012 the Adana public prosecutor filed a bill of indictment against the applicant, accusing him mainly of being a member of a terrorist organisation, making propaganda in its favour, illegal possession of explosives, causing damage to property and having participated in an illegal armed demonstration.
On 1 October 2012 the Adana Assize Court accepted the indictment. On the same date the restriction on the investigation file was lifted.
According to the latest information in the case file, the proceedings against the applicant are still pending before assize court.
Article 153 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Law no. 5271) reads:
“(1) The defence counsel may examine the full content of the investigation file and may take copies of the documents free of charge.
(2) Upon the request of the public prosecutor, the judge may order a restriction on access to the investigation file, should he considers that the outcome of the ongoing investigation could be jeopardised. This decision can only be taken if....
...
the investigation concerns drug trafficking.
...”