The case originated in an application (no. 200/15) against the Republic of Austria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Austrian national, Mr P.R. (“the applicant”), on 26 December 2014. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by Mr F. Kuch, a lawyer practising in Vienna. The Austrian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr. H. Tichy, Head of the International Law Department at the Austrian Ministry for Europe, Integration and Foreign Affairs.
The applicant complained that the Austrian authorities’ refusal to issue a new diploma certificate (Sponsionsurkunde) after his change of surname had violated his right to private life under Article 8 of the Convention.
On 3 May 2016 notice of the complaint concerning Article 8 of the Convention was given to the Government, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1968 and lives in Vienna.
Upon completing his legal studies at Karl-Franzens-University, Graz the applicant was awarded the academic degree of Magister iuris in a graduation ceremony (Sponsion) in February 1997 and was issued a diploma certificate (Sponsionsurkunde).
In 2010 the applicant lodged a request with the Vienna Municipality (Magistrat der Stadt Wien) to have his name changed from S. to R. In his application, he relied on section 2(1)(10) of the Name Amendment Act of 1988 (Namensänderungsgesetz). That provision provides, as one possible reason for having one’s last name changed, the pre-emption of unacceptable economic and social disadvantages. He maintained in his application that he was being discriminated against due to the “oriental origin” of his name, and provided empirical studies in order to support his claim.
On 12 February 2010 the Vienna Municipality granted the applicant’s request. That decision was based on sections 1, 2 and 7 of the Name Amendment Act; however, the wording of the decision gave no further reasoning.
Subsequently, the applicant lodged a formal request with the University of Graz on 6 May 2010 to be issued a rectified diploma certificate or a notice of award (Verleihungsbescheid) bearing his new surname, in accordance with the Vienna Municipality’s decision of 12 February 2010.
On 19 August 2010 the university’s Director of Studies (Studiendirektor) issued a decision rejecting the applicant’s request. He held that there were no legal grounds for issuing a new document. The applicant had been awarded his academic degree in line with the relevant provisions of the General University Studies Act (Allgemeines Hochschulstudiengesetz), as in force at the time in question. The subsequent change of the applicant’s surname did not have retroactive effect. Ever since the implementation in August 1997 of new provisions of the University Studies Act (Universitäts-Studiengesetz), academic degrees had been awarded in the form of a notice of award. Such a notice of award could not be issued as this would imply a second award of the same academic degree to the applicant.
On 11 November 2011 the Senate of the Karl-Franzens-University of Graz (Senat der Karl-Franzens-Universität) dismissed an appeal lodged by the applicant. It found that the right to hold an academic degree was linked to the person to whom the degree was awarded; a subsequent change of the person’s name did not have an effect on that right. The possible reasons for a change of surname listed in section 2(1)(10) of the Name Amendment Act clearly applied to the applicant’s situation; however, the decision of the Vienna Municipality of 12 February 2010 did not impose a duty on the University of Graz to amend diploma certificates.
The applicant lodged a complaint with the Constitutional Court. He submitted that the refusal to amend the diploma certificate or to issue a notice of award in his new surname violated, inter alia, his rights under Article 8 of the Convention. He had applied for a change of surname relying on section 2(1)(10) of the Name Amendment Act, which prescribes as a reasonable ground for such change the pre-emption of unacceptable economic and social disadvantages. In the past he had been the victim of discrimination because of the “oriental origin” of his surname and he had suffered such disadvantages. Accordingly, he had changed his name in compliance with the law, as in force at the time in question. However, he could not submit a diploma certificate to a potential employer without being forced to reveal his former surname. The need to submit the Vienna Municipality’s decision of 12 February 2010 together with the diploma certificate would require explanations and would eventually lead to social stigmatisation. The university’s refusal to amend the certificate had therefore violated his rights under Article 8 of the Convention.
On 11 June 2012, the Constitutional Court declined to deal with the applicant’s complaint owing to the unlikelihood of it succeeding. It found that there were no sufficient reasons to assume that the provisions under consideration would violate the applicant’s rights, especially given that there were laws in place, such as the Non-Discrimination Act (Gleichbehandlungsgesetz), to pre-empt discriminatory treatment on the part of potential employers.
At the applicant’s request the Constitutional Court remitted the case to the Administrative Court, which dismissed the complaint on 26 June 2014. Examining the provisions in force at the time of the applicant’s graduation, the Administrative Court found that the right to use an academic degree was linked to the person to whom that academic degree had been awarded, regardless of whether that person’s name was subsequently changed. There was no subjective right for a person to have all previously issued documents changed after a change to that person’s name. There was no provision compelling the university authorities to take specific steps in the event of a change in surname after a student had finished his studies, or after that student’s academic degree had been awarded. The Constitutional Court had already stated in its decision of 11 June 2012 that there were no sufficient reasons to assume that the provisions applicable to the case would violate the applicant’s rights under the Convention. Therefore, and on the basis of the applicant’s complaint, as formulated, the Administrative Court likewise did not see any reason to institute proceedings for review of the compliance of the law with the Constitution (Gesetzesprüfungsverfahren) with the Constitutional Court.
The Name Amendment Act of 1988 regulates changes to the forenames and surnames of Austrian nationals. A reasoned request for a change of someone’s name shall be granted if it is not contrary to public interests of fundamental importance or to private interests deserving protection. Section 2 of the Name Amendment Act provides possible reasons for changing a surname. Under paragraph 1 (10) of that provision, one of the recognized reasons for changing one’s surname is if “the applicant credibly claims that a change of surname is necessary in order to avoid unacceptable [economic or social] disadvantages ... and those disadvantages cannot be avoided in other ways”. Under section 2 (1)(11) of the Act, a surname can be changed if the applicant “wishes to have a different name for other reasons”.
A decision granting a change of name is constitutive and has ex nunc effect. It entitles and requires the person who had his or her name changed to use his or her new name.
Section 41 of the Personal Status Act 2013 (Personenstandsgesetz) provides that any change to somebody’s personal status data (Personenstandsdaten) must be entered in the Central Personal Status Register (Zentrales Personenstandsregister). Under section 2(2), a person’s name and his or her academic degree constitute general personal-status data. Under section 53 of the Personal Status Act 2013 the relevant authorities must issue upon request personal-status documents (Personenstandsurkunden) (birth certificates, marriage and registeredpartnership certificates and death certificates) reflecting the current content of the register.
As far as identity documents (namely passport or an identity card) are concerned, the relevant laws provide for the possibility of the issuance of a new document after a change of name. Upon request, such documents can be issued, including the person’s academic degree.
Under sections 34 and 35 of the General Higher Education Studies Act of 1966 (Allgemeines Hochschulstudiengesetz; in force until 31 July 1997) an academic degree was to be awarded in the course of a ceremony (Sponsion). The award of an academic degree had to be certified (beurkundet). The certificate had to contain, inter alia, the surname and forename of the person receiving the degree and his or her date of birth.
On 1 August 1997 the University Studies Act (UniversitätsStudiengesetz) entered into force. Under section 66, which has a similar wording to that of section 87 of the now applicable University Act 2002 (Universitätsgesetz), the academic degree shall be awarded within one month after fulfilment of all requirements through the issuing of a formal written decision (Bescheid).
Under section 116 of the University Act 2002 the unjustified use of an academic degree is an administrative offence punishable with a fine of up to 15,000 euros (EUR).