The case originated in an application (no. 23909/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a German national, Mr Mehmet Desde (“the applicant”), on 20 May 2003.
The applicant was represented by Mr Ç. Bingölbalı, a lawyer practising in . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged that he had been subjected to ill-treatment while in police custody, that the national authorities had failed to conduct an effective investigation into his complaints, and that he had been denied a fair hearing in the criminal proceedings against him. He alleged a violation of Articles 3, 5 § 2, 6 and 13 of the Convention.
On 14 September 2007 the President of the Second Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The German Government, who were invited to indicate whether they wished to exercise their right to intervene in the proceedings (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention), did not express their wish.
The applicant is a German national who was born in 1959 and lives in .
On 9 July 2002 at 2 p.m. the applicant was taken into police custody while travelling in . According to the arrest report, a search warrant had been issued by the Anti-Terrorist Branch of the Izmir Security Headquarters in respect of the car in which the applicant was travelling.
At 3.10 p.m. on the same day, prior to his detention in police custody, the applicant was taken to the . The doctor who examined the applicant noted that there was no sign of violence on the applicant's body. The applicant was then taken to the Izmir Security Headquarters by Anti-Terrorist Branch officers.
The applicant alleges that he was subjected to various forms of illtreatment while in police custody. In particular, he was kept in a cell with strong light and insufficient ventilation. He was deprived of food and sleep. While being questioned he was blindfolded, stripped naked and insulted. He was also threatened with death and beaten. In particular, he received blows to his chest, back and head. The applicant was further forced to kneel down while police officers rubbed an object around his anus.
On 11 July 2002 the applicant was once again examined by a doctor at the , who noted that there was no sign of physical violence on the applicant's person.
On 11 July 2002 an identification parade was organised by the police. Individuals named M.Ö., H.H.T. and E.Y., who were arrested in the course of a police operation, identified the applicant as a senior member of an illegal organisation, Bolşevik Parti-Kuzey Kürdistan/Turkiye (Bolshevik Party-North Kurdistan/Turkey). They stated that the applicant used the code name “Hıdır” and was an active member of the said organisation. It is to be noted that the above-mentioned persons denied these statements before the trial court, alleging that they had been obtained under duress.
In a police report dated 12 July 2002 it was stated that the applicant had refused to answer questions relating to his activities within the aforementioned illegal organisation and that he wished to exercise his right to remain silent. The applicant however alleges that he had given statements under torture.
On 13 July 2002 the applicant was brought to the  for the third time. According to the applicant's submissions, which were not contested by the Government, a doctor examined him and nine other persons (his co-accused) between 10.47 and 11 a.m; thus, ten people were examined in thirteen minutes. The doctor noted in the medical certificate that there was no sign of violence on the applicant.
On the same day, the applicant was questioned by a public prosecutor at the . He claimed that he had not been involved in the activities of the Bolşevik Parti. The applicant was then brought before the Izmir Magistrates' Court, where he contended that he had been subjected to ill-treatment while in police custody. In particular, the police officers had sexually abused him and hit him on the back and chest. The applicant's lawyer requested the court to order that an investigation be initiated into their allegations. The Izmir Magistrates' Court held that it was in the public prosecutor's discretion to order a medical examination of the applicant. The court also remanded the applicant in custody. The applicant was subsequently transferred to Buca Prison.
On 15 July 2002 a psychologist and a social worker interviewed the applicant in Buca Prison. According to their report, dated 24 July 2002, they observed that the applicant was anxious and frightened during the interview and that he was suffering from an emotional disorder.
On 18 July 2002 the applicant's lawyer lodged a complaint with the public prosecutor's office in Buca Prison about the alleged illtreatment the applicant had suffered while in police custody. The lawyer further requested that the applicant have a medical examination in a university hospital. She requested, in particular, that the applicant be examined by an internist, a psychiatrist, a neurologist and a urologist, and that a bone scintigraphy be carried out. In her submission the lawyer maintained that the applicant had not been examined by the prison doctor when he arrived at Buca Prison and that the applicant was experiencing pain in various parts of his body.
On 19 July 2002 the applicant's lawyer lodged an objection with the  to the order for remand in custody, and requested the release of the applicant pending trial. He noted that the applicant had been denied legal assistance during his detention in police custody and that he had been forced to sign some documents under torture while blindfolded. He further complained that he had been denied access to the investigation file and that the applicant's defence rights had been restricted. This objection was dismissed by the  on 24 July 2002 in view of the nature of the alleged crime and the date of the order for remand in custody.
On 22 July 2002 the public prosecutor in Buca Prison requested the prison doctor to conduct a medical examination of the applicant.
On the same day, the prison doctor examined the applicant and noted that there was no sign of violence on the applicant's person. The doctor considered that there was no reason to refer the applicant to the Forensic Medicine Institute for further examination.
On 24 July 2002 the  public prosecutor took statements from the applicant relating to his lawyer's allegations of ill-treatment. The applicant confirmed the allegations of his lawyer and maintained, inter alia, that he had been kept blindfolded, beaten and insulted by police officers for five days in the Anti-Terrorist Branch of the Security Headquarters. He noted that he had not seen the people who ill-treated him but had heard the voice of the Anti-Terrorist Branch director among those who had beaten him.
On an unspecified date the applicant was transferred to Kırıklar Ftype Prison.
On 31 July 2002 the applicant wrote a letter to his lawyer in which he described the conditions in which he was detained and stated that he had been ill-treated while in police custody. In his letter, the applicant contended that he had been informed neither of the reasons for his arrest nor of his rights. Furthermore, his lawyer and his family members had not been notified of his arrest. The applicant alleged that he had been kept in a small cell for four days under strong light and subjected to ill-treatment. The applicant finally maintained that he had begun to suffer from hypertension after his detention in police custody.
On 20 August 2002 the applicant's lawyer made a submission to the  public prosecutor's office. Referring to the applicant's letter of 31 July 2002, the lawyer requested that the officers who had ill-treated the applicant be identified and punished.
On 9 September 2002 one of the public prosecutors in , C.Ç., issued a decision not to prosecute anyone in relation to the applicant's allegations of ill-treatment. The public prosecutor considered that there was insufficient evidence to press charges against police officers, in view of the medical reports dated 9, 11 and 13 July 2002. On the same day, the applicant's lawyer lodged an objection to this decision, which was dismissed by the  on 25 November 2002.
On 16 September 2002 the applicant wrote another letter in which he maintained that he had begun to suffer from hypertension after his detention in police custody. The applicant requested a medical examination in a university hospital.
On 22 October 2002, upon receipt of a letter from the applicant, the German Consul in  sent a letter to the Kırıklar Prison authorities requesting that the applicant be medically examined in a university hospital in relation to his allegations of ill-treatment. The Consul further noted the applicant's allegation of isolation in the F-type prison and requested that he be given the opportunity to be in contact with other detainees.
On 23 October 2002 the governor of Kırıklar Prison sent a letter to the German Consulate in  asserting that the applicant had contact with other detainees three days a week. The prison director further noted that the request for a medical examination should be addressed to the  public prosecutor's office.
On 31 October 2002, at the request of the Consulate General of the Federal Republic of Germany, a second public prosecutor in , N.A., requested the public prosecutor in Kırıklar Prison to take statements from the applicant relating to his allegations of ill-treatment. She further requested the Ege University hospital to conduct a medical examination of the applicant in view of the latter's allegation that he had received blows to his ear from the police officers and that he had lost his hearing.
In a medical report dated 6 November 2002 the 's Nose and Otolaryngology Department stated that the tympanic membranes of the applicant's ears and his hearing were normal and that there were no signs of ill-treatment on the applicant's body.
On 7 November 2002 the public prosecutor in Kırıklar Prison took statements from the applicant. The applicant reiterated the content of his letter of 31 July 2002 in which he had described the conditions of his detention and the details of the alleged ill-treatment.
On the same day, the applicant's lawyer lodged an objection against the  public prosecutor's decision of 9 September 2002, which was dismissed by the  on 25 November 2002.
On 15 November 2002 the second public prosecutor in Izmir, N.A., informed the chief public prosecutor in Izmir that the applicant had been examined by  hospital doctors and that she would wait for the hospital's medical report before concluding the investigation into the applicant's allegations.
On 22 November 2002 the first public prosecutor in , C.Ç., issued a second decision not to prosecute regarding the applicant's allegations of ill-treatment, in view of the content of the medical reports of 9, 11 and 13 July 2002.
On 21 January 2003 the applicant was released pending trial.
On 19 February 2003 the applicant was examined by a panel of medical experts from the  branch of the Turkish Medical Association (İzmir Tabip Odası) who diagnosed the applicant as suffering from major depression and posttraumatic stress syndrome. According to the medical report of 21 July 2003 prepared by the commission, the applicant did not bear any sign of physical violence. The doctors however noted that even if the applicant had been subjected to ill-treatment, with the passage of time it would be impossible to observe any sign of it on his body. The commission further noted that the medical examinations which the applicant had undergone during his detention in police custody and following his release were not capable of establishing whether the applicant had actually been subjected to ill-treatment as alleged. The experts considered that these examinations were not “medically valid”, as they did not comply with the standards established by the Ministry of Health. The commission thus considered that the applicant's complaints were consistent with the alleged ill-treatment, and concluded that he had been subjected to torture during his detention in police custody.
On 3 February 2003 the applicant's doctor in Germany prepared a medical report stating that the applicant had not been suffering from hypertension before he left .
On 11 March 2003 the Ege University Hospital submitted a medical report to the  public prosecutor's office. According to the report, the applicant had been subjected to a medical examination on 5 November 2002. The doctors observed that there was an old lesion measuring 10 cm on the left side of the applicant's abdomen. The applicant alleged that the injury had occurred when he fell from a chair in police custody. The doctors were not however able to determine when and how the injury had occurred. The medical report further stated that the psychiatric examination of the applicant had revealed that he was suffering from severe depression and posttraumatic stress syndrome.
In a letter dated 20 March 2003 public prosecutor N.A. requested an additional report from the Ege University Medicine Faculty's Forensic Medicine Department. She asked whether it would be possible to determine the approximate date on which the injury which had caused the lesion observed on the applicant's abdomen had occurred.
On 7 April 2003 the Ege University Medicine Faculty's Forensic Medicine Department informed the public prosecutor that it was impossible to determine the time when the injury had occurred.
In a letter dated 30 May 2003 the public prosecutor summoned the police officers who had been on duty when the applicant was being questioned in police custody.
On 10 June, 9 July, 5 August and 6 August 2003 the public prosecutor took statements from the police officers M.A., A.E., H.G. and the police superintendent M.Ç. in connection with the applicant's allegations of illtreatment. The police officers denied the allegations and claimed that they had not inflicted any physical or psychological illtreatment on the applicant, as the medical reports showed.
On 19 June 2003 a psychiatric expert delivered a report after meeting the applicant on four occasions, on 27 February, 12 March, 16 May and 18 June 2003. He concluded that the applicant was suffering from chronic post-traumatic disorder and severe depression, which had certainly been caused by the treatment he had suffered during his detention in police custody and his solitary confinement in a cell for four months.
On 6 August 2003 public prosecutor N.A. filed a bill of indictment with the Izmir Assize Court, charging three police officers from the AntiTerrorist Branch of the Izmir Security Headquarters as well as the former director of the Anti-Terrorist Branch with inflicting torture with the aim of obtaining a confession (Article 243 § 1 of the former Criminal Code). She noted that the applicant had been subjected to various forms of ill-treatment in order to extract confessions during his detention in the custody of the anti-terrorist police. In particular, he had been kept blindfolded, deprived of sleep, threatened with death and rape, insulted, hit on the head, back and chest, his testicles had been squeezed and he had been sexually abused. Relying on the medical report dated 21 July 2003, given by the  branch of the Turkish Medical Association, which concluded that the applicant had been subjected to torture during his detention in police custody, the public prosecutor alleged that there was sufficient evidence to indicate that the accused had committed the offence in question.
On 30 September 2003 the applicant asked the  for leave to intervene in the criminal proceedings against the accused police officers.
On 2 October 2003 the  heard oral evidence from the applicant. He gave a detailed description of his questioning and the ill-treatment he had suffered at the hands of the police officers while he was in custody.
On 6 October 2003 the  asked the public prosecutor to provide the court with all the medical evidence concerning the alleged ill-treatment inflicted on the applicant prior to the hearing on 31 October 2003. This request was transmitted to the Turkish Medical Association.
On 10 October 2003, at the request of the , the  heard evidence from M.Ç., who had been serving as deputy to the Provincial Security Director in Aydın. The indictment was read out to him. He claimed that he was innocent of the alleged offence and that he wished to be excused from the hearings taking place in .
On 22 October 2003 the  branch of the Turkish Medical Association provided the  with all the relevant medical reports (such as medical opinions and X-rays).
At the hearing of 31 October 2003 the  granted the applicant leave to intervene in the criminal proceedings against the accused police officers. The court also heard evidence from five police officers who were accused of being involved in the alleged unlawful questioning of the applicant and the ill-treatment inflicted upon him. All the accused denied the allegations and claimed that they were innocent of the alleged offence.
On 16 April 2004 the  requested a detailed report from the Forensic Medical Institute, attached to the Ministry of Justice, with a view to establishing whether the lesions found on the applicant's body had been caused by torture or whether they could have been caused by other means.
In its report dated 16 July 2004 the Forensic Medical Institute, having examined all previous medical reports concerning the applicant, concluded that there was nothing to indicate that the applicant had been subjected to physical trauma. Additionally, subsequent to the examination of the applicant by doctors from the Institution and experts from the Ege University Medical Faculty, no link had been established between the alleged illtreatment and the minor hearing loss. The two medical examinations carried out on 11 March 2003 at the Forensic Department of the Ege University Medical Faculty and on 10 May 2004 at the Forensic Medical Institute had not established the cause of the lesions on the left side of the applicant's abdomen. Finally, in view of the “severe depression” and “post-traumatic stress disorder” diagnosis by the Psychiatry Department of the Ege University Medical Faculty and considering that the 4th Assessment Council [of the Forensic Medical Institute] had requested that the applicant be hospitalised for observation, the Forensic Medicine Institute recommended that an opinion be sought from the aforementioned Council with a view to determining whether the applicant had been subjected to psychological trauma.
At the hearing of 11 October 2004 the  decided that it was no longer necessary to obtain an additional report from the 4th Assessment Council of the Forensic Medical Institute, in view of the parties' submissions that there was already sufficient evidence to elucidate the facts.
On 22 December 2004 the  acquitted the accused police officers, holding that there was no sufficient and convincing evidence indicating beyond reasonable doubt that the police officers had inflicted torture on the applicant. The court noted that the applicant's examination in  had not revealed any sign of physical violence. Furthermore, it was not established that the findings of the doctors from the  concerning the applicant's psychiatric health had occurred as a result of the alleged ill-treatment inflicted upon the applicant during his detention in police custody.
On 17 February 2005 the applicant appealed. He claimed that the medical reports prepared by the Forensic Department of the Ege University Medical Faculty and the Turkish Medical Institute had clearly proved that he had suffered torture at the hands of the police officers. Moreover, the first-instance court had ignored and had not mentioned the findings in the detailed report of the Turkish Medical Institute. The court had attached greater weight to the lack of physical evidence rather than pursuing the indications of psychological effects of torture. He had given a clear description of the police officers and the treatment he had suffered at their hands. Although he had asked for a lawyer when he was questioned while he was in custody, the police officers had refused his request, and had written in the log book that he had not asked for legal assistance. He had not signed the log book but his signature had been forged.
On 11 December 2006 the Court of Cassation upheld the judgment of 22 December 2004. It noted that the assessment of evidence and the judgment given by the first-instance court had complied with the procedure and law.
On 12 July 2002 the anti-terrorist police superintendent drew up a report summarising the investigation into the alleged activities of the applicant and other members of the Bolşevik Parti-Kuzey Kürdistan/Turkiye (Bolshevik Party-North Kurdistan/Turkey). He noted that the aim of the said organisation was to undermine the constitutional order and replace it with a communist regime. As regards the alleged involvement of the applicant in the activities of the organisation, he stated that prior to the arrest of the applicant a search had been carried out in the flat of a certain M.K. and that a number of documents belonging to the applicant had been found. Examination of those documents had revealed that the applicant had been acting as a person in charge of a “party cell” and that he had been involved in high-profile activities for the organisation, such as recruitment of new members and propaganda in the form of publications.
On 6 September 2002, the public prosecutor at the Izmir State Security Court filed a bill of indictment against the applicant, charging him with membership of an illegal organisation, Bolşevik Parti-Kuzey Kürdistan/Türkiye, under Article 168 § 2 of the former Criminal Code. He alleged that the applicant had been acting as a person responsible for the “party cell” in  and that he had also been in charge of communication between the “party cell” and the organisation. He further noted that a number of documents belonging to the applicant had been found during a search of a “cell house”.
In a report dated 24 October 2002 the  summarised the evidence found in the investigation prior to the commencement of the trial (tensip tutanağı). The report contained statements by the applicant that he had not been involved in the organisation known as Bolşevik Parti-Kuzey Kürdistan/Turkiye, that the alleged code name “Hıdır” was in fact a nickname given to him by his family, and that he had been subjected to ill-treatment during his detention in police custody.
On 24 October 2002 the applicant lodged a request with the  for release pending trial. The court dismissed this request in view of the nature of the crime, the state of evidence and the risk of absconding.
On 21 January 2003 the  ordered the applicant's release pending trial but banned him from leaving .
In his written defence submissions dated 24 July 2003 the applicant submitted that he had not been involved in the organisation known as the Bolşevik Parti-Kuzey Kürdistan/Türkiye. He noted that he had denied the allegations since the beginning of the investigation and that the statements he had made during his detention in police custody had been obtained under torture, as proven by the report of the Turkish Medical Association (İzmir Tabip Odası). He further claimed that there was nothing illegal in his belongings found at his friend's flat.
On 24 July 2003 the  convicted the applicant of membership of an unarmed terrorist organisation under Article 7 § 1 of Law no. 3713 (Law on the Prevention of Terrorism). The applicant was sentenced to four years and two months' imprisonment. Relying on evidence given by several witnesses and a significant number of documents, computers and CDs found in a flat belonging to a member of the illegal organisation, the court found it established that the applicant was a founding member and one of the leaders of the said organisation and that, in particular, he had been in charge of propaganda and recruitment of new people to the organisation.
On 25 July 2003 the applicant appealed against the judgment of the first-instance court, alleging, inter alia, that his conviction had been based on statements taken under duress.
On 19 December 2003 the applicant lodged a request with the Chief Public Prosecutor's office at the Court of Cassation for the ban on his leaving the country to be lifted. He noted that he lived and worked in  and that, given the length of the proceedings, he had been severely affected by the impugned measure. On an unspecified date, this request was refused by the .
On 3 March 2004 the applicant submitted his grounds of appeal to the Court of Cassation. He submitted that the  had found it established that he had been one of the founding members of the said organisation although he had been charged with mere membership of that organisation. Furthermore, in its judgment the first-instance court had not offered evidence that he had done anything which could be qualified as a terrorist offence and could lead to the conclusion that the Bolşevik Parti-Kuzey Kürdistan/Türkiye was a terrorist organisation. Moreover, in view of the criminal proceedings brought against the police officers who had inflicted torture on him and his co-accused, the statements given by him and his coaccused whilst in police custody should be removed from the investigation file. Finally, he claimed that there was no evidence capable of proving that he had been a member of an illegal organisation.
On 8 April 2004 the Court of Cassation quashed the judgment of 24 July 2003, holding that the first-instance court should have taken into account the recent amendments made to Law no. 3713 when giving its judgment. It thus upheld the applicant's reasons for appeal.
By Law no. 5190 of 16 June 2004, published in the Official Gazette on 30 June 2004, State Security Courts were abolished. The case against the applicant was transferred to the .
On 16 July 2004 the  dismissed the applicant's request for the lifting of the ban on his leaving the country. It noted that the proceedings were still pending and that the final judgment must be awaited.
In the meantime, the public prosecutor in charge of the investigation submitted his opinion on the merits of the case and requested the acquittal of the applicant and his co-accused on the ground that the organisation which they had founded did not correspond to the definition of a terrorist organisation under Article 7 § 1 of Law no. 3713.
On 12 October 2004 the  convicted the applicant once again under Article 7 § 1 of Law no. 3713. The applicant appealed.
In November 2005 the Chief Public Prosecutor at the Court of Cassation sent the case file back to the first-instance court and requested the latter to reconsider the case in the light of the amendments made to the Code of Criminal Procedure.
On 5 December 2005 the applicant submitted to the  that the criminal proceedings against him had already breached his rights protected by Articles 5 § 3 and 4, 6 § 1 and 13 of the Convention. He thus requested the court to lift the ban on his leaving the country and to expedite the proceedings.
On 16 March 2006 the Izmir Assize Court convicted the applicant and sentenced him to two years and six months' imprisonment under Article 7 § 1 of Law no. 3713. Having considered the structure, methods, purpose and activities of the said organisation, the court concluded that it could be qualified as a terrorist organisation, contrary to the submissions of the accused and the public prosecutor in charge of the investigation. It noted that even though the members of the organisation had not resorted to physical violence, they had used “psychological duress” (manevi cebir), such as issuing threats, in order to achieve their aims. The court considered that the aim of the organisation was to start an uprising with a view to replacing the democratic regime with a totalitarian Marxist and Leninist regime. Having regard to the arrest and seizure report and the report based on the identification parade concerning all the accused, the documentary evidence found in the possession of the applicant and other members of the organisation, as well as the medical reports, the court found it established that the applicant was a founding and active member of the illegal organisation. It also decided that the ban imposed on the applicant's leaving the country should remain in force until the judgment became final. However, the court did not respond to the applicant's request to remove the statements given by him and his coaccused during their detention in police custody from the investigation file.
On 21 March 2006 the applicant appealed against the above judgment, alleging that he had been convicted on the basis of the evidence obtained illegally and that the organisation in question did not correspond to the definition of a terrorist organisation under Articles 1 and 7 of Law no. 3713.
On 5 October 2006 the Chief Public Prosecutor submitted his opinion and asked the Court of Cassation to quash the first-instance court judgment on the grounds that the legal status of the applicant and other accused should be reconsidered in view of the amendments made to Article 7 of Law no. 3713 on 29 June 2006.
On 25 December 2006 the Court of Cassation upheld the judgment of 16 March 2006. It considered that there was no change favourable to the applicant in respect of the elements of the offence defined under Article 7 of Law no. 3713. On the contrary, the sanction to be imposed was heavier than the previous version of the provision. Accordingly, the court disagreed with the Chief Public Prosecutor's opinion. It also dismissed the applicant's objections after having heard the parties' submissions at a hearing, having examined the evidence adduced by the parties and having taken into account the first-instance court's discretion and assessment of the evidence obtained in the course of the investigation.
On 7 February 2007 the applicant's representative lodged an objection to the above decision and requested rectification.
Articles 1 and 7 § 1 of Law no. 3713 provide as follows:
Article 1
“(1) Terrorism is any kind of act committed by one or more persons belonging to an organisation with the aim of changing the characteristics of the Republic as specified in the Constitution, its political, legal, social, secular and economic system, damaging the indivisible unity of the Turkish State and Republic, weakening or destroying or seizing the authority of the State, undermining fundamental rights and freedoms or damaging the internal and external security of the State, public order or general health by means of pressure, force, violence, terror, intimidation, oppression or threat.
(2) An organisation for the purposes of this Act is constituted by two or more persons coming together for a common purpose.
(3) The “organisation” also includes groups, associations, armed associations, gangs or armed gangs as described in the Turkish Criminal Code and provisions of relevant laws.”
Article 7 § 1
“Those who set up a terrorist organisation or manage or become members of such an organisation to commit crime for the purposes stated under Article 1, using force and violence, and by way of exerting pressure, fear, intimidation or threats manage or become members of such an organisation, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Article 314 of the Turkish Criminal Code. Those who organise the activities of the organisation shall also be punished as managers of the organisation.”