The case originated in an application (no. 16328/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Macedonian national, Ms Natka Dimitrieva (“the applicant”), on 13 May 2003.
The Macedonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs R. Lazareska Gerovska.
On 7 May 2007 the Court decided to communicate the complaint concerning the length of the proceedings. Applying Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time.
The applicant was born in 1958 and lives in Štip.
The applicant worked in Stopanska Banka A.D. Skopje (“the Bank”). On 10 March 1997 she was dismissed under, inter alia, section 19-a of the Restructuring Act of some of the banks in the  (“the Restructuring Act”). A redundancy allowance (испратнина) was paid to her.
On 22 April 1997 the applicant challenged her dismissal before the Štip Court of First Instance (“the first-instance court”) alleging non-compliance with the procedural requirements of the Labour Act (“Act”) (Закон за работните односи). She further claimed that section 19-a of the Restructuring Act had been discriminatory and accordingly, unconstitutional.
None of the five hearings listed before the first-instance court was adjourned at the applicant’s request. During the proceedings, the applicant specified her claim on three occasions. On 27 March 1998 the first-instance court dismissed the applicant’s claim, finding that the Restructuring Act, as the lex specialis, had suspended the application of the Labour Act. It further stated that an appeal against that decision could be lodged within eight days of its service on the party concerned.
On 2 June 1998 the applicant appealed (her notice of appeal ran to twenty-five pages). She requested, inter alia, the Court of Appeal to hold a public hearing for the purpose of providing her representative with an opportunity to elucidate the grounds of the appeal.
Following private deliberations held on 17 September 1999, the Štip Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and confirmed the lower court’s decision. It reiterated that the Restructuring Act had indeed been lex specialis and that section 19-a, as applied in her case, had suspended the application of sections 127 and 129 of the Act. It further maintained that the eight-day time-limit for submission of the appeal had been in compliance with the Civil Proceedings Act, valid at that time. The decision was served on the applicant on 12 October 1999.
On 11 November 1999 the first-instance court received a detailed appeal by the applicant on points of law.
On 19 September 2002 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law, endorsing the reasons given by the lower courts. It further held that the Court of Appeal had provided sufficient reasons for dismissing her arguments concerning the time-limit for submission of the appeal. It also dismissed her arguments about the temporal validity of the Restructuring Act. The applicant was served with the decision on 14 November 2002.
On 14 January 2003 the applicant lodged with the  a request for the protection of human rights and freedoms (барање за заштита на слободите и правата на човекот и граѓанинот) (“the constitutional complaint”) alleging discrimination. She claimed that the Restructuring Act had been more restrictive for her, as an employee of the Bank, and that she had been put in a disadvantageous position compared to employees of other employers. Following the ’s request, on 27 January 2003 she clarified her application: she claimed to be a victim of the application of section 19-a of the Restructuring Act which had removed the discharge notice (отказен рок) and the criteria specified in the Act.
On 9 July 2003 the  dismissed the applicant’s constitutional complaint, finding no discrimination: it stated, inter alia, that the Restructuring Act, as the lex specialis, had suspended the application of the Act. It also referred to its earlier decision of 23 October 1996 by which it had confirmed the constitutionality of section 19-a of the Restructuring Act. It further maintained that it did not provide supervisory review (инстанционен надзор) of the relevant decisions. On 23 July 2003 the decision was published in the Official Gazette.
Article 32 § 5 of the Constitution provides that the rights of employees and their positions are regulated by statute and collective agreements.
Section 3 of the Restructuring Act provided that it concerned the Bank.
Section 19-a of the Restructuring Act provided that sections 127 § 1 and 129 of the Labour Act would not apply to the Bank’s employees dismissed as redundant.
Section 127 § 1 required employers to give one month’s discharge notice to individual employees when dismissed as redundant.
Section 129 provided, inter alia, that the number and posts of employees to be made redundant would be determined on the basis of the criteria established by the collective agreements.
The applicant submitted several decisions of the Supreme Court concerning same legal issues:
(a) Supreme Court decision of 1 April 1999 (Рев.бр.531/98)
(b) Supreme Court decision of 5 July 2001 (Рев.бр.67/99)
(c) Supreme Court decision of 6 September 2001 (Рев.бр.366/01)
In the above cases the Supreme Court dismissed appeals on points of law lodged by the Bank’s employees against courts’ decisions confirming their dismissal. The Supreme Court reiterated that the Restructuring Act, as the lex specialis, had a specific aim and that, in relation to the Bank’s employees, it had suspended some of the procedural requirements provided in the Act.
On 23 October 1996 the  decided not to launch proceedings for constitutional review (не поведува постапка за оценување на уставноста) of section 19-a of the Restructuring Act. It held that that provision had been based on Article 32 § 5 of the Constitution and that it had been adopted in a specific context concerning the Bank’s restructuring. It concluded that the specific terms and criteria for dismissal of the Bank’s employees as redundant could not be regarded as discriminatory compared to employees of other employers.
Section 340 § 1 of the Civil Proceedings Act provided that there would be a substantial infringement of the civil procedure if the court had not applied or had wrongly applied a statutory provision, a circumstance which influenced or might have influenced the adoption of a lawful and just decision.
Section 348 provided that as a rule the second-instance court decided without a public hearing. A public hearing would be held if the decision-making panel of the second-instance court considered it necessary to rehear evidence which had already been taken in order to establish the facts correctly.
Section 408 provided, inter alia, that the court should take into consideration the necessity of urgent settlement of employment disputes.
Section 410 provided for an eight-day time-limit for lodging an appeal in employment disputes.