The case originated in six applications against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) on the various dates listed in the Appendix by nine nationals of Somalia whose details are listed in the Appendix.
The first applicant was represented by Ms N. Gurkovska, a lawyer practising in Kyiv, and Ms J. Gordon of the European Human Rights Advocacy Centre in London. At the time the applications were lodged, that applicant was also represented by Ms H. Bocheva, at the time a lawyer practising in Kyiv. The other applicants were represented by Ms Gurkovska. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
The applicants complained that their deprivation of liberty under domestic court’s detention orders had been contrary to Article 5 § 1 (f) of the Convention since there had been no realistic possibility of their being expelled to Somalia and the proceedings for their expulsion had not been conducted with the requisite diligence.
The second to sixth applicants also complained that their arrest by the police and detention prior to the issuance of the above-mentioned court orders had had no basis in domestic law.
The first and sixth to ninth applicants further complained that the proceedings concerning their appeals against the above-mentioned detention orders had not met the requirement of “speediness” of Article 5 § 4 of the Convention.
On 20 September 2016 the Government were given notice of the above complaints and the remainder of the applications was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants left Somalia and on various dates entered Ukraine from Russia in an irregular manner without any documents certifying their identity or authorising their entry or stay. They stayed in Vinnytsya where they were subsequently arrested by police as undocumented migrants.
The first and sixth to ninth applicants (hereinafter “the December Group”) were arrested on 23 December 2011, the first applicant at an unspecified hour and the sixth to ninth applicants at 5 a.m. The second to fifth applicants (hereinafter “the January Group”) were arrested on 30 January 2012 at 6 a.m. The applicants alleged that, following their arrest, and before being brought to court (see paragraph 8 below) they were detained in police stations.
On the same day (23 December 2011 and 30 January 2012 respectively) the police and migration authorities asked the Vinnytsya Circuit Administrative Court (hereinafter “the Circuit Court”) to place the applicants in a “centre for temporary accommodation of foreigners and stateless persons who are present in Ukraine illegally” (hereinafter “the centre” or “the temporary accommodation centre” – see paragraphs 44 to 53 below for the legislation governing the functioning of such centres) for the period of time necessary for arranging their expulsion.
The Circuit Court held hearings in each of the applicants’ cases on the same days. According to the applicants, the hearings were held late in the evening. At the close of the hearings the court allowed the applications. It found it established that the applicants had entered Ukraine illegally from Russia having intentionally destroyed their identity documents before crossing the border. In view of the need to arrange the applicants’ expulsion, the court issued orders authorising their arrest (затримання) and placement in a temporary accommodation centre for up to twelve months.
As legal grounds for the decisions, the court cited in respect of the December Group, section 32 of the Aliens Act 1994 and, in respect of the January Group, section 30(1), (3) and (4) of the Aliens Act 2011 (which came into force on 25 December 2011, see paragraphs 34, 36 and 40 below respectively). In respect of the January Group the court also referred to sections 14(2) of the Aliens Act 2011, which permitted arrest of aliens who had crossed the border outside of authorised ports of entry (see paragraph 38 below).
After the hearings, administrative-arrest reports were drawn up in respect of all applicants, in the period of time from 8.30 p.m. to 11.55 p.m., indicating as grounds for arrest enforcement of the Circuit Court’s orders.
The December Group applicants were transferred to the Zhuravychi temporary accommodation centre in Volyn Region and the January Group applicants to Rozsudiv temporary accommodation centre in Chernigiv Region.
On 28 December 2011 the applicants’ lawyer Ms Gurkovska appealed on behalf of the December Group applicants and on 6 February 2012 on behalf of the January Group applicants. She argued, in particular, that there had been no grounds for arresting them or ordering their detention since they could not be expelled to Somalia owing to risks they faced there.
In her appeals on behalf of the December Group the lawyer also argued that, since there had been no decisions ordering the applicants’ expulsion, they could not be detained because, according to her interpretation of domestic law (section 32 of the 1994 Aliens Act, see paragraph 36 below) detention could only be ordered once an expulsion decision had been taken and no such decision had been taken against them.
On 3 January 2012 the lawyer supplemented her appeals on behalf of the December Group applicants, using some of the same arguments.
On 10 January and 17 February 2012 respectively the Vinnytsya Administrative Court of Appeal held hearings on the December and January Group applicants’ appeals.
In the course of the hearing concerning the January Group applicants, their representative argued that their detention was unlawful because, under section 30 (paragraph 4) of the 2011 Aliens Act (see paragraph 40 below), detention could only be ordered once an expulsion decision have been taken and no such decision had been taken against them.
At the close of the hearings the Court of Appeal upheld the detention orders concerning the December and January Group applicants. It held, in particular, that their detention had been lawful and based on the Aliens Acts 1994 and 2011.
The lawyer lodged appeals on points of law on behalf of the December and January Group applicants with the Higher Administrative Court relying on essentially the same arguments as those raised before the Court of Appeal, in particular those set out in paragraphs 13 and 16 above. The appeals were lodged on the following dates: on behalf of the first applicant on 30 January 2012, the sixth and seventh applicants on 6 February and the eighth and ninth applicants on 2 February 2012. The appeals on behalf of the January Group applicants were lodged on unspecified dates between 2 February and 13 March 2012.
The Higher Administrative Court rejected the December Group applicants’ appeals on the dates set out in the Appendix. It held that there had been no illegality in the lower courts’ decisions.
According to the most recently available information, as of 30 November 2015, the second applicant’s appeal on points of law was still pending. As for the other January Group applicants, on 14 May 2014 the Higher Administrative Court rejected the third to fifth applicants’ appeals on points of law, holding that the lower courts’ decisions were not unlawful.
On 13 January and on 8 February 2012 the police wrote to the Embassy of Somalia in Moscow to have passports or temporary travel documents issued to the December Group and January Group applicants respectively.
On 24 February 2012 the first applicant applied for asylum. His application was refused on 10 August 2012. On 5 November 2012 and 1 February 2013 the Vinnytsya Circuit Administrative Court and the Lviv Administrative Court of Appeal respectively upheld that decision.
On 17 February 2012 the eighth applicant applied for asylum. Her application was refused on 10 August 2012. On 5 November 2012 the Volyn Circuit Administrative Court quashed that decision and directed the migration authorities to re-examine the applicant’s application. On 14 February 2013 and 27 March 2014 this decision was upheld by the Lviv Administrative Court of Appeal and the Higher Administrative Court respectively.
The sixth, seventh and ninth applicants were granted subsidiaryprotection status in Ukraine on 10 August, 5 November and 22 May 2012 respectively.
The applicants were released or escaped from the temporary accommodation centres on the dates set out in the Appendix.
With respect to the second applicant an expulsion decision was taken on 25 April 2013, that is to say after he had left the temporary accommodation centre. There is no indication that an expulsion decision was ever taken in respect of any other applicant at any point.
Under Article 261 of the Code, when an arrest is effected under the provisions of the Code, an arrest report must be drawn up. It must state the name of the official drawing up the report, the identity of the arrested person, time of arrest and reasons for arrest. The report must be signed by the arresting official and the arrestee.
Under Article 263, a person who has violated border regulations may be arrested for up to three hours so that an official report may be prepared charging him or her with the violation. If it is necessary to establish the identity of the person concerned and verify the circumstances of the offence, he or she may be detained for up to three days. Written notice must be given to a prosecutor within twenty-four hours of the arrest.
Article 204-1 makes illegal border-crossing punishable by a fine or by short-term detention of up to fifteen days.
The Code of Administrative Justice was enacted in 2005 and was entirely revised by Law no. 2147-VIII of 3 October 2017, with effect from 15 December 2017. In the following paragraphs the provisions of the 2005 and 2017 versions are referred to as “the 2005 Code” and “the 2017 Code” respectively.
Article 183 § 1 of the 2005 Code provided:
“Appeals by foreign nationals or stateless persons (‘aliens’) against expulsion decisions and claims by [police, border guards and security service] asking for such expulsion and for arrest in connection with such expulsion [позовні заяви ... про примусове видворення іноземців та осіб без громадянства і затримання їх у зв’язку з таким видворенням] shall be lodged with the circuit administrative court ...”
In §§ 5 and 6 of the same Article it was provided that appeals against circuit courts’ decisions in such proceedings could be lodged within five days and had to be examined by the appellate courts within five days of the appeal being lodged. Article 183 § 8 provided that a further appeal on points of law (appeal in cassation) could be lodged with the Higher Administrative Court.
Article 195 § 1 of the 2005 Code provided that the appellate court had to review the case within the limits of points raised in the appeal but the appellate court could go beyond those points where, in the course of appeal proceedings, it has been established that the first-instance court committed an error of law which led to an erroneous decision on the substance. As far as proceedings for review on points of law before the Higher Administrative Court were concerned, Article 220 § 2 of the Code likewise provided that that court had to review the cases within the limits of the points of law raised in an appeal but could go beyond those points if it identified breaches of substantive or procedural law not raised by the appellant.
Article 289 of the 2017 Code established an amended procedure for examination of cases concerning detention of aliens. It provides that initially detention of aliens with a view to their expulsion is to be ordered for six months, with possible subsequent extensions in the event of difficulties in organising expulsion, for six months at a time and for a total of eighteen months.
The applicants of the December Group were placed in temporary accommodation centres under the Aliens Act 1994, which had been in effect prior to 25 December 2011. The applicants of the January Group were placed there under the Aliens Act 2011, which had replaced the 1994 Act with effect from 25 December 2011.
Section 28(1) of the 1994 Act authorised the arrest of foreign nationals and Stateless persons (hereinafter also called “aliens”) who had crossed Ukraine’s border outside an authorised port of entry.
At the relevant time (from 5 May to 24 December 2011) section 32 of the 1994 Act, as amended by law of 5 April 2011, provided:
“Aliens arrested for being illegally present in Ukraine (contrary to a ban on entry, in the absence of legal grounds of presence provided by domestic law or international treaties ..., including the use of forged, damaged or not matching visa, permit or passport) or those admitted into Ukraine under readmission treaties... shall, pursuant to an order of an administrative court, be placed in centres for temporary accommodation... for the period necessary for the preparation of their expulsion from Ukraine, not to exceed twelve months.”
Prior to 5 May 2011 the maximum period of detention in the circumstances described in the preceding paragraph had been six months.
Section 14(2) of the 2011 Act provides that:
“2. Aliens who have crossed Ukraine’s border illegally outside of an authorised port of entry shall be arrested [затримуються] and, provided they have not committed a criminal offence, shall be returned, pursuant to the procedure established by law, to the country where they were previously present [повертаються до країни попереднього перебування у встановленому порядку].”
Section 26 lays down the procedure for the compulsory return (примусове повернення) of aliens to their country of origin or a third country. In particular, the State Security Service, border guards or immigration authorities can order the return of an alien whose actions have violated the regulations concerning the legal status of aliens. The decision must include reasons and indicate the period of time during which the alien must leave Ukraine (not exceeding thirty days).
At the relevant time section 30 read, in so far as relevant, as follows:
Section 30. Compulsory expulsion [примусове видворення] of aliens
“1. [Migration authorities, border guards and the Security Service] may, solely on the basis of a decision of an administrative court, expel from Ukraine an alien who has failed to comply with a return decision or if there are grounds to believe that the alien would not comply ...
Appeals can be lodged against the court’s decision on forcible expulsion of aliens, pursuant to the procedure provided by law.
[Migration authorities or border guards] on the basis of the respective decision shall place [на підставі відповідного рішення розміщує] the aliens referred to in paragraph 1 of this section in temporary accommodation centres for aliens...
Aliens shall remain [перебувають] in temporary accommodation centres for the period necessary for enforcement of the judicial decision on forcible expulsion but not more than twelve months.
...
This section shall not apply to refugees and persons that are granted subsidiary protection.”
On 19 May 2016 paragraph 4 of section 30 of the Act was amended by Law no. 1379-VIII. It now reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“4. Aliens who have no legal grounds for being present in Ukraine, who are duly arrested and are subject to expulsion, including those admitted into Ukraine under readmission treaties, shall be placed in centres for temporary accommodation ... for the period necessary for their identification and the preparation of their expulsion from Ukraine or readmission, for up to eighteen months ...”
Section 14 of the Act provides that individuals granted subsidiaryprotection status enjoy the same rights as citizens of Ukraine, unless otherwise provided by law, and are considered to be legally resident in Ukraine on an indefinite basis. Section 15 provides that they are entitled to freely travel, reside and work in Ukraine, and to exercise a number of other rights.
Section 17 of the Act provided that asylum-seekers could appeal against decisions rejecting asylum claims to the courts.
Regulations governing the centres were enacted by the resolution of the Cabinet of Ministers of 17 July 2003 no. 1110 and were in force at the relevant time. Section 16 of the regulations provided that premises of the centres had to be surrounded by a solid fence with a checkpoint at the entry (територія пункту перебування огороджується парканом суцільного заповнення з контрольно-пропускним пунктом).
At the time the centres were under the authority of the Ministry of the Interior, which, by its order of 16 October 2007 no. 390, enacted regulations governing them.
Sections 3(1)(13)-(17) required that arrestees (затримані) to be placed at the centres be searched at intake.
Section 3(3)(2) provided that aliens placed in the centre could circulate freely within the limits of the centre designated by its management and, with the management’s written permission, leave the centre and freely move within the relevant territorial entity where the centre was located.
Section 3(3)(3) provided that centre residents had to be placed in multiple occupancy dormitories. However, individuals prone to violence, who posed danger to the staff, themselves or others, or who were a flight risk, had to be placed in separate single or double rooms (одно- або двомісних локалізованих кімнатах) for fifteen days or, if the individual continued to present those risks, up to thirty days (section 3(3)(4)). Individuals kept in such rooms had to be allowed at least two hours’ daily exercise outside in special courtyards under supervision of a guard (sections 3(3)(14)-(16)).
Section 4 regulated the functions and organisation of the centres’ guards. It stated, in particular, that the function of the guards was to prevent the residents from leaving without authorisation. It provided that guarding duties were to be carried out by police officers who were to be unarmed but carrying self-defence equipment (section 4(1)(8)).
Section 4(1)(10) prohibited the use of weapons to apprehend an alien who had “escaped” (учинено втечу) from a centre, save in the circumstances defined in the Police Act (to arrest a person who had committed a serious offence, to protect the life and health of the officer or others, in case of armed resistance, and so forth).
Section 5(9) provided that food was normally to be served in the canteen at times set in the centre’s schedule, in the presence of guards.
Section 6 regulated procedures for the residents’ “release” (звільнення) from the centres.
Section 7(3)(1) provided that the centre’s director could impose the following sanctions on the residents for failure to observe the centre’s rules: (i) warning and (ii) reprimand.
Section 7(7)(1) required the centre’s management to put in place a time schedule for the centre, including the mealtimes, sleep period, visiting times, and so forth.
The Agreement was ratified by Ukraine on 23 September 2008 and was in force at the material time. Article 4 of the Agreement required the requested State to readmit thirdcountry nationals if they illegally entered the territory of the requesting State directly from the territory of the requested State.
European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (hereinafter “the CPT”) in the report on its 2009 visit to Ukraine (CPT/Inf (2011) 29, Section: 11/53), published on 23 November 2011, examined conditions in the temporary accommodation centres:
“B. Foreign nationals detained under aliens legislation / Preliminary remarks
 47. It should be recalled that the State Border Service operates two types of facilities for the detention of foreign nationals: Specially equipped premises (SP), intended for stays of up to 3 days, and Temporary detention facilities (PTT), intended for stays of up to 10 days.
 Further, the Ministry of Internal Affairs runs Temporary accommodation centres (PTPs) designed for the detention of foreign nationals [for longer periods]. Two new PTPs entered into service in Rozsudiv (Chernigiv region) in July 2008 and in Zhuravichi (Volyn’ region) in September 2008...
...
Conditions of detention / a. Internal Affairs Temporary accommodation centre (PTP) in Rozsudiv
With an official capacity of 235 places, at the time of the visit, Rozsudiv PTP was holding 92 foreign nationals, including five women and three children aged from 3 to 20 months. Detained foreign nationals were being held in five separate sections, one of which was accommodating the women and children.
The delegation was impressed by the material conditions offered to detained foreign nationals. The bedrooms, which were designed to hold from three to eight persons and measured from 16 to 34 m², were well lit and ventilated, adequately equipped (with beds, table, chairs and wardrobes) and clean ...”
Ukraine as a Country of Asylum publication, 2013
“Legislation
According to Ukrainian law, a person who is in the country without a legal basis for stay is guilty of an administrative violation [Code of Administrative Offences, Art. 203]. Similarly, an individual who crosses or attempts to cross a state border irregularly is guilty of an administrative violation [Code of Administrative Offences, Art. 204(1).]... Persons who have committed administrative violations relating to the legality of their stay or illegal crossing of the state border are subject to forcible return or forcible expulsion from Ukraine if they cannot prove they have a legal basis for stay in Ukraine [Law On the legal status of foreigners and stateless persons, Art. 26(1) [on forcible return] and Art. 30 [on forcible expulsion]. The difference between forcible return and forcible expulsion is as follows: The decision on forcible return is made by an administrative body (SMS, SBGS, Security Service) and the individual is given up to 30 days to leave the country by his/her own means. The decision on forcible expulsion is taken by an administrative court, and the individual is detained pending his/her expulsion.]. Pending their forcible expulsion, they can be detained for up to twelve months in a Migrant Custody Centre (MCC) [In many English-language publications, these facilities are referred to as Migrant Accommodation Centres”(MACs), but this euphemistic translation gives the mistaken impression that these are open facilities that provide shelter. In fact, they are closed administrative detention facilities].
...
Conditions of Detention
There are currently two MCCs in Ukraine—located in remote rural areas of the Volyn and Chernihiv regions; they have a combined capacity of 373 persons. Through early 2013, the conditions at the MCCs were monitored regularly through an observatory mechanism organized by the International Organization for Migration with participation of civil society and on occasion foreign embassies. This mechanism led to various improvements, such as in the quantity and quality of food provided in the MCCs. While different gaps continue to be noted in the context of monitoring visits—such as limitations on showering and use of telephones—the authorities have shown some readiness to address these gaps. This is a welcome improvement from 2007 when the Committee Against Torture noted “with concern the poor and overcrowded conditions of detention for asylum-seekers.”