The case originated in an application (no. 59304/00) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Ramūnas Jankauskas (“the applicant”), on 22 June 1999.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by
The applicant complained, in particular, under Article 8 of the Convention about the opening up and reading by the administration of the Šiauliai remand prison of his correspondence.
The application was allocated to the Third Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1. Mr P. Kūris, the judge elected in respect of , withdrew from sitting in the case (Rule 28). The Government accordingly appointed Mr J. Hedigan to sit as the judge elected in respect of  (Article 27 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 29 § 1).
By a decision of 16 December 2003, the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
On 1 November 2004 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). This case was assigned to the newly composed Third Section (Rule 52 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1972. He lives in Šiauliai.
The applicant, a former police investigator, was suspected of abuse of office and bribery. His detention on remand was ordered by the Šiauliai City District Court on 12 March 1999 on the fear of his absconding and influencing witnesses. His remand in custody was thereafter prolonged.
On 3 October 2000 the Šiauliai  convicted the applicant of abuse of office and bribery, sentencing him to eight years’ imprisonment. On 29 June 2001 the Court of Appeal upheld the lower judgment. On 18 December 2001 the Supreme Court rejected the applicant’s cassation appeal in the case. The sentence was subsequently reduced in view of an amnesty law. The applicant was released from prison after having completed the sentence on 18 August 2003.
According to the applicant, all his letters to and from the State authorities, non-governmental organisations as well private
Article 22 of the Constitution guarantees the right to respect for one’s private life, family life and correspondence.
According to Article 15 of the Detention on Remand Act 1996 and Rule 72 of the Remand Prisons Internal Rules 1996, which were applicable at the material time, remanded persons’ letters could be subject to censorship.
Rule 75 of the Remand Prisons Internal Rules provides that the remand centre administration cannot open letters of detainees addressed to the European Court of Human Rights if those letters were given to the administration to be sent in a closed envelope.
 Rule 83 provides that the remand prison administration shall familiarise the detainee with a reply to his correspondence within three days following receipt of the letter addressed to the detainee. Therefore, all letters received by the detainees are not given to them and are kept in their files by the remand centre administration.