The case originated in two applications (nos. 2312/08 and 34179/08) against Bosnia and Herzegovina lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Iraqi citizen, Mr Abduladhim Maktouf, and a citizen of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr Goran Damjanović, (“the applicants”), on 17 December 2007 and 20 June 2008 respectively.
The applicants’ complaints related to criminal proceedings in which the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina (“the State Court”) had convicted and sentenced them under provisions of the 2003 Criminal Code of Bosnia and Herzegovina for war crimes against civilians committed during the 1992-95 war. They complained that the failure of the State Court to apply the 1976 Criminal Code of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (“the former SFRY”), which had been applicable at the time of the commission of the war crimes, had amounted to a violation of the rule of non-retroactivity of punishments, set forth in Article 7 of the Convention. They further relied on Article 14 taken in conjunction with Article 7 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 12. Mr Maktouf also relied on Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
The applications were allocated to the Fourth Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). On 31 August 2010 the President of that Section decided to give notice of the applications to the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina (“the Government”). It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the applications at the same time (Article 29 § 1). On 10 July 2012 a Chamber of the Fourth Section, composed of the following judges: Lech Garlicki, David Thór Björgvinsson, Päivi Hirvelä, George Nicolaou, Zdravka Kalaydjieva, Nebojša Vučinić and Ljiljana Mijović, and also of Lawrence Early, Section Registrar, relinquished jurisdiction in favour of the Grand Chamber, none of the parties having objected to relinquishment (Article 30 of the Convention and Rule 72).
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined according to the provisions of Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24. Faris Vehabović, the judge elected in respect of Bosnia and Herzegovina, was unable to sit in the case (Rule 28). The Government accordingly appointed Angelika Nußberger, the judge elected in respect of Germany, to sit in his place (Article 26 § 4 of the Convention and Rule 29 § 1).
The Grand Chamber decided to join the applications (Rule 42 § 1).
The parties filed written observations on the admissibility and merits. In addition, third-party comments were received from the Office of the High Representative, which had been given leave to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 §§ 3 and 4).
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 12 December 2012 (Rule 54 § 3). There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Ms Ibrahimović and Mr Lejlić.
Following its declaration of independence from the former SFRY in March 1992, a brutal war broke out in Bosnia and Herzegovina. More than 100,000 people were killed and more than 2,000,000 others were displaced as a result of “ethnic cleansing” or generalised violence. Numerous crimes were committed during the war, including those committed by the present applicants. The following local forces were the main parties to the conflict: the ARBH (mostly made up of Bosniacs and loyal to the central authorities in Sarajevo), the HVO (mostly made up of Croats) and the VRS (mostly made up of Serbs). The conflict ended in December 1995 when the General Framework Agreement for Peace (“the Dayton Agreement”) entered into force. In accordance with that Agreement, Bosnia and Herzegovina consists of two Entities: the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republika Srpska.
In response to atrocities then taking place in the territory of the former SFRY, the UN Security Council established the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (“the ICTY”) as an interim institution. In 2002, in order to ensure that its mission was concluded successfully, in a timely way and in coordination with domestic legal systems in the former Yugoslavia, the ICTY began devising a completion strategy. That strategy was endorsed by the UN Security Council and the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina (they enacted the necessary statutory amendments and concluded agreements with the High Representative – an international administrator appointed under the Dayton Agreement). A vital component of the strategy was the setting up of war crimes chambers within the State Court consisting of international and national judges (see paragraphs 34-36 below).
Mr Maktouf was born in 1959 and lives in Malaysia.
On 19 October 1993 he deliberately assisted a third party to abduct two civilians in order to exchange them for members of the ARBH forces who had been captured by the HVO forces. The civilians were freed several days later.
On 11 June 2004 the applicant was arrested.
On 1 July 2005 a Trial Chamber of the State Court found him guilty of aiding and abetting the taking of hostages as a war crime and sentenced him to five years’ imprisonment under Article 173 § 1 in conjunction with Article 31 of the 2003 Criminal Code.
On 24 November 2005 an Appeals Chamber of that court quashed the judgment of 1 July 2005 and scheduled a fresh hearing. On 4 April 2006 the Appeals Chamber, composed of two international judges (Judge Pietro Spera and Judge Finn Lynghjem) and one national judge (Judge Hilmo Vučinić), convicted the applicant of the same offence and imposed the same sentence under the 2003 Criminal Code. As regards the sentence, it held as follows (the translation has been provided by the State Court):
“Considering the degree of criminal responsibility of the accused and consequences of the criminal offence, as well as the fact that the accused was an accessory to the commission of the criminal offence, and considering the mitigating circumstances in favour of the accused, the Chamber applied the provisions on reduction of punishment and reduced the sentence to the maximum extent possible, applying the provision of Article 50 § 1 (a) of the [2003 Criminal Code], sentencing him to imprisonment for a term of five years, being of the opinion that the pronounced sentence can fully achieve the purpose of punishment and that the pronounced sentence will influence the accused not to commit other criminal offences in future.”
Following the applicant’s constitutional appeal, on 30 March 2007 the Constitutional Court examined the case under Articles 5, 6, 7 and 14 of the Convention and found no violation of the Convention. The decision was served on the applicant on 23 June 2007. The majority decision reads, in the relevant part, as follows:
“42.  The Constitutional Court points out that section 65 of the [State Court Act 2000], the initial text of which was imposed in a Decision taken by the High Representative and subsequently endorsed by the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina, provides that during the transitional period, which may not exceed five years, the Panels of Section I for War Crimes and Section II for Organised Crime, Economic Crime and Corruption are to be composed of national and international judges. The Criminal and Appellate Divisions may be composed of several international judges. The international judges may not be citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina or any other neighboring state. International judges are to act as panel judges in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code of Bosnia and Herzegovina and in accordance with the provisions of the Law on the Protection of Witnesses and Vulnerable Witnesses of Bosnia and Herzegovina and may not be criminally prosecuted, arrested or detained, nor are they liable in civil proceedings for an opinion expressed or decision made in the scope of their official duties.
The High Representative ‘... in the exercise of the powers vested in the High Representative by Article V of Annex 10 (Agreement on Civilian Implementation of the Peace Settlement) to the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, ... under which the High Representative shall facilitate, as the High Representative deems necessary, the resolution of any difficulties arising in connection with civilian implementation..., noting that the communiqué of the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council issued at Sarajevo on 26 September 2003 stated that the Board took note of the UN Security Council Resolution 1503, which, inter alia, called on the International Community to support the work of the High Representative in setting up the war crimes chamber..., noting the Joint Recommendation for the Appointment of International Judges signed by the Registrar of the Registry ... and President of the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council of Bosnia and Herzegovina...,, [and] bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the [State Court Act 2000],’ on 24 February and 28 April 2005, took Decisions on the Appointment of International Judges Finn Lynghjem and Pietro Spera to Section I for War Crimes of the Criminal and Appellate Divisions of the [State Court].
Under the aforementioned Decisions on Appointment, international judges are to serve for a term of two years and are eligible for reappointment as prescribed by law. International judges may not discharge duties which are incompatible with their judicial service. All other requirements concerning the judicial duty referred to in the [State Court Act 2000] apply to these appointments to the greatest extent possible. The international Registrar of the Registry shall inform the High Representative of any event which may prevent the judge from discharging his/her duties. During the mandate, the judge is to comply with all standards relating to professional conduct as prescribed by the [State Court]. The appointed international judge is to discharge his/her duties in accordance with the laws of Bosnia and Herzegovina and take decisions on the basis of his/her knowledge [and] skills and in a conscientious, responsible and impartial manner, strengthening the rule of law and protecting individual human rights and freedoms as guaranteed by the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the European Convention.
...
The competences of the Divisions of the [State Court] to which international judges are appointed include, beyond any doubt, certain matters derived from international law. The acknowledgment of the supranational nature of international criminal law, established through the case-law of the Nuremberg and Tokyo Military Tribunals, the Tribunal in The Hague and the Tribunal for Rwanda, also includes international criminal tribunals. This certainly includes the situation in which a certain number of international judges are appointed to national courts. The High Representative appointed international judges to the [State Court] in accordance with the powers vested in him according to the UN Security Council’s resolutions, adopted in accordance with Chapter VII of the UN Charter and the Recommendation of the Registry pursuant to the Agreement of 1 December 2004, which was also signed by the President of the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council; it is particularly important that the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council, an independent body competent to appoint national judges, was involved in the procedure preceding the appointment.
The Constitutional Court holds that the international judges who were members of the Panel which rendered the contested verdict were appointed in a manner and in accordance with a procedure which complied with the standards concerning a fair trial provided for in Article 6 of the European Convention. In addition, the [State Court Act 2000], the Agreement of 1 December 2004 and the decisions on [their] appointment created the prerequisites and mechanisms which secure the independence of [the] judges from interference or influence by the executive authority or international authorities. Judges appointed in this manner are obliged to respect and apply all the rules which generally apply in national criminal proceedings and which comply with international standards. Their term of office is defined and their activities are monitored during this period. The reasoning behind their appointment was the need to establish and strengthen national courts in the transitional period and to support the efforts of these courts in establishing responsibility for serious violations of human rights and ethnically motivated crimes. It is therefore aimed at securing the independence and impartiality of the judiciary and administering justice. Even the fact that the manner of appointment was changed by the subsequent Agreement of 26 September 2006, so that the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council of Bosnia and Herzegovina has become responsible for the appointment of international judges, does not in itself automatically imply that their original appointments, in the manner provided for at the time of the contested verdicts, were contrary to the principles of independence of the court in terms of Article 6 § 1 of the European Convention. The Constitutional Court holds that the appellant failed to submit convincing arguments and evidence in support of the allegations relating to a lack of independence on the part of the international judges. As to the appellant’s allegations concerning the lack of independence of the national judge, on the ground that he is a person with ‘insufficient experience’, the Constitutional Court finds that these allegations are prima facie ill-founded and do not require any extensive examination. Taking all of the above into account, the Constitutional Court concludes that the appellant’s allegations concerning the lack of independence and related violation of the standards relating to the right to a fair trial under Article II(3)(e) of the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Article 6 of the European Convention are unfounded.
...
One of the appellant’s key arguments refers to the relationship between the criminal proceedings in issue and Article 7 of the European Convention, namely the fact that, as the appellant stated, he was sentenced under the [2003 Criminal Code] rather than under the [1976 Criminal Code], valid at the time of the offence, which provided for a more lenient sanction.
...
In this particular case, the appellant acknowledges that, under the regulations applicable at the material time, the offence for which he was convicted constituted a criminal offence when it was committed. However, he expressly refers to the application of the substantive law in his case and examines primarily the concept of a ‘more lenient punishment’, i.e. ‘more lenient law’. He considers that the [1976 Criminal Code], in force when the criminal offence for which he was convicted was committed, and in respect of which, inter alia, the death penalty was prescribed for the severest forms, was a more lenient law than the [2003 Criminal Code], which prescribes a punishment of long-term imprisonment for the severest forms of the criminal offence in question.
...
In this context, the Constitutional Court finds that it is simply not possible to ‘eliminate’ the more severe sanction applicable under both the earlier and later laws, and apply only the other, more lenient, sanctions, with the effect that the most serious crimes would in practice be inadequately punished. However, the Constitutional Court will not provide detailed reasons or analysis of these regulations, but will focus on the exemptions to the obligations arising under Article 7 § 1 of the European Convention, which are regulated, as is generally accepted, by Article 7 § 2.
In such a situation, the Constitutional Court notes that Article 7 § 2 of the European Convention refers to ‘the general principles of law recognized by civilised nations’, and Article III (3) (b) of the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina establishes that ‘the general principles of international law shall be an integral part of the law of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Entities.’ It follows that these principles constitute an integral part of the legal system in Bosnia and Herzegovina, even without the special ratification of Conventions and other documents regulating their application, and thus also include the 1993 Statute of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the former SFRY.
Further, the Constitutional Court draws attention to the fact that the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina is part of an international agreement and, while this fact does not diminish the Constitution’s importance, it clearly indicates the position of international law within the legal system of Bosnia and Herzegovina, so that a number of international conventions, such as the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (1948) and Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War (1949) and the Additional Protocols I-II (1977), have a status equal to that of constitutional principles and are directly applied in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It should be mentioned that the former SFRY was signatory to the said Conventions, and that Bosnia and Herzegovina, as an internationally recognised subject which declared its independence on 6 March 1992, accepted all of the Conventions ratified by the former SFRY and, thereby, the aforementioned Conventions, which were subsequently included in Annex 4, that is, the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The wording of Article 7 § 1 of the European Convention is limited to those cases in which an accused person is found guilty and convicted of a criminal offence. However, Article 7 § 1 of the European Convention neither prohibits the retrospective application of laws nor includes the non bis in idem principle. Further, Article 7 § 1 of the European Convention could not be applied to cases such as those referred to in the United Kingdom’s War Damages Act 1965, which amended with retrospective effect the common-law rule granting compensation for private property in certain wartime circumstances.
The Constitutional Court notes that Article 7 § 1 of the European Convention concerns criminal offences ‘under national or international law’. The Constitutional Court also notes, in particular, the interpretation of Article 7 provided in a number of texts dealing with this issue, which are based on the European Court’s position that a conviction resulting from a retrospective application of national law does not constitute a violation of Article 7 of the European Convention where such a conviction is based on an act which was a crime under ‘international law’ when committed. This position is particularly relevant in respect of the present case, and of similar cases, given that the main point of the appeal refers to the application of primarily international law, that is, the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (1948) and the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War (1949) and the Additional Protocols III (1977), rather than to the application of one or another text of criminal law, irrespective of their content or stipulated sanctions.
In addition, with regard to the retrospective application of criminal legislation, the Constitutional Court stresses that Article 7 of the European Convention was formulated immediately after World War II with the particular intention of encompassing the general principles of law recognised by civilised nations, where the notion of ‘civilised nations’ was adopted from Article 38 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice (ICJ), the case-law of which is generally recognized as the third formal source of international law. In other words, the Statute of the International Court of Justice is applicable in respect of member states of the ICJ, and the rules established by it are regarded as a source of law, which concern even municipal authorities. Both the Statute of the International Court of Justice and Article 7 of the European Convention exceed the framework of national law, and refer to ‘nations’ in general. Accordingly, the Constitutional Court holds that the standards for their application should be looked for in this context, and not merely within a national framework.
The Constitutional Court further notes that the travaux préparatoires refer to the wording in paragraph 2 of Article 7 of the European Convention, which is calculated to ‘make it clear that Article 7 does not have any effect on the laws which were adopted in certain circumstances after World War II and intended for punishment of war crimes, treason and collaboration with the enemy, and it is not aimed at either moral or legal disapproval of such laws’ (see X v. Belgium, no. 268/57, Yearbook 1 (1957); ... compare De Becker v. Belgium no. 214/56), Yearbook 2 (1958)). In fact, the wording of Article 7 of the European Convention is not restrictive and must be construed dynamically so to encompass other acts which imply immoral behaviour that is generally recognized as criminal under national laws. In view of the above, the United Kingdom’s War Crimes Act 1991 confers retrospective jurisdiction on the UK courts in respect of certain grave violations of the law, such as murder, manslaughter or culpable homicide, committed in German-held territory during the Second World War
In the Constitutional Court’s opinion, all of the above confirms that war crimes are ‘crimes according to international law’, given the universal jurisdiction to conduct proceedings, so that convictions for such offences would not be inconsistent with Article 7 § 1 of the European Convention under a law which subsequently defined and determined certain acts as criminal and stipulated criminal sanctions, where such acts did not constitute criminal offences under the law that was applicable at the time the criminal offence was committed. On 4 May 2000 the European Court of Human Rights issued a decision in the case of Naletilić v. the Republic of Croatia (no. 51891/99). It follows from that decision that the applicant was charged by the Prosecutor’s Office of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia with war crimes committed in the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and that he submitted complaints that were identical to those of the appellant in the present case, i.e. he called for the application of ‘more lenient law’. He argued that the Criminal Code of the Republic of Croatia stipulated a more lenient criminal sanction than the Statute of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, and called for application of Article 7 of the European Convention. In its decision, the European Court of Human Rights considered the application of Article 7 and emphasised the following: ‘As to the applicant’s contention that he might receive a heavier punishment by the ICTY than he might have received by domestic courts if the latter exercised their jurisdiction to finalise the proceedings against him, the Court notes that, even assuming Article 7 of the Convention to apply to the present case, the specific provision that could be applicable to it would be paragraph 2 rather than paragraph 1 of Article 7 of the Convention. This means that the second sentence of Article 7 paragraph 1 of the Convention invoked by the applicant could not apply. It follows that the application is manifestly ill-founded ... and, therefore, must be rejected ...’
Finally, the Constitutional Court points out that the Nuremberg and Tokyo War Crimes Trials were conducted in 1945 and 1946, after World War II, in respect of crimes that were only subsequently, i.e. by the Geneva Convention, defined as acts amounting to war crimes, crimes against humanity, crimes of genocide, etc. Aggressive war was defined as an ‘international crime’, as confirmed by the International Law Commission in its Yearbook of 1957, Vol. II. Related discussions on the principle of nullum crimen nulla poena sine lege were also held at that time. This is also valid in respect of the 1993 Statute of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the former SFRY.
It is quite clear that the concept of individual criminal responsibility for acts committed contrary to the Geneva Convention or appropriate national laws is very closely related to that of human rights protection, since human-rights and related conventions concern the right to life, the right to physical and emotional integrity, prohibition of slavery and torture, prohibition of discrimination, etc. In the Constitutional Court’s opinion, it seems that an absence of protection for victims, i.e. inadequate sanctions for perpetrators of crime, is not compatible with the principle of fairness and the rule of law as embodied in Article 7 of the European Convention, paragraph 2 of which allows this exemption from the rule set out in paragraph 1 of the same Article.
In view of the above, and having regard to the application of Article 4a of the [2003 Criminal Code] in conjunction with Article 7 § 1 of the European Convention, the Constitutional Court concludes that, in the present case, the application of the [2003 Criminal Code] in the proceedings conducted before the [State Court] does not constitute a violation of Article 7 § 1 of the European Convention.”
The relevant part of the dissenting opinion of Judge Mato Tadić, attached to that decision, reads as follows:
“Pursuant to Article 41 § 2 of the Rules of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina (Official Gazette of Bosnia and Herzegovina No. 60/50), I hereby give my separate dissenting opinion, in which I dissent from the opinion of the majority of the Judges of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the aforesaid decision, for the following reasons:
...
It is my opinion that the more lenient law should be applied before the domestic courts, i.e. the law which was in force when the criminal offence was committed. It is not easy to give an answer as to which law is more lenient, and this legal issue is much more complex than it appears. Taking into account around ten criteria that have been developed through theory and practice, one may conclude that in the instant case the prescribed penalty is a key factor which is relevant to the question of which law is the more lenient. Given that the same criminal offence existed (Article 142 of the [1976 Criminal Code]) under the criminal legislation of the former Yugoslavia, which Bosnia and Herzegovina inherited by its 1992 Decree, and which provided for a penalty of five years’ imprisonment or the death penalty, while the new criminal legislation applied in the instant case (Article 173 of the [2003 Criminal Code]) provides for a penalty of ten years’ imprisonment or long-term imprisonment, the basic question is which law is more lenient. At first sight, the [2003 Criminal Code] is more lenient, since it does not provide for the death penalty. However, taking into account that subsequent to the entry into force of the Washington Agreement and the Constitution of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1994, the death penalty was abolished, as was merely confirmed by the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina from 1995, and taking into account the positions of the ordinary courts in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Entities and the Brčko District (Supreme Court of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Supreme Court of the Republika Srpska and Appellate Court of the Brčko District) that the death penalty was not to be pronounced (this position was also taken by the Human Rights Chamber in the case of Damjanović and Herak v. Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina), it appears that the 1992 law is more lenient. According to the above-mentioned court positions and the law, the maximum term of imprisonment that can be pronounced for this criminal offence is 20 years.
Reference to Article 7 § 2 of the European Convention is irrelevant in the instant case. Article 7 § 2 of the European Convention has the primary task of providing a basis for criminal prosecution for violations of the Geneva Conventions before the international bodies established to deal with such cases, for example the International Criminal Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, and to provide a legal basis for cases pending before domestic courts where the domestic legislation failed to prescribe the actions in question as criminal offences. In other words, this is the case where the legislature failed to include all of the elements characterising the said offences as referred to in the Geneva Conventions. This case does not raise that issue. The criminal offence in question existed in the domestic legislation, both when the offence was committed and at the time of trial, and therefore all of the mechanisms of criminal law and safeguarded constitutional rights should be consistently applied, including the rights guaranteed under the European Convention. The Naletelić case is irrelevant here, because it concerned an international prosecutor who accused [the applicant] before an international tribunal which had been established on a special basis and is vested with the powers defined by the Resolution of the United Nations and its Statute; it does not apply national legislation, but rather its own procedures and sanctions/penalties. If it were otherwise, a very small number of accused persons would respond to summons for proceedings before that court. Thus, I am of the opinion that the position of the European Court of Human Rights in the Naletelić case was absolutely correct, but that this position cannot be applied in the instant case.
I consider that extensive reference to an international court is absolutely unnecessary, such as reference to its jurisdiction, etc., since the issue here is simply the domestic court conducting a trial in compliance with national legislation, and does not involve a case which was transferred to an international tribunal.
For the most part, the Naletelić decision deals with history (Nuremberg, Tokyo) and, generally, an international aspect which is completely unnecessary in the instant case, because our national legislation, as pointed out above, incorporated this criminal offence and, when the offence was committed, the sanction was already prescribed, unlike the Nuremberg case. Moreover, the appellant is not challenging the aforesaid. It is in fact the appellant himself who pointed out that the national legislation had the incriminated acts coded as a criminal offence and sanctioned, and the appellant is only asking that it be applied. He also stated that, on account of the failure to apply Article 142 of the inherited [1976 Criminal Code] instead of the [2003 Criminal Code], there had been a violation of the Constitution and of Article 7 § 1 of the European Convention.
Wishing to keep this explanation brief, I will recollect the opinion of Mr Antonio Cassese, the esteemed professor of Florence State University, who was appointed President of the International Criminal Tribunal in The Hague. In a 2003 document entitled ‘Opinion on the Possibility of Retroactive Application of Some Provisions of the New Criminal Code of Bosnia and Herzegovina’, Professor Cassese concluded as follows: ‘Finally, let us deal with the issue whether the [State Court] should apply the more lenient sanction in the event of a crime for which the new criminal code prescribes a graver penalty than that envisaged by the former law. The reply to this question can only be affirmative. This conclusion rests on two legal bases: first, there is a general principle of international law according to which, if a single crime is envisaged in two successive provisions with one imposing a less strict penalty, that penalty should be determined according to the favor libertatis principle; secondly, this principle is explicitly mentioned in Article 7 § 1 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, wherein it is stated that no heavier penalty shall be imposed than the one that was applicable at the time the criminal offence was committed. Accordingly, the [State Court] should always apply the more lenient penalty whenever there is a difference in length of penalty when the former is compared with the new criminal provision. It is clear that retroactive application of criminal code is related to the penalty only and not to other elements of this Article.’
...
For the aforesaid reasons, I could not agree fully with the opinion of the majority which is presented in this decision.”
On 12 June 2009 the applicant completed his sentence and left the country soon afterwards.
Mr Damjanović was born in 1966. He is still serving his sentence in Foča Prison.
On 2 June 1992, in the course of the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, he played a prominent part in the beating of captured Bosniacs in Sarajevo, in an incident which lasted for one to three hours and was performed using rifles, batons, bottles, kicks and punches. The victims were afterwards taken to an internment camp.
On 17 October 2005 a Pre-Trial Chamber of the State Court decided to take over this case from the Sarajevo Cantonal Court, where it had been pending for years, in consideration of its sensitivity (the case concerned torture of a large number of victims) and the better facilities available for witness protection at the State Court (a higher risk of witness intimidation at the Entity level). It relied on the criteria set out in paragraph 40 below and Article 449 of the 2003 Code of Criminal Procedure.
On 26 April 2006 the applicant was arrested.
On 18 June 2007 a Trial Chamber of the State Court convicted him of torture as a war crime and sentenced him to eleven years’ imprisonment for that crime under Article 173 § 1 of the 2003 Criminal Code. An Appeals Chamber of the same court upheld that judgment on 19 November 2007. The second-instance judgment was served on the applicant on 21 December 2007.
On 20 February 2008 the applicant lodged a constitutional appeal. It was dismissed as out of time on 15 April 2009.
In accordance with its emergency powers, on 24 January 2003 the Office of the High Representative imposed the 2003 Criminal Code. The Code entered into force on 1 March 2003. It was subsequently endorsed by the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Article 3 thereof provides that no punishment or other criminal sanction may be imposed on any person for an act which, at the time when it was committed, did not constitute a criminal offence under national or international law and for which a punishment was not prescribed by law. Furthermore, in accordance with Article 4 of that Code, the law that was in effect at the time when a criminal offence was committed applies to the offender; however, if the law has been amended after the commission of the offence, the law that is more lenient to the offender must be applied. In January 2005, Article 4a was added to the 2003 Criminal Code. Like Article 7 § 2 of the Convention, it stipulates that the provisions of Articles 3 and 4 of the Criminal Code must not prejudice the trial and punishment of any person for any act or omission which, at the time when it was committed, was criminal according to the general principles of international law.
In line with those principles, the domestic courts have, in cases concerning war crimes, been applying either the 1976 Criminal Code or, if it was considered to be more lenient to an offender, the 2003 Criminal Code. Since the intermediate Entities’ Codes (the 1998 Criminal Code of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the 2000 Criminal Code of the Republika Srpska) have rarely, if ever, been applied in such cases, they are irrelevant to the present applicants.
During the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the 1976 Criminal Code was in force throughout the country. It remained in force in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina until 1998 and in the Republika Srpska until 2000 (when it was repealed and replaced by the Entities’ Codes mentioned in paragraph 25 above). Under that Code, war crimes were punishable by imprisonment for a term of 5-15 years or, for the most serious cases, the death penalty; a 20-year prison term could also be imposed instead of the death penalty (see Articles 37, 38 and 142 thereof). Aiders and abettors of war crimes (such as Mr Maktouf) were to be punished as if they themselves had committed war crimes, but their punishment could also be reduced to one year’s imprisonment (Articles 24, 42 and 43 of that Code). The relevant Articles read as follows:
Article 24 § 1
“Anybody who intentionally aids another in the commission of a criminal act shall be punished as if he himself had committed it, but the sentence may also be reduced.”
Article 37 § 2
“The death penalty may be imposed only for the most serious criminal acts when so provided by statute.”
Article 38 §§ 1 and 2
“The sentence of imprisonment may not be shorter than 15 days or longer than 15 years.
The court may impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of 20 years in respect of criminal acts eligible for the death penalty.”
Article 42
“The court may impose a sentence below the limit prescribed by statute, or impose a milder type of sentence:
Article 43 § 1
“Where conditions exist for the reduction of sentence referred to in Article 42 of this Code, the court shall reduce the sentence within the following limits:
Article 142 § 1
“Whoever in violation of the rules of international law effective at the time of war, armed conflict or occupation, orders or perpetrates ... torture, ... taking of hostages, ... shall be punished by imprisonment for a minimum term of five years or by the death penalty.”
The death penalty could no longer be imposed after the entry into force of the Dayton Agreement on 14 December 1995. In particular, pursuant to Annexes 4 and 6 thereto, Bosnia and Herzegovina and its Entities must secure to all persons within their jurisdiction the rights and freedoms provided in the Convention and its Protocols (including Protocol No. 6 on the Abolition of the Death Penalty) and in the other human rights agreements listed therein (including the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights on the death penalty). The domestic authorities have always taken those provisions to mean that no one may be condemned to the death penalty or executed in peacetime, even in respect of criminal offences committed during the 199295 war.
Under the 2003 Criminal Code, war crimes attract imprisonment for a term of 10-20 years or, in most serious cases, long-term imprisonment for a term of 20-45 years (Articles 42 and 173 thereof). Aiders and abettors of war crimes (such as Mr Maktouf) are to be punished as if they themselves committed war crimes, but their punishment could also be reduced to five years’ imprisonment (see Articles 31, 49 and 50 of that Code). The relevant Articles read as follows:
Article 31 § 1
“Anybody who intentionally aids another in the commission of a criminal act shall be punished as if he himself had committed it, but the sentence may also be reduced.”
Article 42 §§ 1 and 2
“The sentence of imprisonment may not be shorter than 30 days or longer than 20 years.
For the most serious criminal acts perpetrated with intent, imprisonment for a term of 20 to 45 years may exceptionally be prescribed (long-term imprisonment).”
Article 49
“The court may set the sentence below the limit prescribed by statute, or impose a milder type of sentence:
Article 50 § 1
“Where conditions exist for the reduction of sentence referred to in Article 49 of this Code, the court shall reduce the sentence within the following limits:
Article 173 § 1
“Whoever in violation of the rules of international law effective at the time of war, armed conflict or occupation, orders or perpetrates ... torture, ... taking of hostages, ... shall be punished by imprisonment for a minimum term of ten years’ or long-term imprisonment.”
The Entity courts and the State Court have interpreted the principles outlined in paragraph 24 above differently in war crimes cases. With a few exceptions, the Entity courts generally apply the 1976 Code. In contrast, the State Court initially held that the 2003 Code was always more lenient and applied it in all cases. In March 2009, however, the State Court began applying a new approach, which was to establish on a case-by-case basis which of the Codes was more lenient to the offender. It has since applied the 1976 Code to less serious instances of war crimes. At the same time, it has continued to apply the 2003 Code to more serious instances of war crimes, which were punishable by the death penalty under the 1976 Code, and whenever it held that the 2003 Code was more lenient to the offender for any reason. It should be noted that the new approach concerns only the appeals chambers of the State Court; the trial chambers have continued to apply the 2003 Code in all war crimes cases. According to figures provided by the Government (see paragraph 63 below), appeals chambers rendered 21 decisions in war crimes cases between March 2009, when the new approach was first applied, and November 2012. They applied the 1976 Code in five of them and the 2003 Code in 16 of them. However, the application of the 1976 Code by an appeals chamber did not always lead to a reduction of penalty (in two cases, the appeals chamber imposed the same penalty under the 1976 Code as the trial chamber had done under the 2003 Code; in one case, the penalty imposed by the appeals chamber under the 1976 Code was even heavier than that imposed by the trial chamber under the 2003 Code).
It would appear that the application of different Criminal Codes in war crimes cases, as described in the previous paragraph, has led to diverse sentencing practices. According to a report published by the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in 2008 (“Moving towards a Harmonised Application of the Law Applicable in War Crimes Cases before Courts in Bosnia and Herzegovina”), the Entity courts generally imposed lighter sentences than the State Court. The relevant part of that report reads as follows:
“Usage of different criminal codes also leads to marked discrepancies between the sentences delivered in state and entity courts for war crimes. This stems from the wide variances in the sentences enforceable under these codes. For instance, an entity court has sentenced a defendant convicted of cruel treatment of prisoners to a term of one year and eight months’ imprisonment even as the State Court has sentenced another defendant charged with a comparable act to imprisonment for a period of ten-and-a-half years. On average, sentences delivered by the [State Court] in war crimes cases have been almost double the length of those delivered by entity courts.”
In a 2011 report (“Delivering Justice in Bosnia and Herzegovina”), the OSCE held that the application of different Criminal Codes at the State- and Entity-levels could be problematic in certain types of war crimes cases. The relevant part of that report reads as follows:
“Certainly, it is acceptable that the issue of which criminal code should be applied to war crime cases is assessed on a case-by-case basis. In many cases before entity courts, the application of the [1976] Code does not represent a serious problem in practice. In general, the cases in which the application of different codes undermines the principle of equality before the law are those in which the court, by applying the [2003] Code, could sentence the accused to a sentence higher than the 15 or 20 years maximum sentence prescribed under the [1976] Code. In these cases, the application of the [1976] Code arguably does not allow the court to deliver a sentence which is proportional to the gravity of the crimes. Nor are the sentences in those cases harmonized with practice at the state level. Another category of cases in which the application of the [1976] Code is problematic are those in which the accused’s conduct is arguably best captured under the concept of crimes against humanity or under the theory of command responsibility, which are expressly prescribed only under the [2003] Code.”
The UN Human Rights Committee, in its “concluding observations” on Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2012 (CCPR/C/BIH/CO/1), expressed similar concerns (at § 7):
“While appreciating efforts to deal with war crime cases such as the implementation of the National War Crimes Processing Strategy, the Committee remains concerned at the slow pace of prosecutions, particularly those relating to sexual violence, as well as lack of support to victims of such crimes. The Committee is also concerned at the lack of efforts to harmonise jurisprudence on war crimes among entities, and that entity-level courts use the archaic criminal code of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY) that does not, inter alia, define crimes against humanity, command responsibility, sexual slavery and forced pregnancy. The Committee is concerned that this might affect consistency in sentencing among entities (arts. 2 and 14). The State party should expedite the prosecution of war crime cases. The State party should also continue to provide adequate psychological support to victims of sexual violence, particularly during the conduct of trials. Furthermore, the State party should ensure that the judiciary in all entities strongly pursues efforts aimed at harmonising jurisprudence on war crimes and that charges for war crimes are not brought under the archaic criminal code of the former SFRY, which does not recognise certain offences as crimes against humanity.”
In its Opinion on Legal Certainty and the Independence of Judiciary in Bosnia and Herzegovina (no. 648/2011), issued on 18 June 2012, the Venice Commission noted that the existence of several legal orders and the fragmentation of the judiciary made it difficult for Bosnia and Herzegovina to fulfil the requirements of, inter alia, consistency in its legislation and case-law.
In accordance with its emergency powers, on 12 November 2000 the Office of the High Representative imposed the State Court Act 2000 establishing the State Court. The Act entered into force on 8 December 2000. It was subsequently endorsed by the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As part of the ICTY’s completion strategy mentioned in paragraph 9 above, war crimes chambers were established within the State Court in early 2005. During a transitional phase which ended on 31 December 2012, some international judges were included in the composition of those chambers. Initially, they were appointed by the Office of the High Representative in accordance with its 2004 agreement with the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The mandate of those judges was two years and was renewable. A typical decision appointing an international judge read, in the relevant part, as follows:
“...
Noting the joint recommendation for the appointment of an International Judge of 22 April 2005 signed by the Registrar of the Registry for Section I for War Crimes and Section II for Organized Crime, Economic Crime and Corruption of the Criminal and Appellate Divisions of the [State Court] and [Special Departments of the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina], President of the [State Court] and President of the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council of Bosnia and Herzegovina;
The High Representative hereby issues the following decision on appointment of an International Judge to Section I for War Crimes of the Criminal and Appellate Divisions of the [State Court]
As provided by section 65 § 4, as amended, of the [State Court Act 2000] the following person is hereby appointed as International Judge of Section I for War Crimes of the Criminal and Appellate Divisions of the [State Court]:
Pietro Spera
The initial term of appointment ... shall be for two years, subject to reappointment pursuant to the [State Court Act 2000]. The [appointee] is required to reside in Bosnia in Herzegovina during the term of his appointment and cannot perform any other function that is incompatible with the judicial service or that can impede his performance of the judicial function on a full time basis. To the extent applicable, all other requirements for judicial service as set forth in the [State Court Act 2000] shall apply...
The International Registrar of the Registry for Section I for War Crimes and Section II for Organized Crime, Economic Crime and Corruption of the Criminal and Appellate Divisions of the [State Court] and [Special Departments of the Prosecutor’s Office] shall notify the High Representative of any occurrence, including the ones as referred to in paragraph 2 [above], that may cause the inability of the [appointee] to perform his mandate.  In the event of resignation by or inability of the [appointee] to complete his mandate, the High Representative will appoint a successor to complete the above-mentioned term of office.
During the term of appointment, the appointee shall complete all training programs as directed by the President of the [State Court] and adhere to all professional conduct standards as established by the [State Court].
The [appointee] shall perform the duty of judge in accordance with the Constitution and laws of Bosnia and Herzegovina, take decisions upon his best knowledge, conscientiously, responsibly and impartially to uphold the rule of law, and shall protect the freedoms and rights of individuals granted by the Constitution and the European Convention on Human Rights. Before taking up his official function, which occurs not later then 6 May 2005, the International Judge shall take a solemn declaration before the President of the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council of Bosnia and Herzegovina to that effect.
This Decision shall enter into force forthwith and shall be published without delay in the Official Gazette of Bosnia and Herzegovina.”
In September 2006 the Office of the High Representative and Bosnia and Herzegovina revised the procedure for the appointment of international judges to the State Court: international judges were thereafter appointed by a specialised professional body, the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council of Bosnia and Herzegovina, also for a renewable period of two years.
Domestic war crimes cases can be divided into two categories.
Old cases (reported before 1 March 2003) remain with Entity courts if an indictment entered into force before 1 March 2003. If an indictment did not enter into force before 1 March 2003, they remain with Entity courts unless the State Court decides to take over any such case in accordance with the criteria set out in paragraph 40 below (see Article 449 of the 2003 Code of Criminal Procedure).
New cases (reported after 1 March 2003) fall under the jurisdiction of the State Court, but the State Court may transfer any such case to the competent Entity court in accordance with the criteria set out in paragraph 40 below (see Article 27 of the 2003 Code of Criminal Procedure).
In accordance with the Book of Rules on the Review of War Crimes Cases of 28 December 2004 the following types of cases were, as a rule, to be heard before the State Court: (a) cases concerning genocide, extermination, multiple murders, rape and other serious sexual assaults as part of a system (such as in camps), enslavement, torture, persecution on a widespread and systematic scale, mass forced detention in camps; (b) cases against past or present military commanders, past or present political leaders, past or present members of the judiciary, past or present police chiefs, camp commanders, persons with a past or present notorious reputation, multiple rapists; (c) cases with insider or suspect witnesses; (d) if there was a risk of witness intimidation; and (e) cases involving perpetrators in an area which is sympathetic to them or where the authorities have a vested interest in preventing public scrutiny of the crimes. All other war crimes cases were, as a rule, to be heard before the Entity courts. In December 2008 the authorities adopted the National War Crimes Strategy, providing, among other things, a new set of criteria. They are, however, almost identical to those outlined above.
Article 327 of the 2003 Code of Criminal Procedure provides that a criminal trial may be reopened in favour of the offender where the European Court of Human Rights has found that human rights were violated during the trial and that the verdict was based on these violations. An application for the reopening of a criminal trial is not subject to deadlines. It may even be lodged after the sentence has been served (Article 329 § 2 of this Code).
Pursuant to Article 333 § 4 of this Code, in any new trial the verdict may not be modified to the detriment of the accused (prohibition of reformatio in peius).
Pursuant to the 1949 Geneva Conventions (see, for example, Article 146 of the Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War), the High Contracting Parties must enact any legislation necessary to provide effective penal sanctions for persons committing, or ordering to be committed, any of the grave breaches of those Conventions. At the same time, the accused persons must in all circumstances benefit from safeguards of proper trial and defence that are not less favourable than those provided by the Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War.
Pursuant to Article 99 of the Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War no prisoner of war may be tried or sentenced for an act which is not forbidden, at the time the said act was committed, by the law of the Detaining Power or by international law. The rule of non-retroactivity of crimes and punishments also appears in the Additional Protocols I and II of 1977 in almost identical terms. Article 75 § 4 (c) of the Additional Protocol I reads as follows:
“No one shall be accused or convicted of a criminal offence on account of any act or omission which did not constitute a criminal offence under the national or international law to which he was subject at the time when it was committed; nor shall a heavier penalty be imposed than that which was applicable at the time when the criminal offence was committed; if, after the commission of the offence, provision is made by law for the imposition of a lighter penalty, the offender shall benefit thereby”