The case originated in an application (no. 16602/06) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by 87 Moldovan nationals (“the applicants”, see details in the appended Annex), on 15 April 2006.
The applicants were represented by Mr A. Postică and Mr I. Manole, lawyers practising in Chișinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent at the time, Mr V. Grosu.
On 12 January 2009 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicants are entrepreneurs who obtained from the local authorities in Leova licences (patenta) to offer services such as selling various types of goods at the local marketplace. All the applicants offered their services on the territory of a private marketplace (L.) situated in the centre of Leova and which had received its licence in 1996. The local authorities authorised the offering of services on the  from Monday to Saturday. Another marketplace, owned by the State (U.), was open on Sundays, but was situated far from the centre and was inconvenient to many sellers and the population.
The applicants and L.’s owners asked the local authorities for a change in work schedule, allowing them to work on Sundays and to have their free day on Monday, as was the case of many similar marketplaces in other towns. However, the local authorities rejected on a number of occasions such a change, invoking various sanitary, public order and other reasons. According to the applicants, the real reason for the refusal was the protection of U.’s interests, since Sunday was the most lucrative day of the week. Accordingly, many private entrepreneurs felt obliged to offer their services also at the State-owned marketplace, thus having to incur additional costs and suffering from the rudimentary conditions of work on the
On 31 January 2005 the general meeting of entrepreneurs (which included the applicants) decided to ask the local authorities to allow them to work on Sundays and to rest on Mondays. They submitted their request to L.’s owners, who on 8 February 2005 complained to the mayor of Leova, referring to the decision of 31 January 2005 and requesting an authorisation of a change in the work schedule of the marketplace.
On 2 March 2005 the Leova city council adopted its decision no. 2.2, rejecting “the requests of citizens of Leova who work on the territory of [L.] and have business licences”. The reasons were that work on Sunday would cause traffic problems and would disturb the nearby population, including a school and a hospital. The decision was printed a stationery with the heading of the mayor’s office. The stamp on the decision was applied by the Leova mayor’s office and bears the date 29 March 2005.
On 4 April 2005 the general meeting of entrepreneurs (including the applicants) expressed its disagreement with the decision of 2 March 2005. On the same day the 191 entrepreneurs working on the , including the applicants, declared a strike and decided to submit an official request for a change in their work schedule.
Accordingly, on 4 April 2005 the entrepreneurs submitted their request to the “Leova regional council”. They asked, inter alia, for the annulment of the decision 2.2 adopted by the city council on 2 March 2005 and explained that they had not been offered proper working conditions on the territory of U.
On the same date the applicants sent a preliminary request to the Mayoralty of Leova. In it, the applicants made a similar description to that in their complaint made mentioned in paragraph above. They asked for the annulment of decision no. 2.2 adopted by the city council of the Leova Mayoralty.
On 6 April 2005 the Leova city council discussed at its meeting the demands of the entrepreneurs and of L.’s administration, made in their request of 4 April 2005. According to the applicants, L.’s director was allowed to address the councillors and spoke about the applicants’ demands. After discussing the issue, the city council adopted its decision no. 3.1 in which it took note of the applicants’ demands and decided that L. was to work in accordance with the decision of the Leova city council no. 2.2 of 2 March 2005.
On 12 May 2005 the mayor of Leova replied to the complaint of 4 April 2005. The mayor informed the entrepreneurs that an answer to their demands had already been given by the Leova city council in its decision no. 3.1. of 6 April 2005, “namely that [L.] shall work in accordance with the decision of the Leova city council no. 2.2 of 2 March 2005”.
On 28 May 2005 the 191 entrepreneurs, including the applicants, lodged administrative court proceedings, asking for the annulment of the decision of 2 March 2005. They argued that their rights had been affected by that decision and that its aim was the protection of U.’s interests. They annexed copies of the preliminary request addressed to the mayoralty, of their complaint made on 4 April 2005 to the Leova city council, and of the reply of the mayor’s office of 12 May 2005 (see the preceding paragraph).
On 5 July 2005 the Leova District Court found in favour of the entrepreneurs. The court established that L.’s activity on Sundays did not cause any kind of sanitary, traffic or other problems and that the decision of 2 March 2005 was contrary to anti-monopoly legislation. It also accepted in full the applicants’ request for compensation for their legal costs of 15,000 Moldovan lei, a sum which they had paid to the lawyer for representing them in this case. The Leova city council appealed.
By its final decision of 20 October 2005 the Cahul Court of Appeal quashed the lower court’s judgment and decided to strike out the court action lodged by the entrepreneurs. It explained that the entrepreneurs had submitted their preliminary complaint to the mayor, while the decision which they sought to annul had been adopted by the city council of the Leova mayoralty. Therefore, Article 14 of the Law on administrative proceedings (see paragraph 17 below) had not been observed since the complaint had to be submitted first to the authority which had adopted the impugned decision. The court added that the applicants no longer had the right to complain against the decision of 2 March 2005.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure at the relevant time read as follows:
The court shall strike a case out if:
a)  the plaintiff did not observe the procedure, provided for by law or by a contract between the parties, of preliminary solving of the case in a extrajudicial manner;
...”
(1)  The cassation court, after judging the appeal in cassation, has the power:
...
f) to accept the appeal in cassation and to partially or totally annul the decision of the first-instance court, ordering the discontinuation of the proceedings or the striking of the case out if there are grounds provided for in Articles 265 and 267.”
The relevant provisions of the Law on administrative proceedings (No. 793-XIV of 10 February 2000 with subsequent modifications) read as follows:
(1)  A person who considers that his/her rights recognised by law have been violated by an administrative act may request, within 30 days of the date of knowledge of the act, its total or partial revocation by the authority which adopted the act, save in a case where the law provides otherwise.
(2)  If the authority which adopted the act has a hierarchically superior authority, the preliminary complaint may be addressed, at the applicant’s choice, either to the authority which adopted the act or to the hierarchically superior authority, unless the law provides otherwise. ...”
(1)  The request by which it is requested to annul an administrative act or the acknowledgment of a right shall be submitted within 30 days, if the law does not provide otherwise. This time-limit shall run from:
a)  the date of receiving a reply to the preliminary request or the date of expiry of the time-limit provided by law for examining such a request;
...”
The relevant provisions of the Law on petitions (No. 190-XIII of 19 July 1994 with subsequent modifications) read as follows:
“(1)  A petition, within the meaning of the present law, shall be considered any request, complaint, proposal, communication, addressed to the competent authorities, including a preliminary request by which one contests an administrative act or the failure to respond to a request within the legally established time-limit.”
“(1)  If the petition falls within the competence of another authority, the original petition shall be forwarded to that authority within five working days from the date of registering it, a fact that is brought to the petitioner’s knowledge.”