The case originated in an application (no. 3681/06) against Bosnia and Herzegovina lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a citizen of Bosnia and Herzegovina Ms Azra Zornić (“the applicant”), on 19 December 2005.
The applicant was granted leave for self-representation. The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina (“the Government”) were represented by their Deputy Agent, Ms Z. Ibrahimović.
The applicant complained of her ineligibility to stand for election to the House of Peoples and the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina because she does not declare affiliation with any of the “constituent people”. She relied on Article 3 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention taken alone and in conjunction with Article 14 of the Convention, and on Article 1 of Protocol No. 12.
On 14 March 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1957 and lives in Sarajevo.
She actively participates in the political life of the country. Among other things, in 2002 she stood as a candidate of the Social Democratic Party of Bosnia and Herzegovina for election to the parliament of one of the Entities.
As the applicant does not declare affiliation with any of the “constituent people” (namely, Bosniacs, Croats and Serbs), but simply as a citizen of Bosnia and Herzegovina, she is ineligible to stand for election to the second chamber of the State parliament (the House of Peoples) and to the collective Head of State (the Presidency).
The relevant law and practice were outlined in Sejdić and Finci v. Bosnia and Herzegovina [GC], nos. 27996/06 and 34836/06, ECHR 2009. Notably, the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina makes a distinction between “constituent peoples” (persons who declare affiliation with Bosniacs, Croats and Serbs) and “others” (members of ethnic minorities and persons who do not declare affiliation with any particular group because of intermarriage, mixed parenthood or other reasons).
In the former Yugoslavia, a person’s ethnic affiliation was decided solely by that person, through a system of self-classification. Thus, no objective criteria, such as knowledge of a certain language or belonging to a specific religion were required. Moreover, there was no requirement of acceptance by other members of the ethnic group in question. Since the Constitution contains no provisions regarding the determination of one’s ethnicity it appears that it was assumed that the traditional self-classification would suffice.
In accordance with the Constitution (Articles IV § 1 and V), only persons declaring affiliation with a “constituent people” are entitled to stand for election to the House of Peoples and the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
On 29 June 2010 the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina (“the Constitutional Court”) declared that it lacked jurisdiction to examine a discrimination complaint concerning the appellant’s ineligibility to stand for election to the Presidency on the ground of his ethnic origin (decision no. AP 1945/10). The appellant in that case directly relied on the Sejdić and Finci judgment.
The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, in its supervisory function under the terms of Article 46 § 2 of the Convention, adopted three interim resolutions concerning the implementation of Sejdić and Finci judgment (see documents nos. CM/ResDH(2011)291, CM/ResDH(2012)233 and CM/ResDH(2013)259). It urged the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to take all the necessary steps for the full execution of that judgment by adopting required measures aimed at eliminating discrimination against those who are not affiliated with a constituent people in standing for election to the House of Peoples and the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to bring its constitution and electoral legislation in conformity with the Convention requirements without any further delay.
The relevant part of the first interim resolution, adopted on 2 December 2011, reads:
“Recalling that, from the beginning of its examination of this case, the Committee considered that the execution of this judgment would require a number of amendments to the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to its electoral legislation;
Bearing in mind further that, on 7 July 2010, on the occasion of the examination of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s honouring of its obligations and commitments, the Ministers’ Deputies urged the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to bring the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina in line with the Convention, in compliance with the present judgment;
Stressing that, in becoming a member of the Council of Europe in 2002, Bosnia and Herzegovina undertook to “review within one year, with the assistance of the European Commission for Democracy through Law (Venice Commission), the electoral legislation in the light of Council of Europe standards, and to revise it where necessary”;
Noting also that the Parliamentary Assembly has periodically reminded Bosnia and Herzegovina of this post-accession obligation;
...
Recalling that the Committee of Ministers deeply regretted that the elections took place in Bosnia and Herzegovina on 3 October 2010 in accordance with the legislation which was found to be discriminatory by the Court in the present judgment;
...
REITERATES ITS CALL ON the authorities and political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to take the necessary measures aimed at eliminating discrimination against those who are not affiliated with a constituent people in standing for election to the House of Peoples and the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to bring its constitution and electoral legislation in conformity with the Convention requirements without any further delay”. (footnotes omitted)
The relevant part of the second interim resolution, adopted on 6 December 2012, reads:
“Underlining that these amendments, by allowing all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina to run for elections, would enhance the functioning of democratic institutions in the country and citizens’ confidence in them;
...
Stressing that reaching a political consensus is an indispensable condition for the amendment of the Constitution and the electoral legislation in order to ensure not only the execution of the present judgment but also full compliance of future elections with Convention requirements;
FIRMLY RECALLS the obligation of Bosnia and Herzegovina under Article 46 of the Convention to abide by the judgment of the Court in the case of Sejdić and Finci;
STRONGLY URGES the authorities and political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to amend the Constitution and the electoral legislation and to bring them in conformity with the Convention requirements without any further delay.”
The relevant part of the third interim resolution, adopted on 5 December 2013, reads:
 “Recalling the Committee’s repeated calls on the authorities and political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to reach a consensus and to amend the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its electoral legislation to comply with this judgment and that these calls have been echoed notably by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (including most recently in its Recommendation 2025(2013)), as well as different bodies of the European Union and the United Nations;
Recalling the assurances given on numerous occasions by the representatives of the executive and the main political parties of Bosnia and Herzegovina that all political stakeholders are fully committed to finding an appropriate solution for the execution of this judgment;
Recalling also that the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina provides that “The rights and freedoms set forth in the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and its Protocols shall apply directly in Bosnia and Herzegovina. These shall have priority over all other law”;
Expressing the gravest concern that, despite the repeated assurances, including at its last human rights meeting in September 2013, the necessary constitutional and legislative amendments have still not been made and that time is running out for the 2014 elections to be held in compliance with the Convention requirements;
Reiterating that failure to do so would not only amount to a manifest breach of obligations under Article 46, paragraph 1, of the Convention but could also potentially undermine the legitimacy and the credibility of the country´s future elected bodies;
...
FIRMLY CALLS UPON all authorities and political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to ensure that the constitutional and legislative framework is immediately brought in line with the Convention requirements so that the elections in October 2014 are held without any discrimination against those citizens who are not affiliated with any of the “constituent peoples”.”