The case originated in an application (no. 4994/04) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Oleg Oleksandrovych Zheltyakov (“the applicant”), on 27 January 2004.
The applicant was represented by Mr O. Nagornyy, a lawyer practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Y. Zaytsev, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, a breach of the principle of legal certainty on account of the reopening of the proceedings and quashing of a final judgment and complained about lengthy partial non-enforcement of that judgment and about the length of the court proceedings.
On 15 April 2009 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1955 and lives in Vinnytsya.
In March 1988 the local authorities decided to allocate to the Podilskprommontazh Association, a State company (“the Association”), a plot of land, on which the applicant’s father’s house stood, in order to build a block of flats on that land. In July 1991 the domestic courts rejected, as unsubstantiated, the Association’s claim against the applicant’s father, who had refused to vacate the house in return for compensation.
In May 1992 the applicant’s father died and the applicant and his relatives (Mrs D., Mrs M. and Mr Z.) inherited the house. According to the applicant, in November 1992, despite the above-mentioned court decision, the Association partially destroyed the house and he could no longer live in it.
In September 1994 the applicant instituted court proceedings against the Association, seeking compensation for the partial destruction of the house and reimbursement of the cost of renting a flat due to the impossibility of living in the damaged house.
On 19 November 1996 the Leninskyy District Court of Vinnytsya partially granted the applicant’s action. On 3 April 1997, following an objection (протест) lodged by a local prosecutor, the Presidium of the Vinnytsya Regional Court quashed that judgment and remitted the case for fresh consideration.
On 5 April 2000 the  partially granted the applicant’s action, awarded him 167,847 Ukrainian hryvnias (“UAH”) for pecuniary damage and UAH 5,000 for non-pecuniary damage and rejected, as unsubstantiated, his claim for reimbursement of rental fees. The court based its pecuniary-damage award on a report of 5 August 1999, prepared upon a request it made on 1 June 1999, by the experts of the Kherson State Technical Inventory Bureau (“the Bureau”). As no appeal was lodged, the judgment became final.
On 22 June 2000 the Presidium of the  rejected, as unsubstantiated, a local prosecutor’s objection against the judgment.
Between 5 April 2000 and 28 September 2007 the Association repeatedly challenged the initiation of the enforcement proceedings, sought their suspension or variation of the manner of the enforcement of the judgment. According to the Government, the judgment was enforced in the amount of UAH 8,856.77.
On 10 April 2006 the Association requested the  to reopen the proceedings in the light of newly-discovered circumstances. It argued that the expert report had been prepared not by the Bureau but, instead, by its experts acting in a private capacity. It stated that it had learned about that from letters of the Bureau and the local department of the State Security Service issued, respectively, on 13 and 14 March 2006. The applicant filed his comments challenging the request.
On 30 May 2006 the local police rejected, as unsubstantiated, a criminal complaint by the Association’s chairman of 26 May 2006 against the above experts, based on the same submissions as the Association’s request to the court, for lack of corpus delicti in the experts’ actions.
On 28 September 2007 the court granted the request, quashed the judgment of 5 April 2000 and ordered a fresh examination of the case. Referring to the aforementioned letters of the Bureau and the State Security Service, it found that the experts of the Bureau, who had prepared the impugned report, had acted in a private capacity and not on behalf of the Bureau. In this respect, it noted that the report had borne no stamp and no registration number of the Bureau. The court thus concluded that its ruling of 1 June 1999 had not been complied with, and found this to constitute a “newly-discovered fact”.
On 25 March 2008 the same court returned the applicant’s claim unexamined on account of his alleged failure to attend several hearings.
On 26 June 2008 the Vinnytsya Regional Court of Appeal quashed that ruling on the ground that the applicant had not been duly informed of those hearings and remitted the case for fresh consideration.
The proceedings are still pending before the Pecherskyy District Court of Kyiv, which on 29 July 2008 joined them to the second set of proceedings (see below).
In the course of the proceedings seven hearings were adjourned at the applicant’s request or due to his failure to appear and five hearings were adjourned due to both parties’ failure to appear. This protracted the proceedings to approximately ten months. Thirteen hearings were adjourned at the respondent’s request, due to its or third parties’ failure to appear, due to the absence or illness of a judge or due to the applicant’s absence from several hearings of which he was not duly informed (see paragraph 17 above). Two forensic examinations lasted in total for about three and a half months.
In October 1994 the applicant instituted court proceedings against Mrs M. and Mr Z., seeking separation of the inherited property.
On 11 July 1995 the  endorsed the friendly settlement reached by the parties.
On 13 December 2000 the Supreme Court, following an objection lodged by its Deputy Head, quashed the ruling of 11 July 1995 and remitted the case for fresh consideration. Subsequently, the case was transferred to the .
On 26 November 2001 the Association instituted proceedings in that court against the applicant, Mrs M. and Mr Z., challenging the validity of the inheritance certificate issued to them.
On 16 April 2002 the court suspended the proceedings for separation of the inherited property pending the outcome of the proceedings brought by the Association.
On 26 July 2002 the court transferred the case to the , which on 2 August 2004 joined both proceedings.
On 12 January 2005 the court returned the claims of the applicant and the Association unexamined on account of their alleged failure to attend several hearings.
On 18 April 2005 the Khmelnytsk Regional Court of Appeal quashed that ruling on the ground that the parties had not been duly informed of those hearings and remitted the case for fresh consideration.
On an unspecified date the applicant lodged an additional claim against Mrs D. for separation of the inherited property.
On 21 July 2005 the case was transferred to the , which on 19 October 2005 joined that claim to the proceedings.
On 15 November 2007 the same court, at the request of the Association, returned the latter’s claim unexamined.
Between 16 May and 29 July 2008 the proceedings were suspended at the applicant’s request pending the outcome of the first set of proceedings (see paragraphs 16-17 above).
On 29 July 2008 the court joined the first set to the second set of proceedings, which are still pending before it.
In the course of the proceedings twelve hearings were adjourned at the applicant’s request or due to his failure to appear and eleven hearings were adjourned due to both parties’ failure to appear. This protracted the proceedings for approximately one year and three months. Sixteen hearings were adjourned at the other parties’ requests, due to those parties’ or experts’ failure to appear, due to the absence or illness of a judge or due to the parties’ absence from several hearings of which they were not duly informed (see paragraph 27 above). Three forensic examinations lasted in total for about one year and eight months.
The relevant provisions of the domestic legislation concerning the ordering of a forensic examination and reopening of the proceedings in the light of the newly-discovered circumstances read as follows:
Article 57. Ordering forensic examination
“... A forensic examination shall be carried out by experts of relevant establishments or by other specialists appointed by the court. Any person who has the necessary knowledge for giving an expert opinion may be appointed as an expert”.
Article 7. Organisation of forensic expert activities
“... Forensic expert activities shall be carried out on an entrepreneurial basis under special permission (licence), as well as by the citizens on the basis of [individual] contracts...”
Article 361. Grounds for review
“1. Judgments or rulings which have come into force as well as court orders may be reviewed on the basis of the newly-discovered circumstances.
The grounds for review ... shall be as follows:
1) important circumstances which were not and could not have been known to a party who requests review;
2) a knowingly erroneous expert conclusion ... as established by a final court verdict, which entailed the adoption of an unlawful or ungrounded judgment ...”
Article 365. Examination of requests
“...
Having examined a request, the court, by its ruling, may either grant the request and quash the judgment, ruling or court order or dismiss the request if it is unsubstantiated ...”
Article 366. Appeals against the ruling of the court
“1. A court decision by which an application for review of a ... judgment ... in the light of newly-discovered circumstances is granted shall not be subject to appeal ...”