The case originated in an application (no. 44199/14) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Isiyat Israilovna Dzaurova (“the applicant”), on 29 May 2014.
The applicant was granted leave to present her own case under Rule 36 § 2 in fine of the Rules of Court. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 3 November 2015 the Government were given notice of the complaints concerning the alleged violation of the applicant’s right to respect for her home and her right to a fair trial and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1979 and lives in the Republic of Ingushetia.
In 1994 the applicant left the Chechen Republic for the Republic of Ingushetia and settled in the town of Karabulak.
In 1996 the Federal Migration Service (“the FMS”) granted the applicant the status of internally displaced person (“IDP”) which was subsequently extended until 12 June 2014.
In 2003 the authorities provided the applicant with a room in a housing facility “Promzhilbaza”, the property of the town of Karabulak.
Between 2003 and 2013 the applicant gave birth to five children. According to her, she and her children had been living in “Promzhilbaza” until their eviction in 2014.
The Government submitted that from 2002 and at least until 2016 the applicant had been registered as living in a flat in Malgobek, a town in the Republic of Ingushetia.
Since 2003 the applicant is on the housing list in order to receive a housing voucher.
In 2010 the Karabulak town prosecutor brought court proceedings against the Town Council on account of breaches of anti-fire rules on the premises of “Promzhilbaza”.
On 28 September 2010 the Karabulakskiy District Court, Republic of Ingushetia (“the District Court”), granted the prosecutor’s action. The District Court found that the Town Council’s failure to take the measures to remedy the situation on the premises of “Promzhilbaza” had put at danger the lives and the health of inhabitants. The court ordered the Town Council to take immediate measures to eliminate all the violations of anti-fire rules and secure the safety of inhabitants. That judgment entered into force on 7 October 2010.
In 2011 the town prosecutor brought fresh court proceedings seeking to declare unlawful the Town Council’s failure to evict persons who were unlawfully living on the premises of “Promzhilbaza”. In particular, the majority of those persons had not had any IDP status, had no rent agreement with the municipality and therefore, had no right to live in those premises.
On 6 September 2011 the District Court granted the prosecutor’s action and ordered the Town Council to submit to the court eviction claims in respect of the persons who had no IDP status and therefore were unlawfully living in the premises of “Promzhilbaza”. That judgment entered into force on 19 September 2011.
In July 2013 the Town Council initiated court proceedings against thirty five persons, including the applicant, seeking their eviction from “Promzhilbaza”. The Town Council submitted that seventy eight families (225 persons) were living in “Promzhilbaza”, which was municipal property. The majority of those persons had no legal grounds to live there. The Town Council further submitted the following arguments:
 - the defendants had been moved into the premises on the basis of an oral order by the President of the Republic of Ingushetia as IDPs; however, they had lost their right to live there after they had received housing vouchers for the purchase of housing,
 - the majority of those persons were not IDPs and had not been registered as persons in need of housing,
 - no social tenancy agreements had been concluded with them,
 - they had accumulated debts for communal charges,
- the buildings of the temporary facility were not in conformity with sanitary and anti-fire standards.
Having regard to the above, the Town Council considered, with reference to the judgments of 28 September 2010 and 6 September 2011, that the respondents had been occupying the living premises in question unlawfully and had to be evicted together with their respective families.
On 4 September 2013 the District Court ordered the eviction of thirty-five persons including the applicant.
The District Court found, in particular, that on 6 September 2011 it had ordered the Town Council to prepare and submit to the court eviction claims in respect of persons who were unlawfully living in the premises of “Promzhilbaza”. It further established that no rent agreement had been concluded by the Town Council and the defendants had no IDP status. The District Court further referred to its findings in the judgment of 28 September 2010 as regards the incompatibility of “Promzhilbaza” with anti-fire rules. The District Court further held that according to the minutes of the meeting of 5 June 2013, the working group of the relevant Ministry of the Republic of Ingushetia had decided to deliver to the defendants the housing vouchers.
The applicant was not present at the hearing of the District Court. She submitted that she had not been duly notified of that hearing and therefore, could not attend it. Between 1 and 7 September 2013 she and one of her children had been undergoing an outpatient treatment in a hospital. She learnt about the eviction order adopted by the District Court on 9 October 2013, when she received a copy of it with an accompanying letter.
The applicant appealed against the eviction order on the grounds that she had been living in “Promzhilbaza” lawfully as an IDP. The District Court had not clarified the most relevant circumstances of the case, for instance the fact that on the date when the eviction order had been adopted, she had been still in need of housing and the Town Council had not provided any evidence to the contrary.
On 26 December 2013 the Supreme Court of the Republic of Ingushetia (“the Supreme Court”) upheld the District Court’s judgment. The Supreme Court held, in particular, that the applicant had not concluded any rent agreement in respect of the premises which she had been occupying, and therefore, the District Court had ordered her eviction in accordance with law.
On an unspecified date the applicant was evicted from the flat.
On 17 April 2014 the enforcement proceedings were terminated.
In August 2014 the FMS refused to further extend the applicant’s IDP status on the grounds that between 3 December 2013 and 14 April 2014 she had been the owner of a flat in the town of Malgobek, Republic of Ingushetiya, and between 25 February and 22 March 2011 she also owned 1/30 of another flat in the town of Magas, Republic of Ingushetia.
The applicant contested that decision in a court on the grounds that the first flat had been the social housing of her parents, which was transferred to her ownership in December 2013 by way of privatisation. In April 2014 she sold it to a third party. Since then she has been living in that flat under a commercial rent agreement. She became the owner of 1/30 of the second property by using her “Mother’s voucher”.
On 1 September 2014 the Malgobekskiy District Court, Republic of Ingushetia, ordered the FMS to extend the applicant’s IDP status for a oneyear period and to reinstate her on the list of IDPs in need of housing. The court found that de facto the first property had not been purchased by the applicant and that 1/30 of the second property belonging to the applicant had not solved her housing problems. The court concluded that the applicant had not had any property or any other housing to live in.
On 5 February 2015 the Supreme Court upheld that judgment. The Supreme Court noted, in particular, that the applicant and her children were entitled to receive housing measuring at least 90 square metres on the basis of the statutory standard of 18 square metres per person, whereas the total surface of all property purchased by the applicant had been 40 square metres. There had been no other evidence to prove that the applicant had arranged her housing situation.
Following those decisions, the FMS extended the applicant’s IDP status until 5 February 2016.