The applicant was born in 1979 and is detained in Diyarbakır prison. The applicant was represented by Ms Z. Turhallı, a lawyer practising in Paris.
The Government were represented by their Agent.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 12 November 1999 a clash broke out between the members of the PKK (Workersʼ Party of Kurdistan, an illegal armed organisation) and the security forces in Kurtalan as a result of which ten PKK members were killed and fourteen others, including five injured, were captured with their weapons and arrested. The applicant was amongst the injured PKK members and was arrested while in possession of a Kalashnikov rifle.
On 13 November 1999 Kurtalan magistrate’s court ordered the applicant’s detention on remand in absentia given that he had been hospitalised as he had been injured during the clash with the security forces.
On 14 November 1999 a single judge at the Diyarbakır State Security Court read out the order about his detention to him and he was taken to Diyarbakır D-Type Prison.
On 15 December 1999 the applicant made statements to the police in the absence of a lawyer, explaining how he had joined the PKK. The applicant did not give any statement regarding the incidents that took place on 12 November 1999.
On 24 December 1999 the applicant made statements to the public prosecutor in the absence of a lawyer, reiterating the statements that he had made to the police. He added, however, that on the night of the armed clash he had been sleeping in the fields around Kurtalan, and had woken up to the sound of gunfire. Subsequently, he had been wounded in his arm and back and had lost consciousness. The applicant further stated that he had been carrying a Kalashnikov rifle with him, but asserted that he had not taken part in any armed act and that, in any event, he would have surrendered regardless of having been captured by the security forces.
On 6 January 2000 the public prosecutor at the Diyarbakır State Security Court filed an indictment with that court, charging the applicant together with other individuals, under Article 125 of the former Criminal Code, with seeking to destroy the unity of the Turkish State and to remove part of the country from the State’s control.
During the trial, the applicant was represented by his defence counsel.
At a hearing held on 2 May 2000 the applicant gave evidence before the Diyarbakır State Security Court and, while confirming the information about his background and his involvement in the illegal organisation, he once again claimed that he had been wounded while sleeping at the scene of the incident with a Kalashnikov rifle he had taken from a female member who had not been able to carry it. As a result, he claimed that he had not used it during the clash.
The applicant’s defence counsel frequently submitted that his actions, as they had been explained by him, had merely constituted the offence of membership of an illegal organisation and requested that he be released pending trial.
On 27 October 2009 Diyarbakır Assize Court found the applicant guilty under Article 125 of the then Criminal Code and sentenced him to life imprisonment. The trial court rejected the applicant’s submission that he had not committed any armed act, holding that he had been present at the scene of the incident with a rifle and formed part of the group of terrorists who had had an armed clash with the security forces. As a result, the trial court found him criminally responsible for the armed clash, which constituted the material element of the offence prescribed under Article 125 of the then Criminal Code. In the part entitled “general assessment regarding the applicant” the trial court referred to the available information regarding the applicant’s involvement in the PKK, which appears to have been mentioned by him during both the preliminary investigation stage and the trial.
The applicant’s lawyer appealed and the Court of Cassation upheld the judgment.
The relevant provisions of the former Code of Criminal Procedure (Law no. 1412), namely Articles 135, 136 and 138, provided that anyone suspected or accused of a criminal offence had a right of access to a lawyer from the moment he or she was taken into police custody. In accordance with section 31 of Law no. 3842 of 18 November 1992, which amended the legislation on criminal procedure, the above-mentioned provisions were not applicable to persons accused of offences falling within the jurisdiction of the State Security Courts. On 15 July 2003, by virtue of Law no. 4928, the restriction on an accused’s right of access to a lawyer in proceedings before the State Security Courts was lifted (see Salduz v. Turkey [GC], no. 36391/02, §§ 27-29, ECHR 2008).