The case originated in an application (no. 12317/06) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Ms Zenfira Abartsumovna Akopyan (“the applicant”), on 14 March 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr G.A. Maryanovskiy, a lawyer practising in Kharkiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their then Agent, Mr N. Kulchytskyy.
On 9 July 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1953 and lives in Kharkiv.
In 1985 she got married and gave birth to her first daughter. In 1987 she gave birth to her second daughter.
The applicant’s relationship with her husband deteriorated and in August 1994 she and her daughters moved into a house rented by her husband in the village of Pisochyn. Her husband visited his daughters from time to time.
In late November or the beginning of December 1994 the applicant’s husband took the children back to Kharkiv. The applicant was left alone.
On 17 December 1994 the applicant was admitted to Kharkiv Regional Psychiatric Hospital (“the psychiatric hospital”), a State-run institution. According to the medical records, the applicant was brought by ambulance since she was in a reactive state and showed signs of mental disorder.
Soon after her admission to the psychiatric hospital, the applicant was diagnosed as suffering from paranoid schizophrenia and given treatment.
Between January 1995 and November 1997 the applicant unsuccessfully and repeatedly asked to be discharged from the psychiatric hospital and lodged complaints about her internment. During that time the applicant was provided with neuroleptic treatment.
On 7 November 1997 the applicant escaped from the psychiatric hospital and found shelter with some acquaintances. By that time she was divorced.
On 23 December 1997, at the applicant’s request, she was admitted to Kharkiv Municipal Psychiatric Hospital for in-patient psychiatric assessment. According to the medical records, during the applicant’s stay in the municipal hospital she did not take any medicine; discussions with psychiatrists were the only treatment.
On 4 February 1998 the applicant was discharged from that hospital with the conclusion that her mental health was normal.
Subsequently, the applicant re-established contact with her children and started living with them.
Following the applicant’s complaint, on 17 February 1998 the Kharkiv Regional Prosecutor’s Office instituted criminal proceedings against P., the applicant’s doctor, on suspicion of unlawful placement of the applicant in a psychiatric hospital, an offence under Article 123-2 of the Criminal Code of 1960.
On 21 July 1998 an expert panel conducted a forensic psychiatric examination and found that the applicant was not suffering from any mental illness. It further concluded that the applicant’s admission to the psychiatric hospital on 17 December 1994 might have been necessitated by her state of health; however, during her stay in the psychiatric hospital she had been wrongly diagnosed, she had not been assessed comprehensively, and she had not been provided with correct medical treatment from the outset, in December 1994.
On 9 October 1998 the expert panel additionally concluded that the applicant could have been discharged from the psychiatric hospital on 17 January 1995 on the basis of her discharge request, since her mental state had not suggested that she had posed a danger to herself or to the others.
On 24 February 1999 the applicant was recognised as a civil claimant within the framework of the criminal proceedings.
On 25 February 1999 the charges against P. were classified as negligence in the performance of official duties which resulted in grave consequences for the applicant.
On 9 April 1999 P. was committed to stand trial in the Kharkivskyy District Court.
On 20 June 2000 the case file was destroyed in a fire at the court house.
On 24 November 2000 the court remitted the case to the prosecutor’s office for supplementary investigation.
On 8 June 2001 the case was referred back to the court.
Between June 2001 and June 2002 some hearings were scheduled, but for various reasons none of them took place.
On 26 June 2002, in response to a complaint from the applicant, the Kharkiv Regional Department of Justice asked the President of the Kharkivskyy District Court to expedite the examination of the case, considering it to be unreasonably protracted.
On 24 February 2003 the Kharkivskyy District Court ordered the investigating authorities to carry out a further psychiatric assessment of the applicant.
On 14 April 2004 the investigating authorities ordered a psychiatric assessment of the applicant.
On 12 January 2005 the case was referred back to the court without this assessment having been carried out.
On 27 April 2005 the applicant, having regard to the fact that the case-file had been destroyed by fire in 2000, lodged another civil claim with the Kharkivskyy District Court seeking damages from P. and the psychiatric hospital for her unjustified psychiatric hospitalisation.
On 3 June 2005, at P.’s request, the Kharkivskyy District Court discontinued the criminal proceedings as time-barred.
The applicant appealed, alleging, in particular, that the impugned decision had been unlawful and that the examination of the case had been unreasonably protracted by the authorities. She further complained that the trial court had not examined her civil claim.
On 22 December 2005 the Kharkiv Regional Court of Appeal upheld the court decision of 3 June 2005.
On the same date the Court of Appeal delivered a separate ruling, drawing the attention of the Regional Council of Judges to the omissions by the Kharkivskyy District Court which had resulted in the protracted examination of the applicant’s case. It noted, in particular, that between 8 June 2001 and 3 June 2005 there had been an unjustifiable number of adjournments of the hearings and that there had been an unjustifiable two-year period of inactivity pending a forensic assessment which was never carried out.
The applicant appealed on points of law against the decision to discontinue the criminal proceedings, raising the same arguments as in her appeal. She asserted that the courts had failed to determine her civil claim.
On 13 May 2008 the Supreme Court of Ukraine rejected the applicant’s request for leave to appeal on points of law.
In March 2006 the applicant instituted separate civil proceedings against P. and the psychiatric hospital, claiming 10,000 Ukrainian hryvnias (UAH) from P. and UAH 90,000 from the psychiatric hospital by way of compensation for the damage sustained as a result of her unjustified hospitalisation. She alleged, in particular, that the three-year stay in the psychiatric hospital had caused her severe mental and physical suffering. She argued that she had constantly felt debased and treated like a deficient human being, whose opinion was of no value. In addition, she had been subjected to involuntary medical interventions. Furthermore, the applicant’s private and family life had been ruined.
On 31 January 2007 the Chervonozavodsky District Court of Kharkiv found that on 17 December 1994 the applicant had been admitted to hospital lawfully given the signs of mental disorder. It further found that during her stay in hospital, the applicant’s medical doctor, P., had been at fault for breaching a number of legal provisions governing psychiatric assistance. The court established that the requisite procedures for involuntary hospitalisation had not been followed; by contrast, if the applicant had been hospitalised as voluntarily patient, she ought to have been discharged on the basis of her request (see paragraphs 48-50 below). The court also noted that the applicant had repeatedly asked to be discharged and concluded that she could have been discharged as early as 17 January 1995 on the basis of such a request. The court found that as a result of those breaches of domestic law, the applicant had been wrongly diagnosed and mistakenly treated for a considerable time in the psychiatric hospital.
The court further noted that during her wrongful stay in the psychiatric hospital the applicant had been unable to freely exercise her rights or manage her life. It therefore concluded that the applicant had sustained non-pecuniary damage which should be compensated by the psychiatric hospital employing P. In reaching that conclusion, the court also referred to the criminal case against P. and the evidence collected by the investigating authorities in that case.
The court awarded the applicant UAH 7,000 in respect of non-pecuniary damage noting that, in determining that amount, it had taken into account the length of the applicant’s unjustified stay in the psychiatric hospital, the nature and the scope of physical and mental suffering, the enforced changes in her lifestyle, and the restrictions imposed on her rights as a citizen to freely arrange her life and take care of her own health.
The applicant appealed, seeking a higher amount of damages from both defendants.
On 19 April 2007 the Kharkiv Regional Court of Appeal upheld the judgment of 31 January 2007.
The applicant did not lodge a further appeal before the Supreme Court.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution read:
“Human and citizens’ rights and freedoms are protected by the courts.
Everyone is guaranteed the right to challenge in court the decisions, actions or omissions of bodies of State power, bodies of local self-government, officials and officers. ...
Everyone has the right to protect his or her rights and freedoms from violations and illegal encroachments by any means not prohibited by law.”
Article 123-2 of the Code provided that placement of a person in a psychiatric hospital with deliberate disregard for the fact that that person was mentally healthy was punishable by imprisonment of up to two years or correctional labour for the same period. The prison term might or might not be accompanied by an order prohibiting the perpetrator from holding certain posts or performing certain activities for a period of between one and three years.
Article 167 of the Code established criminal responsibility for negligence in performance of official duties. Under Article 167 § 2 of the Code, a failure by an official to perform his or her official duties – or improper performance thereof – owing to carelessness or inaccuracy, which resulted in grave consequences, was punishable by imprisonment of between two and five years, with a prohibition for up to five years on the perpetrator’s holding certain posts or performing certain activities, and with or without a fine of fifteen to twenty-five times the amount of the non-taxable minimum-level income.
Article 248-1 of this Code provided that anyone who considered that his or her rights or freedoms had been infringed by a decision, act or omission by a State body, legal entity or official could lodge a complaint with a court.
According to these Regulations, a person could be hospitalised in a mental health facility if he or she suffered from a mental disorder which required in-patient examination or in-patient treatment; admission to a mental health facility could be effected only by a psychiatrist with the patient’s agreement (section 15). Patients who, by virtue of their mental state, were dangerous to themselves or to others could be hospitalised in a mental health facility without their agreement on the basis of a decision by a psychiatrist. The information concerning the involuntary admission of a patient had to be communicated to his or her relatives or legal representatives, as well as to the superior health care authority, which could, if necessary, examine the lawfulness and reasonableness of the decision (section 16).
Within twenty-four hours (holidays excepted) an involuntarily admitted patient had to be examined by the board of psychiatrists. If the board found that further involuntary treatment was required, the mental health facility had to submit, within twenty-four hours, a substantiated conclusion in that regard to the chief psychiatrist of the local health care authority for his or her information and review. The information concerning the decision of the board had to be communicated to the relatives or legal representatives of the patient. An appeal against the decision of the board could be lodged with the chief psychiatrist by the patient or his or her relatives or legal representatives. If the decision had been taken by the chief psychiatrist, the appeal could be lodged with the chief psychiatrist of the superior health care authority (section 18).
A voluntarily admitted patient had to be discharged from a mental health facility if he or she had recovered from the illness, or when his or her mental state had improved to the extent that further in-patient treatment was no longer required. Such a patient also had to be discharged at his or her own request or at the request of his or her relatives or legal representatives. The discharge of such a patient could be refused if by the time of the request it had been established that the patient, by virtue of his or her mental state, posed a danger to himself or herself or to others. The matter of his or her further involuntary treatment was to be decided by the board of psychiatrists; complex and controversial cases were to be determined by the board of psychiatrists presided over by the chief psychiatrist of the local health care authority (section 20).
Involuntarily admitted patients were to be examined by the board of psychiatrists at least once per month to determine whether the involuntary treatment was to be continued or terminated. In cases of lengthy hospitalisation, the decision about its extension had to be taken every six months by the chief psychiatrist of the local health care authority on the basis of the conclusion of the board of psychiatrists that was proposing the further involuntary in-patient treatment. The health care authorities were obliged to verify the necessity for in-patient treatment, to control its length and to oversee the decisions about its extension (section 21).
The chief psychiatrists of the health care authorities were obliged to monitor, within their competence, the functioning of the mental health facilities, to take measures to protect the rights and interests of persons suffering from mental illnesses and to consider applications and complaints lodged by citizens (section 24).
Pursuant to section 40 of the Regulations, patients in psychiatric hospitals had to be given a comprehensive examination of their psychological, neurological and somatic state and, depending on the nature of the illness, be provided with all the contemporary methods of treatment and social rehabilitation.
Section 54 provided that access to the therapy departments of the hospitals, excluding visiting rooms, was allowed only to medical staff. Other persons could enter the premises only in exceptional circumstances with the permission of the hospital’s chief doctor (or deputy chief doctor) and the head of the department; in their absence permission had to be sought from the doctor on duty.
The relevant excerpts from the Report to the Ukrainian Government on the visit to Ukraine carried out by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“the CPT”) from 8 to 24 February 1998 (CPT/Inf (2002) 19) read:
“D. Psychiatric establishments
... 6. Safeguards in the context of involuntary hospitalisation
... 227. Neither of the psychiatric establishments visited possessed a clearly defined internal arrangement for the reception of complaints. The CPT considers that specific arrangements enabling patients to lodge formal complaints with a clearly-designated body and to communicate on a confidential basis with an appropriate authority outside the establishment, are essential safeguards. It accordingly recommends that the Ukrainian authorities take the necessary measures to introduce such arrangements, which should include the provision of information to patients on the possibility of making a complaint.
More generally, the CPT recommends that an introductory brochure setting forth the hospital routine and patients’ rights be devised and issued to each patient on admission, as well as to their families. Any patients unable to understand this brochure should receive appropriate assistance.
The maintenance of patients’ contact with the outside world is essential, not only for the prevention of ill-treatment but also from a therapeutic standpoint. Patients should be able to send and receive correspondence, to have access to the telephone, and to receive visits from their family and friends. Confidential access to a lawyer should also be guaranteed.
Patients at the High Security Psychiatric Hospital in Dnipropetrovsk were allowed to receive an unlimited number of visits and parcels, and to send and receive letters without restriction. However, the delegation was informed that all letters were subject to censorship by the treating doctor. The CPT would like to be informed whether this rule applies also to correspondence between a patient and his lawyer. ...
As regards the Kyiv City Centre for forensic psychiatric assessment, the CPT would like to receive information on the current arrangements for patients’ visits (including by a lawyer) and correspondence.
The CPT also attaches considerable importance to psychiatric establishments being visited on a regular basis by an independent outside body, responsible for the inspection of patients’ care. ...”
The relevant excerpts from the Report to the Ukrainian Government on the visit to Ukraine carried out by the CPT from 24 November to 6 December 2002 (CPT/Inf (2002) 19) read:
“D. Mental health establishments
...
Chernivtsi Regional Clinical Psychiatric Hospital
safeguards offered to psychiatric patients
... 166. A few patients were officially admitted on a non-voluntary basis under a civil committal procedure.
Nevertheless, as previously mentioned (cf. paragraph 146 above), a large number of the 510 adult patients in the secure wards had not consented to their admission to a psychiatric hospital and could not leave the hospital of their own free will. In practice, they did not have the slightest opportunity to benefit from the safeguards provided by the 2000 Law on Psychiatric Care, in particular the opportunity to contest their admission to hospital. In many cases, the files contained only a request for treatment made by a relative.
Worse still, an examination of the patients’ files revealed that some of them had been admitted to hospital without their consent simply on the basis of a letter from a public prosecutor or at the request of the Militia, without an involuntary committal request having been submitted to the competent court. ...”
Other relevant international material can be found in the judgment in the case of M. v. Ukraine (no. 2452/04, §§ 37-39, 19 April 2012).