The case originated in an application (no. 21984/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Mr Grigore Gorea (“the applicant”), on 7 June 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Tănase and Mr V. Nicoară, lawyers practising in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V. Pârlog.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been held in inhuman and degrading conditions, that he had been unlawfully detained and that the courts had not given relevant and sufficient reasons for his detention.
The application was allocated to the Fourth Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
On 25 October 2005 a Chamber of that Section decided to communicate the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
On 20 December 2004 a video recording of the applicant's statement in connection with Mr Sarban's arrest was broadcast on television. The applicant stated that the criminal investigation against Mr Sarban had been invented for political purposes and that there had been no lawful reason for initiating it (see Sarban v. Moldova, no. 3456/05, § 18, 4 October 2005).
In December 2006 the applicant asked the trial court to annul the Prosecutor General's decision of 29 December 2004 to re-open the criminal investigation into his case and to discontinue the investigation. He argued that the re-opening had violated both his right not to be prosecuted twice for the same act and the principle of legal certainty, contrary to Articles 22 and 287 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and Article 5 § 1 of the Convention.
In its judgment of 13 December 2006 the Buiucani District Court cited Articles 22 and 287 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”) and found that:
“...
Having examined all the evidence during the hearing, the court considers it necessary to discontinue the case due to the existence of circumstances which prevent the initiation of proceedings and the pursuance of criminal charges, namely the prohibition on repeated charges being brought against the same person for the same offence.
During the court hearing, it was established that the criminal proceedings in the case of Gorea Grigore were initiated on the basis of the criminal proceedings initiation order of 13.11.2001(vol I/fd I).
According to the order of the senior investigator at the Prosecution Office of the Town of , I. Batalai, of 12.03.2002, the criminal case against Gorea Grigore was dropped due to lack of constitutive elements for the offence (vol II/71).
By order of the Prosecutor General of the  dated 29.12.2004, the order of 12.02.2002 which had discontinued the proceedings was cancelled and the criminal proceedings were resumed. The reason given was the illegality of the order which dismissed the trial, which ran counter to the evidence gathered during the investigation, the [fact that the] circumstances allowing such a dismissal did not exist and that the contradictions between the statements of Gorea G. and those of the witnesses have not been explained and that no procedures had been carried out in order to establish the identity of the persons who had inserted the information in the record registers and statistics cards (vol II/75).
The court finds that the above conclusion is contrary to the evidence in the file.
In the order of dismissal of the criminal case, dated 12 March 2002, the evidence is described in detail and analysed and a conclusion is drawn. In the order of annulment of 29 December 2004, however, there is no analysis of the circumstances and the reasons for rejecting the conclusion regarding the lack of constitutive elements of the offence. A simple statement pointing to the illegality of this procedural act cannot serve as a legal ground to resume legal proceedings.
Therefore, the court reaches the conclusion that the order of dismissal of the criminal trial of 12 March 2002 was determined on the basis of the evidence in the file and issued in accordance with current legislation.
Therefore, in accordance with Art 287 CPP, the conditions necessary for resuming the criminal proceedings are not met; [this situation also gives rise to] a case of a person being tried twice for the same offence, which excludes the resumption of the criminal investigation and the charging of Gorea Grigore.
...
In accordance with Art 391, Code of Penal Procedure, the court decides:
CESSATION OF PROCEDURE
The criminal proceedings are discontinued against [the applicant] ... owing to the existence of circumstances which exclude the initiation of criminal proceedings and the charging of a person, namely the prohibition on repeatedly charging a person with having committed the same offence.”
This judgment was upheld by the Chişinău Court of Appeal on 12 February 2007. No appeal was lodged and the judgment became final.
Conditions of detention between 18 May and 8 June 2005
The relevant findings of the CPT read as follows:
“11. ... It appears from the findings of the CPT delegation that in 2004 the practice of detaining suspects for prolonged periods – sometimes months – in EDPs is still largely followed. Yet the visit has confirmed that EDPs of the Ministry of Internal Affairs will never be able to offer suitable detention conditions adapted to the needs of persons remanded in custody for prolonged periods.
Conditions of detention.
Institutions of the Ministry of Internal Affairs
Since 1998, when it first visited Moldova, the CPT has had serious concern about the conditions of detention in the institutions of the Ministry of Internal Affairs.
Whether one refers to the police stations or EDPs visited, the material conditions are invariably subject to the same criticism as in the past. Detention cells had no access to daylight or a very limited such access; artificial light – with rare exceptions – was mediocre. Nowhere did persons obliged to spend the night in detention receive mattresses and blankets, even those detained for prolonged periods. Those who had such items could only have obtained them from their relatives...
In sum, the material conditions remain problematic in the police stations; they remain disastrous in EDPs, continuing in many respects to amount, for the detainees, to inhuman and degrading treatment.”
The relevant provisions of the CPT standards (CPT/Inf/E (2002) 1, Rev. 2004) read as follows:
“The duty of care which is owed by the police to persons in their custody includes the responsibility to ensure their safety and physical integrity. It follows that the proper monitoring of custody areas is an integral component of the duty of care assumed by the police. Appropriate steps must be taken to ensure that persons in police custody are always in a position to readily enter into contact with custodial staff.”
The relevant provisions of the Constitution provide:
“Article 4.
(1)  Constitutional provisions for human rights and freedoms shall be understood and implemented in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and with other conventions and treaties endorsed by the .
(2)  Wherever disagreements appear between conventions and treaties signed by the  and her own national laws, priority shall be given to international regulations.
Article 25
(4)  Detention takes place on the basis of a warrant issued by a judge for a maximum period of 30 days. The lawfulness of the warrant may be appealed, in accordance with the law, to a hierarchically superior court. The period of detention may be subject to extensions only by a court, in accordance with the law, up to a total of twelve months.”
“Article 22
(1)  No one shall be prosecuted by the investigating authorities, convicted or sentenced by a court several times for the same deed.
...(3)  The decision of the investigating authority to drop the charges (scoaterea persoanei de sub urmărire penală) or to discontinue the criminal investigation (încetarea urmăririi penale)... shall prevent the re-opening of the investigation ..., except when new or recently discovered circumstances are discovered or a fundamental flaw in the previous investigation affected that decision.
Article 287
(1)  The re-opening of an investigation after its discontinuation, the dismissal of the investigation (clasarea cauzei penale) or the dropping of charges is ordered by the hierarchically superior prosecutor by means of a decision, if it is thereafter discovered that there was no reason for taking the measure or that the circumstance which had led to the discontinuation of the investigation, its dismissal or the dropping of the charges has disappeared.
...(4)  Where a decision to discontinue the investigation, to dismiss it or to drop the charges was adopted lawfully, the investigation can only be re-opened if new or recently discovered circumstances are revealed or if the decision was affected by a fundamental flaw in the previous investigation. Where a fundamental flaw in the investigation is discovered, the criminal prosecution can be re-opened not later than one year following the entry into force of the order discontinuing the criminal investigation, dismissing the criminal case or dropping the criminal charges.”
“Article 14
(1)  In placing the accused in cells the following requirements shall be observed:
2)  The following shall be detained separately from other detainees:
... (f)  persons who before their arrest worked for the public authorities, including the courts, the prosecution service, internal affairs, national security; ...”.
On 24 October 2003 the Parliament adopted decision no. 415-XV regarding the National Plan of Action in the Sphere of Human Rights for 2004-2008. The plan includes a number of objectives for 2004-2008 aimed at improving the conditions of detention, including the reduction of overcrowding, improvement of medical treatment, involvement in work and reintegration of detainees, as well as the training of personnel. Regular reports are to be drawn up on the implementation of the Plan.