The case originated in an application (no. 65324/09) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Mr Alexandr Ialamov (“the applicant”), on 28 November 2009. After his death in 2014 his father, Mr Nicolai Ialamov, expressed his wish to pursue the proceedings before the Court.
The applicant was represented by Mr T. Osoianu, a lawyer practising in Ialoveni. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent ad interim, Ms R. Revencu.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his pre-trial detention had been prolonged in an unlawful manner, contrary to Article 5 § 1 of the Convention. He also alleged that the proceedings concerning the prolongation of his detention had not complied with Article 5 § 4 of the Convention.
On 8 June 2016 the complaints concerning Article 5 §§ 1 and 4 were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government did not object to the examination of the application by a Committee.
The applicant was born in 1986 and lived in Chisinau.
On 6 April 2009 he was arrested on a charge of murder. Later he was also charged with several counts of theft.
The applicant was held in pre-trial detention until 21 January 2011, when he was acquitted of the murder charges but convicted for theft and sentenced to one year and six months’ imprisonment. In view of the duration of his pre-trial detention, he was immediately released.
During the trial the applicant’s detention was extended periodically. One of the extensions concerned the period between 1 and 30 September 2009. On 28 September 2009, two days before the expiry of that period, the prosecutor in charge of the case applied for another extension. The applicant argued in his submissions, inter alia, that such an order was not allowed because the prosecutor had failed to comply with the provisions of Article 186 § 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, that is that such an application had to be lodged at the latest five days before the expiry of the detention period. Nevertheless, the prosecutor’s application was accepted by the court on 29 September 2009 and the applicant’s pre-trial detention was prolonged by twenty-five days. An appeal by the applicant was later dismissed by the Court of Appeal without any consideration being given to his argument set out above.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure in force at the material time read as follows:
“...
(6)  Should a necessity arise to extend the period of pre-trial detention of an accused, the prosecutor shall, no later than five days before the expiry of the detention period, submit a request for the extension of that period to the investigating judge. ...”
“(2)  When the exercise of a procedural right is limited by a time-limit, failure to observe the time-limit causes the loss of that procedural right and the nullity of the acts effected in breach of the time-limit.”
In an explanatory judgment of 15 April 2013, the Plenary Supreme Court of Justice stated that an application for an extension of pre-trial detention, under Article 186 § 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which has been lodged later than five days prior to the expiry of an ongoing period of detention, must be dismissed and the detainee must be released.