The case originated in an application (no. 40107/04) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Israeli national, Mr Sorin Schumel Beraru (“the applicant”), on 12 November 2004.
The applicant was represented by Mr B. Schneider and Mr F. Schultehinrichs, lawyers practising in Frankfurt am Main. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms I. Cambrea, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged that he had not received a fair trial in the criminal proceedings against him. He complained, in particular, that the taking of evidence by the domestic courts had not been adversarial and that the rules for the taking of evidence had been infringed by the domestic courts. He also complained that the domestic courts had not observed their obligation to disclose all the evidence and had not ensured that his lawyers had proper access to the file in order to prepare his defence.
On 27 January 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1949 and lives in Tel Aviv.
In 2001, criminal proceedings were initiated against the applicant by the prosecutor’s office attached to the Supreme Court in connection with the acquisition of a Romanian company, called CICO, sold at auction by the . He was accused of committing several serious financial crimes.
In May 2001, an international arrest warrant was issued against the applicant.
On 18 February 2002, the prosecutor in charge of the case (H.G.) informed her superiors in writing that she had been offered a significant bribe (1.5 million United States dollars (USD)) in order to revoke the arrest warrant issued against the applicant. She added that her husband (H.D.) had been contacted by police officers who had offered to facilitate contact between the person used by the applicant as an intermediary, S.H., and her.
Subsequently, the prosecutor’s office attached to the Supreme Court authorised the monitoring and recording of telephone conversations between the individuals involved in the bribery.
On 14 June 2002, two of the police officers involved in the bribery, B.R. and U.I., met the prosecutor’s husband, H.D., on the terrace of a restaurant, in Bucharest, in order to give him part of the intended bribe. They were apprehended while they were handing H.D. USD 99,700.
Criminal proceedings were initiated against the applicant, S.H. and three police officers who had acted as intermediaries.
By an indictment of 11 July 2002, the applicant was accused of bribery as defined by Article 255 § 1 of the Romanian Criminal Code in conjunction with Article 7 § 2 of Law 78/2000. The other four codefendants, S.H., B.R., U.I. and B.S.L. were accused of conspiracy to commit bribery.
According to the prosecutor, the applicant had asked S.H. to resolve his legal problems in Romania. Based on the applicant’s instructions, S.H. had contacted B.S.L., a police officer whom he knew in Bucharest, and had asked him for help in contacting prosecutor H.G., who had been tasked with prosecuting the applicant’s case. B.S.L. had helped S.H. to meet two other police officers, B.R. and U.I., who it was claimed had a close relationship with the prosecutor’s husband, H.D.
S.H. and the two police officers, U.I. and B.R., met several times. The police officers informed S.H that the applicant’s legal problems could be resolved in exchange for payment of about USD 2-3 million, to be split among several individuals, including prosecutor H.G. As the applicant did not agree with the proposed figure, S.H., accompanied by U.I. and B.R. went to Tel Aviv in order to discuss the matter directly with the applicant. In Tel Aviv they agreed on the figure of USD 1.5 million but they did not agree about the way in which this sum would be paid.
On 19 March 2002 U.I. and B.R. met the prosecutor’s husband and passed on the applicant’s offer. The prosecutor and her husband informed the competent authorities about the offer of a bribe.
On 10 June 2002, S.H., accompanied by B.R. and U.I., went to Antwerp in order to get part of the money sent by the applicant from  through an intermediary. They came back on 14 June 2002. In the evening on the same date B.R. and U.I. met the prosecutor’s husband, H.D., on the terrace of a restaurant in order to give him the money. They were apprehended by investigators, who had been tipped off by H.D., while they were handing him USD 99,700.
The applicant’s version of events differs from the version set forth by the prosecutor and fully endorsed by all domestic courts.
The applicant alleged that his relationship with S.H. had been strained, as he had been aware that S.H. had filed criminal complaints and given incriminating statements against him concerning the CICO case. Furthermore, the applicant had initiated eviction proceedings against S.H. because S.H. had ceased paying the rent for a flat he had rented from the applicant.
The applicant claimed that S.H. had contacted him in Israel offering to resolve his legal problems in Romania in exchange for a monthly salary of USD 2,000, the cessation of the eviction proceedings against him and the payment of all his debts. In this connection he had cited his relationship with prosecutor H.G. and police officers who had a close relationship with H.G. and her husband. The applicant contended that he had not accepted S.H.’s offer. On the contrary, he claimed that he had gone ahead with the eviction proceedings against S.H, submitting an eviction notice to the domestic courts.
Furthermore, the applicant maintained that he had never offered H.G. any money. He claimed that the police officers had met with him in April 2002 in Tel Aviv on S.H.’s initiative and had asked for USD 1.5 million in exchange for the annulment of the international warrant. After the applicant had refused to pay the money he had contacted his lawyer, A.M., and informed him about the offer and asked him to inform the Romanian authorities about this. Despite the applicant’s manifest disagreement, S.H. had continued to involve himself in matters in Romania without his approval.
The applicant also contended that the USD 97,000 confiscated during the sting operation had not been provided by him and that, as was clear from the police officers’ statements, the money had been taken from S.H.’s flat.
The file was registered with the Bucharest Military Tribunal on 12 July 2002.
The evidence submitted by the prosecutor included transcripts of recordings of telephone conversations between the accused, some of them in Romanian, some in Hebrew.
The lawyers appointed by the applicant did not have access to the file while it was before the Bucharest Military Tribunal. On 17 July 2002 the applicant’s lawyers submitted a request to be allowed to photocopy the documents in the file. Initially, the request was denied without any reasons being given. The refusal was later justified by a lack of equipment and it was suggested that the lawyers prepare handwritten notes. The lawyers pointed out that the file ran to four hundred pages and was only available to the public for four hours a day, while just four working days remained until the hearings. The Bucharest Military Tribunal granted the lawyers limited additional time in which to consult the files and the opportunity to make up to thirty pages of photocopies from the file.
On 4 December 2002, the military court ruled that it did not have jurisdiction to examine the case. On 7 January 2003, the Supreme Court of Justice established that the Bucharest Court of Appeal was the competent court to hear the case.
The trial took place in the applicant’s absence. According to the submissions of his lawyers, he knew about the proceedings but preferred to stay in Israel because of his medical condition. Therefore, he was represented in the proceedings by lawyers of his choice.
On 3 February 2003, the applicant’s lawyers asked to photocopy the documents in the file. They again encountered difficulties in this connection and were not allowed to copy certain documents (for example, the transcripts of the tapped telephone calls).
On 21 February 2003 the applicant’s lawyers submitted that the applicant should benefit from immunity from prosecution as provided for in Article 255 § 3 of the Romanian Criminal Code in the same way that the prosecutor’s husband had. In this respect they submitted a written statement given before a public notary on 18 July 2002 by a New York lawyer, A.M. The lawyers maintained that the statement had been transmitted via facsimile to the Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. According to the statement, A.M. had rendered legal services to the applicant in connection with his trials in Romania. In April 2002 the applicant had informed him about the offer made by two police officers to obtain the annulment of the international arrest warrant issued against him in exchange for a bribe amounting to USD 1.5 million. The lawyer further stated that he had informed the Romanian authorities of this information on 10 May 2002 but that he had not received any reply.
The court sent a letter to the Ministry asking to be informed whether the statement had been sent and what follow-up action had been taken. The Ministry did not confirm the receipt of a facsimile or email from the applicant’s lawyer.
On 21 and 26 February 2003 the four co-defendants gave oral statements before the court.
On 5 and 12 March 2003 the single judge heard six witnesses, among which were prosecutor H.G. and her husband.
On 11 March 2003, one of the applicant’s lawyers lodged a request to obtain a taped copy of the phone conversations used as evidence in the file. The applicant submitted that this request had been dismissed and that in spite of their repeated requests to listen to the audio recordings of the conversations, the defence had never had the opportunity to listen to them in their entirety.
At the hearing held on 11 March 2003, when the court played the audio cassettes containing the applicant’s recorded telephone conversations, the Hebrew language interpreter appointed by the court informed it that there were discrepancies between the contents of the transcripts in the file and the recordings on the tapes presented as evidence by the prosecutor, insisting on the necessity of a technical expert report for clarification. The court ordered that an expert report on the contents and the authenticity of the audio cassettes be carried out by the National Institute for Forensic Expert Opinions (“INEC”), a public body operating under the authority of the Ministry of Justice. The expert’s fees were paid by the applicant and an expert appointed by the applicant was allowed to take part in the process of compiling the report.
On several occasions the hearings were postponed because, among other reasons, the technical expert report was not ready.
The Court of Appeal was initially composed of a single judge. Following the amendment of the Romanian Code of Criminal Procedure in the course of the proceedings, the court’s composition included a second judge for the first time at the hearing held on 21 May 2003. At that point, most of the evidence had already been presented to the single judge. That evidence was not reheard.
At a hearing held on 13 October 2003, the court of appeal took note of the fact that the accused had requested that the audio tapes be played in court in order to establish whether the transcripts from the case file corresponded with the recordings, whether the recordings had been made in line with legal requirements and whether some excerpts had been taken out of context. The domestic court further considered that given the fact that it had ordered a technical expert report on the tapes, the tapes could not be played in court until they had been analysed.
At a hearing held on 24 November 2003, the parties discussed a letter sent by INEC in which it stated that it did not have authorised experts in voice identification. The applicant’s lawyers and the other accused insisted that a new date be set for the hearing, after an expert report had been included in the materials of the file.
At a hearing held on 15 December 2003, the parties were informed that the technical report was not ready. The lawyers representing the applicant insisted that the report be finalised if the transcripts were to remain in the case file.
At a hearing held on 22 December 2003 one of the applicant’s lawyers asked for additional evidence to be taken. She submitted that more information should be obtained about the origin of the money confiscated during the sting operation. She also asked for a deposition to be taken from A.M. pursuant to a letter of request in connection with his statement made before an American public notary on 18 July 2002. The said written statement had been submitted before the court on 21 February 2003. The court dismissed these requests on the grounds that the new evidence was irrelevant.
At the same hearing, the Court of Appeal concluded that, given the letter from INEC and the conditions under which the tapes had to be analysed, the time it would take, and the position of the accused, it was impossible to prepare the report and revoked the order to prepare it.
On 8 January 2004 the lawyers appointed by the applicant sought leave from the court to withdraw their representation of the applicant on the grounds that they could not properly defend him. In this respect they relied on the fact that at the beginning of the trial they had not had any knowledge of the contents of the indictment and the evidence against their client, which had not been communicated to them. Their requests to obtain copies of the documents in the file had been systematically declined on the grounds that due to a lack of equipment only thirty pages could be photocopied (even though the file ran to several hundred pages). They had not been permitted to obtain copies of certain documents in the file. The lawyers also maintained that on 11 March 2003 they had submitted a request to obtain the transcript of the phone conversations, which had been rejected by the court by an interlocutory judgment rendered on 22 November 2003. With respect to the technical expert report concerning the tapped telephone conversations, they alleged that after the court had ordered its production on 11 April 2002, on 15 December 2003 it had reversed its decision to gather this piece of evidence, which they submitted was of overwhelming importance, without reasonable justification. They added that despite having authorised the hearing of the applicant by rogatory commission, pursuant to a letter of request by an interlocutory judgment of 19 March 2003, on 25 November 2003 the court had decided to dispense with this piece of evidence on the grounds that the defence had not taken the measures necessary for the applicant to be heard in that manner.
On 21 January 2004 INEC submitted its report, which concluded that the audio tapes were not original and therefore, in the absence of any supplementary information, they could be copies, mixes done with or without the intent to present a false record, or fabricated. It also stated that voice identification could only be carried out using original recordings and using the same equipment used for the recording, which had not been provided by the court despite repeated requests in this regard.
By a judgment rendered on 26 January 2004 the Bucharest Court of Appeal convicted the applicant of bribery and sentenced him to seven years’ imprisonment.
After presenting the prosecutor’s submissions at length, the court proceeded with its own reasoning. It presented the facts, as established by that evidence, which it held to be in line with the prosecutor’s version of events.
The Court of Appeal then stated:
“Even if all the other evidence adduced can be considered subjective to some degree, the transcripts of the phone conversations between the accused do not leave room for much doubt as to their activity, their behaviour, the way in which they intended to solve the problem, their attitude towards state institutions, as well as their opinions concerning certain colleagues (police officers), prosecutors, judges, representatives of the Intelligence Service and even leaders of the Romanian state.
[...]
Defendants U.I., B.R., S.H., and even B.S.L. tried to claim they had been incited to commit the offences they were charged with by the attitude and actions of the persons from whom they had asked for help, namely police officer H.D. and other police officers, as well as prosecutor H.G. [...]
[...]
As has been mentioned above, the telephone conversations between the accused, which were recorded over several months, show clearly and without any doubt that the accused committed with intent the crimes with which they have been charged and accepted the risks deriving from them. During the criminal trial, in an attempt to defend themselves, they argued that the recordings had been unlawfully obtained, that the transcripts did not conform to the recordings, that in parts the voices were not theirs, and that excerpts of the transcripts had been taken out of context and had not been extensively presented, all of which led to the request to hear the tapes in the presence of a Hebrew-speaking expert witness, and later to the request for a technical evaluation to be carried out. (...) At the same time, it should be noted that the only institution which had a legal obligation to carry out the analysis did not comply with that obligation and with the order of the court, rendering it impossible to admit this piece of evidence.”
The Court of Appeal emphasised the decisive role played by S.H. in the offering of the bribe:
“With S.H.’s help, defendants U.I. and B.R. travelled to Israel, where they met defendant Sorin Beraru and discussed the problems the latter was having in Romania.
They could not establish an action plan because defendant Beraru did not have confidence in the two police officers’ connections and the possible support they could obtain from such connections. On the other hand, defendants U.I. and B.R. were also unsatisfied with the result of their visit. However, the person who tried to once again establish a connection was defendant S.H., who not only bore the travel expenses and cost of accommodation for the two defendants but also obtained their visas for Israel.”
The applicant filed an appeal on points of law against the judgment of the first-instance court alleging, inter alia, that he had not been duly summoned to the proceedings, the composition of the panel of judges of the court of first instance had changed during the proceedings, the pronouncement of the judgment had not been public and that the procedural rules regarding the admission of evidence had not been observed. He also averred that there had been procedural irregularities with respect to the recording of the phone conversations and the use of their transcripts as evidence at trial. Thus, he argued that the phone conversations had not been presented in their entirety in the transcripts, as required by the Romanian Code of Criminal Procedure, and that their translation from Hebrew into Romanian had not been accurate.
He also claimed that there had been police entrapment in his case. He submitted that the first-instance court’s findings of fact had been incorrect. He insisted that he had neither offered money in exchange for a favourable outcome in the proceedings against him nor agreed to any payment by S.H. to the prosecutor in charge of his case.
In this respect, he claimed that none of the recorded phone conversations between him and S.H. could prove that he had asked S.H. to resolve his legal problems in Romania. He had been repeatedly bombarded with proposals by S.H. and the police officers, each of them trying to gain financial advantage from him. After the prosecutor’s husband had informed the Romanian authorities about the offer of a bribe, the telephone conversations he had had with S.H had no longer been recorded – despite the fact that such conversations could have been relevant as regards the conclusions drawn after the police officers’ visit to Tel Aviv and the arrangements for the payment of part of the USD 1.5 million.
The applicant further claimed that the report of the sting operation was incomplete as it did not contain any information about the origin of the money.
By a final decision of 14 May 2004, the High Court of Cassation and Justice dismissed the appeal on points of law. It confirmed the findings of fact made by the first-instance court and concluded that that court had duly analysed all the evidence before it and correctly determined that the offences charged had been made out and imposed the sentence. It based its decision on the evidence adduced before the court of first instance. It repeatedly made reference to the recorded phone conversations between the applicant and S.H., holding that it was clear from those records that the applicant had been informed by S.H. about all the steps he had taken in connection with the bribe and had given indications to S.H. as to how to act on his behalf. The final decision did not include any statement in respect of the lawfulness or admissibility of the tapes and their transcripts.
The legal provisions concerning the use of audio tapes as evidence in a criminal trial, in force at the time of the events, as well as the subsequent modifications of the law are detailed in the judgment in the case of Dumitru Popescu v. Romania (no. 2), no. 71525/01, §§ 44-46, 26 April 2007).
The Romanian Code of Criminal Procedure (CCP) provides in its Article 3859 § 1, sub-paragraph 11, that an appeal on points of law may be lodged if a first-instance court has failed to state its opinion on certain evidence or rule on motions which would guarantee the rights of the parties and influence the outcome of the proceedings. Article 38515 of the CCP further provides that if the Supreme Court of Justice allows an appeal on points of law and it is necessary to admit further evidence in order to settle the case, it shall refer the case back to the lower court or settle the case itself.