The case originated in an application (no. 36202/03) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Ivan Nikolayevich Martynov (“the applicant”), on 14 October 2003.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Mrs V. Lutkovska, succeeded by Mr Y. Zaytsev.
On 28 April 2005 the Court decided to communicate the complaint under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention concerning the non-enforcement of the judgment in the applicant’s favour to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1975 and lives in Dniprodzerzhynsk. At the material time he was an employee of the CJSC “Dniprovsky Zavod Mineralnykh Dobryv” (“the Company,” ЗАТ “Дніпровський завод мінеральних добрив”), in which the State owned 40% of the share capital. The company was therefore subject to the Law of 29 November 2001 “on the Introduction of a Moratorium on the Forced Sale of Property.”
On 10 April 2003 the Bagliysky District Court of Dniprodzerzhynsk (Баглійський районний суд м. Дніпродзержинська) ordered the Company to pay the applicant UAH 3,047.03 in salary arrears and various payments. This judgment was not appealed against and became final.
On 14 April 2003 the Bagliysky District Bailiffs’ Service (“the Bailiffs,” Відділ Державної виконавчої служби Баглійського районного управління юстиції в м. Дніпродзержинську) instituted enforcement proceedings in respect of the above judgment.
On 21 October 2003 the Bailiffs informed the applicant that the delay in the enforcement of the judgment of 10 April 2003 was due to the large number of enforcement proceedings taken against the Company, the holding of its property in a tax lien and a statutory moratorium on the forced sale of State property.
On 7 April 2004 the  (Господарський суд Дніпропетровської області) instituted bankruptcy proceedings against the Company and introduced a moratorium on payment of its debts.
On 30 May 2005 the applicant received the award due to him less UAH 200. This part of the judgment remains unenforced to the present day.
The relevant domestic law is summarised in the judgment of Sokur v. Ukraine (no. 29439/02, §§ 17-22, 26 April 2005).
In their observations on the merits of the applicant’s complaint, the Government contended that there had been no violation of Article 6 § 1.
The applicant disagreed.
The Court recalls that it has already found violations of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention in a number of similar cases (see, for instance, Sokur v. Ukraine, cited above, §§ 36-37).
There has, accordingly, been a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
Article 41 of the Convention provides:
“If the Court finds that there has been a violation of the Convention or the Protocols thereto, and if the internal law of the High Contracting Party concerned allows only partial reparation to be made, the Court shall, if necessary, afford just satisfaction to the injured party.”
The Court recalls that the judgment of 10 April 2003 remains partly unenforced and finds that the Government should pay the applicant the outstanding debt in order to satisfy his claim for pecuniary damage. Further, the Court considers that the applicant must have sustained non-pecuniary damage as a result of the violation found. Making its assessment on an equitable basis, as required by Article 41 of the Convention, the Court awards the applicant EUR 1,000 (one thousand euros) in respect of nonpecuniary damage.
The applicant did not submit any separate claim under this head. The Court therefore makes no award.
The Court considers it appropriate that the default interest should be based on the marginal lending rate of the European Central Bank, to which should be added three percentage points.