The case originated in an application (no. 35049/08) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Ali Serce (“the applicant”), on 15 July 2008.
The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, of the Minstry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the conditions of his detention had been inhuman and that his right to respect for his family life had been breached as a result of the Romanian authorities’ refusal to transfer him to Turkey to serve his prison sentence there, close to his wife and children.
On 7 October 2013 the above-mentioned complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible. The Turkish Government, who had been informed of their right to intervene in the proceedings, under Article 36 § 1 of the Convention, gave no indication that they wished to do so.
The applicant was born in 1966 and is currently being detained in Giurgiu Prison. He is married and has four children. His wife resides in Turkey together with their children.
On 28 June 2005 the Bucharest County Court convicted the applicant of aggravated murder and sentenced him to eighteen years’ imprisonment. The Bucharest County Court also decided that the applicant would be deported to Turkey at the end of his prison term.
In his letters to the Court, which he began sending on 15 July 2008, the applicant complained of the inhuman conditions in which he was being detained, first in Rahova Prison and then in Giurgiu Prison. He described a severe lack of hygiene in both prisons, with insufficient cleaning and personal hygiene products being provided by the prison authorities. He alleged that he could not sleep at night because of bed bugs. He also complained that the food was not adapted to his diabetes.
The applicant further alleged that throughout his detention in both prisons he had not been included in any educational activities and had not been allowed to do any work. He had thus been unable to integrate, to be re-educated or to have the term of his prison sentence reduced.
In 2008 the applicant was diagnosed with type II diabetes and a sleep disorder.
In Rahova Prison the applicant was detained in cells measuring 21 sq. m, which he shared with seven other prisoners (2.62 sq. m of personal space). The cells contained eight beds, a window measuring 1.2 by 1.2 m and their own bathroom with a shower, a sink and a toilet. Cold water was always available and hot water was available twice per week. Heating was provided during the winter up to a maximum temperature of 18oC.
The Government submitted that, whenever the presence of bugs was noticed, disinfection operations took place without delay. They submitted documents showing that disinfection had been performed two or three times per year in 2005, 2007 and 2008 in the cells occupied by the applicant in Rahova Prison.
The food provided to the applicant was adequate and adapted to his diabetes by substituting pork with beef.
The applicant participated in educational and recreational activities whenever necessary. The Government further indicated that the applicant’s reduced participation in the above-mentioned activities was due to his state of health.
The Government submitted that on 17 January 2009 the applicant had been transferred to Giurgiu Prison where he was currently being held in a cell measuring 21.47 sq. m together with five other prisoners (3.57 sq. m of personal space). The cell contained six beds, three bedside tables, one bench, one table and a box for shoes. It had a window measuring 1.5 by 1.8 m and a bathroom with a shower, a sink and a toilet. During the winter, a temperature of 19oC was ensured in all the cells. Hot water was provided twice per week.
With respect to the prisoners’ personal hygiene, once per month the prison administration provided each prisoner with two bars of soap, one tube of toothpaste, one tooth brush, one tube of shaving cream, one razor, and toilet paper. Concerning the hygiene in the cell, the Government submitted that prisoners were responsible for cleaning the cells and were provided with cleaning products by the prison administration. Regular disinfection was conducted once every three months.
The applicant received a menu adapted for his diabetes, which included 125 grams of meat per day.
With respect to activities in Giurgiu Prison, the Government submitted that in December 2011 the applicant had watched a folk music concert and in December 2012 he had taken part in a discussion on religious themes conducted by the orthodox priest. Also, once in 2013 and once in 2014 the applicant had taken part in a quiz on Romanian history.
In 2007 the applicant lodged a request with the Romanian Ministry of Justice based on the provisions of the Convention between Romania and Turkey on the transfer of convicted persons, seeking to serve the rest of his sentence in a Turkish prison. According to the applicant, he wanted the transfer in order to be closer to his family, who lived in a Turkish village in humble conditions and did not have the means to travel to Romania.
The Romanian Ministry of Justice acted on the applicant’s request and initiated the transfer proceedings. As a result, on 5 June 2007 the Ankara District Court acknowledged the judgment of the Romanian court which had convicted the applicant and decided that the rest of the applicant’s sentence should be served in Turkey.
On 4 February 2008 the applicant’s transfer request was brought before the Bucharest Court of Appeal. The applicant claimed before the court that such a transfer would be in accordance with the convention signed between Romania and Turkey and would allow him to see his children and to receive visits from his family, who would provide him with adequate food and treatment for his diabetes.
In a judgment of 4 April 2008 the Bucharest Court of Appeal rejected the applicant’s transfer request, on the ground that Turkey had less severe legal provisions on conditional release, which might lead to the applicant’s release in a shorter period of time. The punitive and educational purpose of his sentence would thus fail to be achieved.
On 15 December 2011 the Bucharest Court of Appeal rejected with the same reasoning a new transfer request lodged by the applicant.
Excerpts from the relevant provisions concerning the rights of detainees, namely Law no. 275/2006, are quoted in Iacov Stanciu v. Romania (no. , §§ 11316, 24 July 2012).
Excerpts from the relevant parts of the General Reports of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“the CPT”) are quoted in Iacov Stanciu (cited above, §§ 121-23).
The CPT did not visit Giurgiu Prison, and in Rahova Prison only visited the section for minors. However, a Romanian NGO, the Association for the Defence of Human Rights in Romania – the Helsinki Committee (APADOR-CH) visited Rahova Prison in February 2009 and reported that the prison was overcrowded and that no activities of any type were proposed to prisoners. The same NGO also visited Giurgiu Prison in 2009 and reported overcrowding, a lack of hygiene in the shower areas and the food-preparation area, and the fact that the spaces provided for various sportive or cultural activities were left unused.
The Government submitted one decision rendered by the post sentencing judge in Oradea Prison on 11 July 2011, admitting a prisoner’s complaint and ordering the prison authorities to provide the necessary cleaning products in accordance with the law. There was no mention of whether that decision was final.
The Government also submitted two additional decisions issued by the post sentencing judge rejecting prisoners’ complaints concerning the lack of activities and opportunities to work.
Lastly, they submitted two final judgments delivered by the High Court of Cassation and Justice, in respect of proceedings brought by detainees under articles 998-999 of te Civil Code, seeking compensation for alleged breaches of their right to correspondence and medical assistance, and for a specific incident of failure to provide hot water for a period of three months. The High Court disagreed with the decisions taken by the lower courts on the merits and on appeal in those cases, and awarded the applicants up to 3,000 euros in respect of non-pecuniary damage.
The Convention between Romania and Turkey concerning the transfer of convicted persons (“the convention”) was ratified by the Romanian Parliament by Law no. 99/1992. Romania and Turkey thereby agreed to the mutual transfer of convicted persons under certain conditions.
The convention sets out the following cases when transfer must be refused:
“The transfer of a convicted person shall be refused:
a)  if one of the two states considers that the transfer may breach its sovereignty, security, public order, fundamental principles of the rule of law or other fundamental interests;
b)  if the competent authorities from the administering state have issued a final judgment against the same convicted person, for the same acts;
c)  if the judgment against the convicted person cannot be enforced in the administering state due to prescription or any other cause which, according to the legislation of the said state, prevents the enforcement of the sentence;
d)  if the person was sentenced for a crime of a strictly military nature.”
The relevant provisions of Law no. 302/2004 on international judicial cooperation on criminal matters, in force at the relevant time, read as follows:
“A request for the transfer of a convicted person may be refused, mainly, for the following reasons:
...
c) if there are sufficient reasons to believe that, once transferred, the convicted person may be set free immediately or after much too short a term compared with the rest of the sentence to be served in accordance with the Romanian law ...”