The case originated in an application (no. 44316/07) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Vladimir Maryanovich Chernetskiy (“the applicant”), on 19 September 2007.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently, Mr I. Lishchyna.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the restrictions on his right to remarry during his detention in prison had been contrary to Article 12 of the Convention.
On 10 January 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1963. In 2002 he was convicted and sentenced to fifteen years’ imprisonment. At the relevant time the applicant was serving his sentence in a prison.
On 1 February 2005, following a request submitted by the applicant’s wife in accordance with Article 107 of the Family Code, the local civil status registry dissolved their marriage. The applicant was sent a notification about the divorce.
Later in February 2005 the applicant and his new female partner, K., were prevented from marrying as the applicant had not obtained a divorce certificate, as required by Article 116 of the Family Code. That document could be obtained exclusively by the applicant at the relevant civil status registry.
The applicant requested that he be escorted to the registry in order to obtain the divorce certificate. His request was refused as the domestic law did not provide for the escorting of prisoners on such grounds.
On 16 June 2005 the prosecutor informed the applicant that under Article 116 of the Family Code he had the right to remarry after he had obtained a divorce certificate. However, this would be possible only after his release from prison.
On 17 August 2005 the Deputy Minister of Justice considered a complaint lodged by the applicant concerning the authorities’ failure to provide him with a divorce certificate for the purpose of remarriage. He stated that under domestic law it was not possible to carry out the relevant actions in prison; nor was it possible to issue a power of attorney for another person to act on behalf of the applicant in relation to that matter. The Deputy Minster informed the applicant that amendments to the domestic legislation had been prepared.
On 23 January 2006 and 20 July 2007 the Ombudsman’s Office informed the applicant that they were aware of that issue and that amendments to the domestic legislation had been prepared by the Ministry of Justice.
On 30 July 2007 the State Prison Department informed the applicant that he would be able to obtain a divorce certificate after his release from prison. The amendments to the domestic legislation had yet to be considered.
On 16 October 2008 the Ministry of Justice issued Order no. 1761/5 providing for a temporary procedure for registering divorces and issuing divorce certificates in prisons.
In December 2008 the applicant was personally informed of the procedure introduced by the Ministry of Justice.
On 6 February 2009, at the applicant’s request, he was provided with a divorce certificate in prison.
On 13 July 2009 the applicant and K. applied for the registration of their marriage. On 14 August 2009 the local civil status registry registered their marriage.
.  The relevant provisions of the Code provide:
“1. Family rights are closely linked to the person and therefore cannot be transferred to another person. ...”
Article 21. The notion of marriage
“1. A marriage is a union between a woman and a man registered in the State civil status registry.
The situation of a woman and a man living together as a family without being married shall not give rise to the rights and obligations of a married couple. ...”
“1. A marriage may be dissolved by the State civil status registry at the request of one of the spouses if the other spouse:
...
3) has been convicted of crime and sentenced to imprisonment for a period of three years or more. ...”
“... 2. The divorce shall be attested by a divorce certificate ...”
“1. After a person has dissolved his or her marriage and obtained a divorce certificate, that person shall have the right to remarry.”
.  Under Article 110 of the Code, prisoners are entitled to short meetings, lasting no longer than four hours, and to long meetings, lasting no longer than three days. Short meetings may be granted to prisoners to meet with relatives or other persons and shall be held in the presence of a prison officer. Long meetings may be granted to prisoners to meet with close relatives only (spouse, parents, children, foster parents, foster children, siblings, grandparents, grandchildren). Long meetings may also be granted to a prisoner to meet with the person who lived with him or her as a spouse without being married, provided that they have common, minor children. The costs of using the meeting rooms should be covered by the prisoners or the visitors.
.  The Order provided for a temporary procedure for the registration of divorces in prisons. At the request of a prisoner, an official from the local civil status registry could register a divorce and issue a divorce certificate in a prison.