The case originated in three applications (nos. 37037/03, 39053/03 and 2469/04) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Russian nationals, Mr Osman Borisovich Chaushev, Mr Valeriy Aliyevich Aybazov, and Mr Timur Kazbekovich Shamanov (“the applicants”), on 13 November 2003.
The applicants were represented by Ms Z. Korkmazova, a lawyer practising in the town of Ust-Dzheguta. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Ms V. Milinchuk and Mr G. Matyushkin, representatives of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants complained, in particular, about having been tried behind closed doors.
On 7 January and 7 February 2008 this complaint was communicated to the Government.
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits, but the Court dismissed the objection.
The applicants were born in 1977, 1969, and 1975 respectively and at the time the case was introduced were imprisoned in Kochubeyevskoye and Aleksandria.
They were among 17 people facing assorted charges related to the socalled Karachay-Circassian Jamaat, a militant Islamist underground movement active in the North Caucasus in the late 1990s and early 2000s.
When the case came to trial before the Stavropol Regional Court, on 12 April 2002 a judge ordered – without giving any explanation – that the trial be held behind closed doors in remand prison IZ26/2 in Pyatigorsk.
On 11 July 2002 the court sentenced the applicants to ten, five, and six years respectively. The applicants lodged an appeal with the Supreme Court, complaining, among other things, that the trial had been closed to the public. On 14 May 2003 the Supreme Court upheld the judgment without replying to the complaint.
The Code of Criminal Procedure 1960, as in force at the material time, read as follows:
In all courts hearings shall be public, save for when this may endanger State secrets.
A closed hearing is also possible, on a reasoned ruling of a court or order of a judge, in trials of persons younger than 16, in trials of sex crimes, or in other trials in order to preserve the confidentiality of participants’ intimate lives.
A closed hearing shall respect all procedural rules.
Judgments shall in all cases be proclaimed publicly.
The Law on Combatting Terrorism 1998, as in force at the material time, read as follows:
Criminal terrorist trials ... may, on a ruling of a court, be heard in closed hearings that respect all procedural rules.