.  The case originated in an application (no. 32538/10) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mr Eldar Ziyadkhan oglu Ahmadov (Eldar Ziyadxan oğlu Əhmədov – “the applicant”), on 12 June 2010.
.  At the time of lodging the application, the applicant was represented by Ms G. Guliyeva, a lawyer based in Lisbon. On 21 January 2019 the President of the Section gave Ms G. Guliyeva leave to represent the applicant in the proceedings before the Court (Rule 36 § 4 (a) in fine of the Rules of Court). By a letter of 4 December 2019 Ms G. Guliyeva informed the Court of her withdrawal from the applicant’s representation. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
.  The applicant alleged that the denial of his Azerbaijani citizenship by the domestic authorities which had refused to issue him with an identity card had amounted to a breach of his rights guaranteed by Article 8 of the Convention.
.  On 23 May 2018 notice of the complaint concerning Article 8 of the Convention was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
.  The applicant, who is of Azerbaijani ethnicity, was born in Marneuli (Georgia) in 1973 and lives in Baku.
.  On 27 September 1990 he was issued with a passport of the Soviet Union by the authorities of the Soviet Socialist Republic of Georgia.
.  After having graduated from secondary school in Georgia in 1991, the applicant moved to Baku, where he studied at the Azerbaijan Oil and Chemistry Institute. He was also registered on 9 October 1991 at a dormitory of that institute in Baku. As from 1 February 1999 the applicant was registered at his sister’s place of residence in Baku.
.  On 22 September 1998 the Nasimi District Police Office (“the NDPO”) inserted a second photograph into the applicant’s Soviet passport and authorised it with a seal. It also put a stamp in his Soviet passport which indicated that he was a “citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan” (Azərbaycan Respublikasının vətəndaşı).
.  The applicant was indicated as a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan and a resident of Baku on the birth certificate of his son (Z.A., born in Georgia on 5 August 2002) issued by the Georgian authorities.
.  It appears from a letter from the Sabunchu First Electoral Constituency no. 26 dated 10 June 2008 that the applicant had been on the electoral roll as a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan since 1991. It further appears from the documents in the case file that the applicant regularly received from the relevant electoral constituency polling cards for various elections held in Azerbaijan and cast his vote in the presidential elections of 15 October 2008 and the referendum of 18 March 2009.
.  According to the applicant’s military identity card (hərbi bilet) issued on 27 September 2008 by the Sabunchu District Military Commissariat, the applicant was registered as a reserve officer and obtained the military rank of lieutenant by a decision dated 18 August 1996 of the Ministry of Defence of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
.  On an unspecified date in 2008 the applicant applied to the Sabunchu District Police Office (“the SDPO”) for an identity card.
.  By a letter of 26 September 2008, the SDPO refused to issue him with an identity card, relying on Article 5 of the Law on Citizenship of 30 September 1998. It was indicated in the letter that in accordance with Article 5 of the Law on Citizenship individuals who were resident in Azerbaijan before the entry into force of that Law were considered citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan. However, the applicant’s registration at a place of residence in Azerbaijan had been temporary at the relevant time because he had been registered as a student on account of his studies.
.  In a letter dated 22 December 2008, the State Migration Service (“the SMS”) informed the applicant that he was not considered to be a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan in accordance with the Law on Citizenship.
.  On 19 February 2009 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Sabunchu District Court against the SDPO and the SMS. He asked the court to declare unlawful the respondents’ refusal to recognise his Azerbaijani citizenship and to order them to issue him with an identity card. In support of his claim, the applicant submitted that he had lived continuously in Azerbaijan since 1991 and had been considered by the Azerbaijani authorities as a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan. In that connection, he referred to the fact that on 22 September 1998 the NDPO had put a stamp in his Soviet passport confirming his Azerbaijani citizenship, that he had been registered as a reserve officer in the Azerbaijani army, and that he had participated in all the elections held in Azerbaijan. He further disputed the interpretation of Article 5 of the Law on Citizenship made by the the SDPO and the SMS, pointing out that he had been duly registered in Azerbaijan before the entry into force of that Law and should thus be considered a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan on those grounds. He also noted that the Law in question did not draw a distinction between temporary and permanent registration.
.  In the course of the court proceedings, the representative of the SMS asked the Sabunchu District Court to dismiss the applicant’s claim, arguing that the applicant could not be considered a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan under Article 5 of the Law on Citizenship as it concerned only those who had had a permanent registration in Azerbaijan before the entry into force of that Law. The representative further stated that, as the interpretation of the initial wording of Article 5 of the Law on Citizenship had given rise to disputes, on 24 June 2008 that provision had been amended.
.  On 1 April 2009 the Sabunchu District Court allowed the applicant’s claim and ordered the SDPO to issue an identity card to him. The court first established that the applicant had been continuously resident in Azerbaijan since 1991 and this fact had not been contested by the respondent domestic authorities. It further held that the relevant applicable domestic law in the present case was the wording of Article 5 of the Law on Citizenship as in force before 24 June 2008 which provided that those who had been resident in Azerbaijan before the entry into force of that Law were considered as citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan. Citing the Court’s case-law, the court also found that the law should comply with the requirements of the quality of law, which should be accessible to the person concerned and foreseeable as to its effects. In that connection, it held that the SMS’s argument that the applicant could not be considered a citizen because he had only a temporary registration at a place of residence as a student could not be accepted because the Law on Registration at Place of Residence and Stay did not draw a distinction between temporary and permanent registration and cited dormitories among places of residence where a person could reside. The court also held that the applicant had entered into various types of relationships with the Azerbaijani State since 1991 which belonged, by their nature, to the category of the relationships that exist only between a State and its citizens. In particular, it referred to the applicant’s participation in elections, his registration as a reserve military officer by the Ministry of Defence and the existence of a stamp confirming his Azerbaijani citizenship in his Soviet passport. Lastly, the court noted that the specification of the identity card of the Republic of Azerbaijan had been established by a decision of the Cabinet of Ministers dated 2 February 1999 and that until that date an accepted identity document of a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan had been a Soviet passport with a stamp confirming Azerbaijani citizenship.
.  On an unspecified date the SMS lodged an appeal against that judgment, disputing the interpretation of the relevant law by the firstinstance court. The SMS also complained of the first-instance court’s failure to examine whether the applicant had been a citizen of the Republic of Georgia. In that connection it referred to a document from the State Border Service confirming that the applicant had crossed the AzerbaijaniGeorgian State border on 25 and 27 October 2002 using a Georgian passport which had been valid until 24 January 2007.
.  It appears from the transcripts of the court hearings that the applicant asked the appellate court to dismiss the SMS’s appeal. He also pointed out that it had been noted that he had been a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan on the birth certificate of his son issued by Georgia and that, in any event, the fact that he had Georgian citizenship did not prove that he was not a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan or had lost his Azerbaijani citizenship. It also appears from the documents submitted to the appellate court by the State Border Service and the Sabunchu First Electoral Constituency no. 26 that Soviet passports had been used in Azerbaijan for crossing State borders until 1 January 2005 and for electoral purposes until the parliamentary elections of October 2005.
.  On 27 July 2009 the Baku Court of Appeal quashed the first-instance court’s judgment and delivered a new judgment on the merits, dismissing the applicant’s claim. The appellate court held that the applicant could not be considered to be a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan since when the Law on Citizenship had entered into force on 7 October 1998 he had not had a permanent registration at his place of residence in Azerbaijan. The appellate court also found that the applicant’s other arguments (his participation in elections and referendums, ownership of immovable property in Azerbaijan, his being noted as an Azerbaijani citizen on his son’s birth certificate) in favour of his Azerbaijani citizenship did not constitute grounds to be considered a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan. The appellate court’s judgment was, however, silent as regards the stamp in the applicant’s Soviet passport confirming his Azerbaijani citizenship and his registration as a reserve officer in the Azerbaijani army.
.  On 7 September 2009 the applicant lodged a cassation appeal against that judgment, reiterating his previous arguments.
.  On 15 December 2009 the Supreme Court upheld the appellate court’s judgment. The relevant part of the decision reads as follows:
“... The arguments (participation in elections and referendums, ownership of immovable property in the Republic of Azerbaijan, [the applicant’s] Azerbaijani citizenship’s being noted on the birth certificate of his son, and so forth) relied on by the applicant ... in his application in order to establish his right to Azerbaijani citizenship do not constitute grounds for establishing his right to ... citizenship.
In reply to the arguments of [the applicant]’s cassation appeal, the court bench considers that Article 5 (I) § 1 of the Law on Citizenship of the Republic of Azerbaijan (both in its initial and subsequent wording) concerns those individuals who held citizenship of the Republic of Azerbaijan before the date of the entry into force of this Law and had been registered at a place of residence in the Republic of Azerbaijan before the date of the entry into force of that Law. As the applicant ... had not held citizenship of the Azerbaijani Republic before the date of the entry into force of that law, the fact that he is currently registered at a place of residence in the Republic of Azerbaijan is not grounds for establishing his right to citizenship of the Republic ...”
.  On 12 September 2013 the applicant lodged a new complaint with the Baku Administrative-Economic Court no. 1 against the Ministry of Internal Affairs, asking the court to order the respondent to issue him an identity card.
.  On 14 October 2013 the Baku Administrative-Economic Court no. 1 allowed the applicant’s claim and ordered the delivery of an identity card to him. The court held that, as the applicant had been registered at a place of residence in the Republic of Azerbaijan before the date of the entry into force of the Law on Citizenship, he should be considered as a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan within the meaning of Article 5 of that Law.
.  On 14 January 2014 an identity card of the Republic of Azerbaijan was issued to the applicant.
.  Following an appeal lodged by the SMS, on 8 December 2015 the Baku Court of Appeal quashed the first-instance court’s judgment, finding that the applicant’s complaint could not be examined by the court. The appellate court held that a similar complaint had already been the subject of court proceedings and that there had been a final decision in that connection. It also found that the identity card delivered to the applicant on the basis of the judgment of 14 October 2013 should be invalidated.
.  On 26 January 2017 the Supreme Court upheld the Baku Court of Appeal’s decision of 8 December 2015.
.  At the material time, the relevant provisions of the Constitution provided as follows:
Article 52.  Right to citizenship
“A person affiliated to the Azerbaijani State, who has a political and legal relationship with, as well as reciprocal rights and duties in respect of, the Republic of Azerbaijan, is a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan. A person born on the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan or to citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan is a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan. A person is the citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan if one of his or her parents is a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan.”
Article 53.  Guarantee of the right to citizenship
“I.  A citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan may not be deprived in any case of citizenship of the Republic of Azerbaijan. ...”
.  Article 5 § 1 of the Law on Citizenship of 30 September 1998, which entered into force on 7 October 1998, provided as follows:
Article 5.  Affiliation to citizenship of the Republic of Azerbaijan
“The following individuals shall be considered citizens of the Azerbaijani Republic:
1)  Individuals who held citizenship of the Azerbaijani Republic before the date of the entry into force of the present Law (basis: the registration of the person at a place of residence in the Republic of Azerbaijan before the date of the entry into force of this Law); ...”
.  On 24 June 2008 Article 5 § 1 of the Law on Citizenship was amended as follows:
“1)  Individuals who held citizenship of the Azerbaijani Republic before the date of the entry into force of the present Law on condition that the citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan was registered at a place of residence in the Republic of Azerbaijan before the date of the entry into force of this Law; ...”
.  In accordance with Article 6 of the Law on Citizenship, the identity card of the Republic of Azerbaijan is a document confirming the citizenship of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
.  Article 2 of the Law on Registration at Place of Residence and Stay of 4 April 1996, which entered into force on 1 January 1997, provided at the material time that the place of residence of a person is the home, apartment, service place of residence, dormitory, old or disabled people’s home, or other kind of place of residence where a person of full capacity lives permanently or majority of time as the owner, under a rental or lease agreement or on any other basis provided for by the legislation of the Republic of Azerbaijan. Under the Soviet legislation, a citizen was issued with a “registration” (propiska) at a particular address, by way of a special seal in his passport attesting to his place of permanent residence for the purposes of domestic law.