The case concerns the applicant’s complaints under Article 3 of the Convention that he was ill-treated at the hands of the police during his arrest and the alleged lack of an effective investigation into those allegations.
The applicant was born in 1993 and lives in Kumanovo. He was represented by Mr V. Stojanovski, a lawyer practising in Skopje.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms D. Djonova.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 3 December 2014 the applicant attended a family party in his father’s flat in Kumanovo. At about 10 p.m. three police officers arrived at the flat in response to a complaint about loud music and inappropriate behaviour and comments by guests at the party. There was an argument between the police officers and the applicant’s father at the entrance to the flat. Next-door neighbours confirmed to the police officers the applicant’s statement that the party had not been noisy. The applicant reacted to the argument (with his father) and in response a police officer twisted the applicant’s arm behind his back. The parties’ accounts of the events at the scene differ from this point on. The Government’s account was based on the version of events established by the public prosecutor (see paragraph 11 below).
The applicant asserted that the police officer who had twisted his arm had started insulting and hitting him on the head and body. He claimed that he had been dragged down the building’s staircase while being continuously insulted and beaten by the said police officer. Barefoot and in a T-shirt, the applicant had been taken to the local police station where he had been continuously insulted. The applicant allegedly had not been provided with any medical assistance, notwithstanding his explicit request in this connection.
The applicant remained in police custody for four hours, where he was tested for alcohol intoxication. After being released, he visited a doctor. According to a medical certificate of 4 December 2014, he was diagnosed as suffering from post-stress trauma and a scratch on his lower back. The doctor noted that the applicant also complained of headache and backache. No other injuries or bruises were noted in the certificate.
On an unspecified date in December 2014, the applicant complained to the Ministry of the Interior’s Sector for Internal Control and Professional Standards (“the Sector”) of the incident, alleging police brutality. In a letter of 16 December 2014, the Sector informed him that there was no evidence to support his allegations of police brutality. The Sector, after it had interviewed subsequently the applicant (in the interview, the applicant reiterated that, inter alia, he had been taken barefoot and in a T-shirt to the police station), also submitted its findings to the public prosecutor.
On 4 February 2015 the applicant asked the Kumanovo local police station to reveal the identity of the police officers that had been involved in his case. On 10 February 2015 the police station informed him that at the material time he had been intoxicated (2.02‰ blood alcohol level); he had reacted in an unruly fashion; he had refused to identify himself; and he had refused to turn down the music. For these reasons, misdemeanour proceedings had been initiated against him for public disorder. The identity of the police officers was not revealed.
On 3 March 2015 the applicant lodged a criminal complaint (кривична пријава) with the Kumanovo prosecution office accusing a police officer of unknown identity of unlawful deprivation of his liberty, torture and ill-treatment (no mention that he had been taken to the police station barefoot and in a T-shirt). In support he submitted a copy of the above medical certificate (see paragraph 7 above) and proposed that the public prosecutor take evidence from four еyewitnesses (M.G., G.K., L.T. and M.T., the latter being his father). He provided their contact details.
In a letter of 9 June 2015 the public prosecutor informed the applicant that on the same day he had adopted a “resolution” in which the prosecutor found no evidence of an offence subject to State prosecution. As stated in the resolution, on the material date two police officers (later joined by another four officers, including I.) had arrived in the flat of the applicant’s father pursuant to a noise complaint. I. had asked the applicant to identify himself and to come with them to the police station. The applicant had been intoxicated, and as he had refused to identify himself and had resisted (пружил отпор), I. had applied coercive measures on him and had twisted his arm behind his back. The applicant then had been brought to the Kumanovo police station. According to the resolution, the prosecutor reached these findings on the basis of reports from the Sector (see paragraph 8 above) and the Kumanovo police station, a statement from police officer I. about the use of force and a report from I.’s superior. The resolution was never served on the applicant.
In misdemeanour proceedings the applicant was fined 100 euros (EUR) for disturbance of public order regarding the incident of 3 December 2014.
The applicant submitted six signed eyewitness statements to the Court about the events of 3 December 2014 from neighbours, his father and guests at the family celebration. According to D.S., a guest of the applicant, a police officer had started hitting the applicant immediately after having twisted his arm. R., a neighbour, stated (written statement dated 10 January 2015) that he had seen the applicant being dragged down the staircase and being hit by a police officer. The applicant’s father, M.T., stated that a police officer had twisted his son’s arm behind his back and had started hitting him on the head with his fists. Three other witnesses (D.J., B.S. and P.S.) mentioned (written statements dated 15 March and 16 October 2015 respectively) having seen the incident and the applicant being arrested, but they did not mention the applicant being hit by a police officer. D.S., P.S. and M.T. confirmed that at the time the applicant had been barefoot and in a T-shirt.
Under sections 273 and 274, any person can report a crime which requires State prosecution to the public prosecution service.
In accordance with section 288, if the circumstances of the case warrant that action, the public prosecutor can reject (ќе ја отфрли) a criminal complaint by means of a decision. This decision, which must contain an instruction regarding the right of an appeal within eight days, must be served on the aggrieved party. The aggrieved party can then appeal to a higher-ranking prosecutor.
Pursuant to section 39 the public prosecutor must open an investigation, direct it and secure the relevant evidence in cases which are subject to State prosecution.