The case originated in an application (no. 32045/10) against the Republic of Poland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by the Christian Baptist Church - II Local Community in Wrocław (II Zbór Kościoła Chrześcijan Baptystów we Wrocławiu – hereinafter “the applicant church”), on 9 June 2010.
The applicant church was represented by Ms D. Bober, and subsequently by Ms D. Przybylska-Fąfara, lawyers practising in Wrocław. The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms J. Chrzanowska of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant church alleged, in particular, a violation of Articles 6 of the Convention and 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 4 February 2015 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant is a legal entity, a local community of the Christian Baptist Church in the Republic of Poland operating on the basis of the Act of 30 June 1995 on Relations Between the Republic of Poland and the Christian Baptist Church Act (ustawa o stosunku Państwa Polskiego do Kościola Chrześcijan Baptystów w RP – hereinafter “the 1995 Act”) with its seat in Wrocław.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The case concerns a property with a four-storey building and another building dedicated to sacral purposes in Wrocław. Before World War II the property was used by the Baptist Commune belonging to the Bund Evangelisch-Freikirchlicher Gemeinden in Deutschland operating on the territory of the German Reich. The property number was 1077/42. It measured 0.785 ha.
On 4 September 1946 the Wrocław Governor (Wojewoda Wrocławski) decided that the property in question should become subject to the applicant church’s management (przejęcie w zarząd) on the basis of section 2(4) of the 1946 Decree on abandoned property (dekret o majątkach opuszczonych i poniemieckich – hereinafter “the 1946 Decree”).
In 1956 the applicant church lodged a request to be registered in the land and mortgage register as the owner of the property and the request was granted. The property was registered under the number 945.
On 23 April 1959 the Minister of the Economy announced a new interpretation of section 2 (4) of the 1946 Decree.
On 23 June 1959 the District Residential Buildings Board for Wrocław-Krzyki (Dzielnicowy Zarząd Budynków Mieszkalnych) decided that all kinds of property which were subject to the church’s management were to pass into the ownership of the State and ordered that the applicant church transfer the property in question to the State. The order did not concern the part of the property which was dedicated exclusively to sacral purposes.
On 19 August 1966 a new land-register entry 35905 was opened for the property no. 1077/42. The land-register entry 945 was however not closed.
In 1968 the property was registered under the land-register number 35905 was given a new plot number 9 and its area was recalculated. The new measurement was 0.371 ha. It appears that the plot number 9 constituted only a part of the previous property number 1077/42 and comprised only the building dedicated to sacral purposes.
The remaining part of the original property number 1077/42, which comprised the four-storey building, was given new plot numbers 39 and 33/5. It measured 0.325 ha and a new land-register entry 63650 was opened for it. In 1977 the State was registered as the owner of this property and, after the reform of the local governments of 1990, the property was transferred to the City of Wrocław.
The present application concerns the right to the property referred to above in paragraph 14.
On 9 May 1996 the applicant church requested that the Wrocław Governor issue a decision confirming the applicant church’s ownership of the property in question. It relied on the newly enacted 1995 Act (see paragraphs 47-50 below).
On 12 September 1996 the Wrocław Governor refused to issue a decision which would confirm that the property in question belonged to the applicant church. The Governor found that the applicant church had failed to satisfy a requirement laid down in section 39 of the 1995 Act, specifically that it had not possessed the property in question on the day of entry into force of the Act relied upon. The Governor further held that:
“... in the circumstances of the case, section 40 of the Act likewise cannot be applied because the property in question is located on territory which was not part of Poland before 1 September 1939. The fact that the property was owned by an organisational unit of the Baptist Church operating in the German Reich does not constitute a basis to claim return of ownership because its ownership was transferred to the State under the [1946 Decree].”
On 23 September 1996 the applicant church appealed against this decision to the Minister of the Interior and Administration.
On 18 February 1998 the applicant church sent a letter to the Minister, specifying that the time-limits laid down in the Code of Administrative Proceedings had been exceeded and requested that the Minister issue a decision.
On 1 July 1998 the Minister replied that the length of the proceedings was attributable to amendments of the 1995 Act and informed the applicant church that the relevant decision would be issued by 15 August 1998.
This time-limit was not respected and therefore, on 12 January 1999, the applicant church lodged with the Supreme Administrative Court a complaint in respect of the alleged inactivity of the administrative authority.
On 5 March 1999, before examination of the applicant church’s complaint, the Minister of the Interior and Administration issued a decision, annulling the challenged decision and ordering the return of the case to the Governor. The Minister ordered that, when re-examining the case, the Governor should take into account the amended section 4 of the 1995 Act.
In view of the fact that the Minister had issued a decision, on 28 April 1999 the applicant church withdrew the complaint of 12 January 1999 concerning the inactivity of the administrative authority.
After remittal of the case, on 24 March 1999, the Governor of Lower Silesia (Wojewoda Dolnośląski) asked the Wrocław Commune whether there was any property available which could be granted to the applicant church in return for the property in question. It appears that the Governor’s letter was left without reply.
On 29 May 1999 the Governor requested from the Minister of the Interior and Administration an official interpretation of the amended section 4 of the 1995 Act “in view of the many doubts as regards the proper interpretation of this provision”.
On 20 June 2000 the Minister replied that, since the administrative authorities were bound by provisions of law binding on the day of decision, it was irrelevant that the applicant church’s original request had been lodged when section 4 of the 1995 Act had had different wording.
On 21 July 2000 the applicant church asked the Governor to issue a decision in its case, pointing out that the time-limits laid down in the Code of Administrative Proceedings had been exceeded.
On 20 October 2000 the applicant church lodged a complaint (zażalenie) with the Minister of the Interior and Administration that the Governor had exceeded the statutory time-limits and had failed to issue a decision on the merits or to justify the delay in the proceedings.
On 7 December 2000 the applicant church lodged a complaint with the Supreme Administrative Court about the alleged inactivity of the Governor.
On 1 March 2001 the Minister of the Interior and Administration found the applicant church’s complaint of 20 October 2000 well founded and ordered the Governor to issue a decision on the merits before 30 April 2001.
On 30 April 2001 the Governor stayed the proceedings.
On 7 July 2001 the applicant church appealed against the decision to stay the proceedings.
On 17 December 2001 the Minister of the Interior and Administration allowed the appeal, finding that the proceedings should not have been stayed, annulled the challenged decision and returned the case to the Governor.
On 12 March 2002 the Supreme Administrative Court examined the applicant church’s complaint against the inactivity of the administrative authority and ordered the Governor of Lower Silesia to issue a decision on the merits within the time-limit of thirty days.
On 21 June 2002 the Governor’s office gave a decision and refused to return the property in question to the applicant church. It found that the applicant church, although registered as owner under the land-register number 945 and treated in the past by the administrative authorities as owner, had never in fact owned the property, which had only been left under the applicant church’s administration (oddane w zarząd).
On 12 July 2002 the applicant church appealed.
On 23 September 2002 the Minister of the Interior and Administration annulled the challenged decision and returned the case for re-examination to the Governor. The Minister found, among other things, that the Governor had had no right to question the validity of the entry in the land register.
On 23 February 2003 the applicant church complained to the Governor about the delay in the proceedings.
On 8 February 2007 the Governor’s office gave a procedural decision in which it held that owing to the particularly complicated nature of the case, the decision on the merits could not be issued within the statutory time-limits and set a new deadline for decision of 30 June 2007.
On 18 June 2007 the Governor of Lower Silesia gave a decision on the merits and refused to return to the applicant church the property in question. The Governor relied on the amended 1995 Act and found that the applicant church had failed to satisfy the requirements laid down in section 4 of the Act, namely that it could not be a legal successor of the Church which had not operated on the territory of Poland before 1 September 1939.
On 11 July 2007 the applicant church appealed.
On 6 February 2008 the Minister of the Interior and Administration upheld the challenged decision.
On 11 March 2008 the applicant church lodged a complaint with the Warsaw Regional Administrative Court.
On 12 September 2008 the Warsaw Regional Administrative Court dismissed the applicant church’s complaint.
On 10 November 2008 the applicant church lodged a complaint against the Regional Administrative Court’s judgment with the Supreme Administrative Court.
On 13 October 2009 the Supreme Administrative Court dismissed the applicant church’s complaint. The judgment was served on the applicant church’s lawyer on 6 January 2010.
At the time the applicant church lodged the first request for return of the property, section 4 of the 1995 Act provided as follows:
“The [Baptist] Church and its legal entities are the legal successors of Baptist local communities [zbór] and organisations operating on the current territory of the Republic of Poland before 1 September 1939.”
On 30 May 1998 a new version of Article 4 of the 1995 Act came into force. Section 4 after amendments provides as follows:
“The (Baptist) Church and its legal entities are the legal successors of Baptist local communities and organisations operating on the territory of the Republic of Poland before 1 September 1939.”
Section 39 of the 1995 Act, in so far as relevant, provides as follows:
“1. Properties or parts thereof which on the day of entry into force of this Act are in the possession of the Church or its legal entities become ipso iure their property if:
1) they were in the possession of the legal entities referred to in section 4 of the Act;
...”
Section 40 of the 1995 Act provides, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“1. Proceedings for the return of the nationalised property or parts thereof, which is not in the possession of the Church or its legal entities referred to in section 39 paragraph 1, (1) are instituted upon the request of the Church or its legal entities notwithstanding the legal basis and method of nationalisation; the above does not concern property nationalised after 1945 for which compensation was paid ...”
Article 2(4) of the 1946 Decree provided that the ownership of the abandoned property of German and Gdańsk public legal entities was transferred ex lege to the “relevant Polish legal entities”.
On 19 December 1959 the Supreme Court issued a resolution of seven judges (I CO 42/59) in which it held that organisational units of religious communities operating on the territory of the People’s Republic of Poland (Polska Rzeczpospolita Ludowa) could not be considered “relevant legal entities” within the meaning of Article 2 § 4 of the 1946 Decree, because in the Polish legal system they had no “public” nature.
Following a constitutional complaint lodged by the Christian Baptist Church in Gdańsk, on 8 November 2005, the Constitutional Court issued a judgment in which it found that section 7(1) of the Act of 26 June 1997 amending the 1995 Act was consistent with Articles 2 and 64 § 2 of the Polish Constitution and was not inconsistent with Article 25 §§ 3 and 5 of the Constitution. This judgment was issued in identical circumstances to those in the applicant church’s case. The Constitutional Court found among other things that even though section 4 of the 1995 Act had been amended in the course of the administrative proceedings for return of property, the amendment had had no influence on the outcome of the proceedings.
The relevant parts of the Constitutional Court’s judgment read as follows:
“Pursuant to the amended section 4 of the 1995 Act the [Baptist] Church and its legal entities are the legal successors of Baptist churches [zbory], local communities and organisations operating on the territory of the Republic of Poland before 1 September 1939.
...
The complainant – the Christian Baptist Church in Gdańsk is indeed a legal entity, but in the light of documents and the hearing held it is indisputable that the property in question was owned by the Bund Evangelisch Freikirschlicher Gemeinden in Deutschland [“the Union”] and not by the Christian Baptist Church or its legal entities (including the Baptist community). During the hearing the complainant made a statement that the Union referred to above was a legal entity of corporate nature which owned properties like churches and other immovable properties including the property which is the subject matter of the present proceedings. This Union continues to operate on the territory of the German Federal Republic. The complainant – the Christian Baptist Church in Gdańsk – said that before 1 September 1939 the Union did not have (as such) a legal personality. Likewise, the claimant was not able to prove itself to be a legal successor of the Union referred to above.”
The Constitutional Court concluded this part of its reasoning with a statement that:
“Even assuming that on the basis of section 4 of the amended 1995 Act the property has been acquired ex lege (although the Constitutional Court does not share this opinion), acquiring the property in question ex lege is excluded because of the lack of the legal succession. It follows that the [Constitutional] Court does not share the complainant’s view presented at the hearing that there were statutory conditions for return of the property.”
The Constitutional Court further held that it was indisputable that the property in question had been taken over by the State on the basis of the 1946 Decree (see paragraph 51 above) and had not been in the possession of the Baptist Church or its legal entities. The Constitutional Court noted the resolution of the Supreme Court of 19 December 1959 (see paragraph 52 above) in which the Supreme Court held that that organisational units of religious communities operating on the territory of the People’s Republic of Poland could not be considered “relevant legal entities” within the meaning of Article 2 § 4 of the 1946 Decree and therefore the property of these organisational units had become the property of the State. The Constitutional Court concluded this part of its reasoning by a statement that “the claimant likewise did not acquire the property in question on the basis of the [1946 Decree].”
Subsequently the Constitutional Court examined the issue whether the claimant had a “legitimate expectation” to acquire the rights to the property in question and found that it was not the case. The relevant parts of its reasoning read as follows:
“The legal construction of return of nationalised property provided for in the [1995] Act consists of several steps ...; the governor [Wojewoda] has a wide range of assessment of factual circumstances and methods of [restoring] of property. The sole fact of being a legal successor within the meaning of section 4 of the 1995 Act constitutes only a basis for a request for the return of property, but does not oblige the governor to issue a positive decision. In the Constitutional Court’s view, a legitimate expectation to acquire property does not always appear on the final step of the proceedings consisting of several steps. Consequently, it must be found that although the [Baptist] Church might expect a favourable decision, that expectation could not be classified as “legitimate”, which [would thus] enjoy legal protection.
In the present case however the most important and decisive argument is the lack of status of legal successor on the part of the complainant. As found above, the complainant does not fulfill the basic statutory condition allowing it to claim return of property ... It follows that even on the basis of section 4 [of the 1995 Act] in its version before the amendment the complainant had no basis to reasonably expect to be granted the property. The amendment of section 4 had therefore no decisive [zasadniczy] impact on the complainant’s legal situation. To explain the issue in simple words: the complainant commenced proceedings to be granted rights to property that neither the complainant nor its legal predecessors ever owned.”