The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) on 2 November 1998, and by Mr W.R. (“the applicant”), an Austrian national, on 18 November 1998, within the three-month period laid down by former Articles 32 § 1 and 47 of the Convention. It originated in an application (26602/95) against Austria lodged by the applicant with the Commission under former Article 25 of the Convention on 13 February 1995. The Government of Austria are represented by their Agent, Mr. F. Cede, Ambassador, Head of the International Law Department at the Federal Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The applicant asked the Court not to reveal his identity. He was granted leave to present his own case to the Court and to use German in his written pleadings.
The Commission’s request referred to former Articles 44 and 48 and to the declaration whereby Austria had recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (former Article 46). The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach of Article 6 § 1. 
On 14 January 1999 the Panel of the Grand Chamber decided, pursuant to Article 5 § 4 of Protocol No. 11 to the Convention and Rules 100 § 1 and 24 § 6 of the Rules of Court, that the application would be examined by one of the Sections. It was, thereupon, assigned to the Third Section.
The Chamber constituted with the Section included ex officio Mr W. Fuhrmann, the judge elected in respect of Austria (Article 27 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 26 § 1 (a) of the Rules of Court) and Mr. P. R. Kūris, Acting President of the Section (Rule 12). The other members designated by the latter to complete the Chamber were Mrs F. Tulkens, Mr K. Jungwiert, Mrs H.S. Greve, Mr K. Traja and Mr M. Ugrekhelidze.
 4.  In accordance with Rule 59 § 3 the President of the Chamber invited the parties to submit memorials on the issues in the application. The Registrar received both the applicant’s and Government’s memorials on  25 May 1999.
After consulting the Agent of the Government and the applicant, the Chamber decided not to hold a hearing in the case.
The applicant is a practising lawyer by profession.
On 30 April and 15 May 1985, respectively, the president of the Mauerkirchen District Court (Bezirksgericht) laid a disciplinary information against the applicant. Subsequently, preliminary investigations were carried out.
On 15 June 1987 the Disciplinary Council of the Upper Austrian Bar Chamber (Disziplinarrat der Oberösterreichischen Rechtsanwaltskammer) decided to open disciplinary proceedings against the applicant. He was charged with several counts of professional misconduct.
On 16 May 1988 the Disciplinary Council joined a further set of disciplinary proceedings against the applicant, which had been started in 1987, to the above proceedings and held a hearing in the presence of the applicant.
On 18 January 1989 the Disciplinary Council, after having held a further hearing in the presence of the applicant, convicted him on three counts and acquitted him on three other counts. The Disciplinary Council found that he had, in two sets of civil proceedings before the Mauerkirchen District Court, wrongly accused the competent judge of having made incorrect entries in the records and that he had, in a civil case before the Ried Regional Court, repeatedly interrupted the judge and put questions to the other party to the proceedings without having obtained leave to do so. The Disciplinary Council, referring to section 2 of the 1977 Guidelines for the Professional Conduct of Lawyers (Richtlinien für die Ausübung des Rechtsanwaltsberufes, RL-BA 1977), found that the applicant had thereby committed a breach of his professional duties and had infringed the profession's honour and reputation. It ordered him to pay a fine of Austrian schillings (ATS) 5,000.
The written version of the Disciplinary Council's decision was served on the applicant on 4 April 1990. The Appeals Board (Oberste Berufungs- und Disziplinarkommission) received his appeal in May 1990.
On 25 January 1993 the Appeals Board dismissed the applicant's appeal. On the appeal of the Bar Chamber, the Appeals Board confirmed the Disciplinary Council's finding of guilt as regards the three counts, and found the applicant guilty of two disciplinary offences for which he had been acquitted by the Disciplinary Council.
In the same decision the Appeals Board decided on appeals brought by both the applicant and the Bar Chamber in two further sets of disciplinary proceedings, which were started in 1988 and 1991, respectively. As to the latter, the Appeals Board, noting that the applicant had requested his acquittal, while the Bar Chamber had requested that the fine imposed on him by the Disciplinary Council be replaced by a three month prohibition on exercising his profession, found that the Disciplinary Council, in its decision of 7 October 1991, had failed to establish the relevant facts. Consequently, the Appeals Board quashed this decision and referred the case back to the Disciplinary Council. As to the 1988 proceedings, the Appeals Board found the applicant guilty on two counts.
Noting that the applicant had been found guilty of breaching his professional duties on a total of seven counts, the Appeals Board, referring to the 1990 Disciplinary Act (Disziplinarstatut 1990), imposed a fine of ATS 25,000 on him.
On 17 May 1993 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Constitutional Court (Verfassungsgerichtshof). He complained in particular about the length of the disciplinary proceedings against him.
On 12 October 1994 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant's complaint. It found in particular that the Appeals Board had dealt with a number of different sets of disciplinary proceedings against the applicant and a variety of different facts. In the circumstances of the case, the duration of the proceedings was not excessive.
Section 12 of the Disciplinary Act 1872 (Disziplinarstatut 1872) provided for the following disciplinary penalties: a written reprimand, a fine of up to ATS 360,000, a prohibition on practising as a lawyer for a period not exceeding one year and being struck off the bar roll (paragraph 1). The choice of the penalty to be imposed in a given case depended on the extent of guilt and the prejudice caused by the disciplinary offence (paragraph 2).
Section 16 of the Disciplinary Act 1990 (Disziplinarstatut 1990) provides for the following disciplinary penalties: a written reprimand, a fine of up to ATS 500,000, a prohibition on practising as a lawyer for a period not exceeding one year and being struck off the bar roll (paragraph 1). A temporary prohibition on practising as a lawyer may be suspended for a probationary period of one to three years if this appears sufficient to prevent the accused from committing further disciplinary offences (paragraph 2).
The Disciplinary Act 1990 entered into force on 1 January 1991.
The applicant applied to the Commission on 13 February 1995. He alleged, inter alia, a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention on account of the length of the disciplinary proceedings against him.
The Commission declared the application (no. 26602/95) partly admissible on 30 June 1997. In its report of 3 March 1998 (former Article 31 of the Convention), it expressed by a majority the opinion that there had been a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
In their memorial, the Government asked the Court to find that Article 6 § 1 was not applicable to the proceedings at issue or, alternatively, that there has been no violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.