The case originated in an application (no. 67503/13) against the Republic of Slovenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mr Boštjan Koprivnikar.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Petek, a lawyer practising in Ljubljana. The Slovenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Andreja Vran, State Attorney.
The applicant alleged that the imposition of an overall thirty-year prison sentence on him had been in breach of Article 7 of the Convention.
On 11 January 2016 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1979 and is detained in Dob pri Mirni.
On 23 April 1999 the 1999 Amendment to the 1994 Criminal Code entered into force (see paragraph 21 below).
On 17 September 2004 the applicant was convicted of robbery by the Ljubljana District Court and sentenced to four years in prison. He began serving his sentence on 7 December 2007 and completed it on 7 December 2011.
On 1 November 2008 the 2008 Criminal Code came into force (see paragraph 22 below).
On 16 June 2009 the applicant was convicted by the Ljubljana District Court of having paid with a bad cheque and of fraudulent use of a bank card in the period between 19 January and 19 August 2005. He was sentenced to five months’ imprisonment. The judgment became final on 7 October 2009. The applicant started to serve the sentence on 7 December 2011.
In the meantime, on 9 April 2009 the Ljubljana District Court found the applicant guilty of murder committed together with another person on 15 September 2002. He was sentenced to thirty years in prison, the maximum penalty provided for under the 1994 Criminal Code applicable at the time at which the offence was committed. The conviction was upheld on appeal by the Ljubljana Higher Court on 9 December 2009 and became final on the same day.
On 28 November 2011 the applicant applied to the Ljubljana District Court to have the three prison terms joined in an overall sentence.
On 13 January 2012 the Ljubljana District Court, by means of a judgment, joined the three above-mentioned prison sentences, including the one for robbery which the applicant had already completed, in an overall sentence. Applying the 2008 Criminal Code as applicable before the introduction of the 2011 Amendment (see paragraphs 22 and 23 below), the court noted that the applicant should have had an overall sentence imposed on him as the conditions under Article 53 of the 2008 Criminal Code (see paragraph 22 below) had been met but the provision had not been applied in his case. While acknowledging that Article 53 § 2 (2) of the 2008 Criminal Code applied to the case (see paragraph 22 below), the District Court sentenced the applicant to an overall term of thirty years’ imprisonment. In its reasoning, it noted that the principle of the rule of law required, inter alia, that criminal-law provisions be drafted in a clear and precise manner in order to avoid sentences being imposed arbitrarily. It went on to note that the legislation applicable to the present case was unclear, ambiguous and deficient for the following reasons. Although the maximum sentence applicable under the 2008 Criminal Code had been thirty years’ imprisonment and the rules on combining multiple sentences in an overall sentence, enshrined in Article 53 § 2 (2) of the 2008 Criminal Code, provided that the overall sentence must exceed each of the individual sentences, these same rules prescribed a maximum sentence of twenty years. The court took the view that the legislature had not intended to enact legislation enabling those offenders who had been sentenced to thirty years’ imprisonment for one of the offences for which they subsequently had had their sentences joined to benefit from an overall sentence that would have been ten years lower than the highest individual sentence to which the offender had been sentenced. In support of its view, the District Court pointed out that the 1994 Criminal Code (see paragraph 21 below) had provided that in cases where an offender had been due to serve thirty years’ imprisonment along with sentences for other offences, the overall sentence would have consisted only of that term. Therefore, the District Court considered that the legislature had made an obvious error in Article 53 § 2 (2) of the 2008 Criminal Code, which had, however, been rectified in the meantime by the 2011 Amendment. The court found that the latter made the rules on the determination of an overall sentence certain, clear and complete and that “[o]nly the so amended provisions therefore prevent[ed] arbitrary sanctioning of criminal offenders for multiple criminal offences as required by the principle of legality”.
The applicant appealed against the judgment, arguing that the District Court’s decision lacked a legal basis and was in breach of the principle of the rule of law and the principle nullum crimen et nulla poena sine lege. He also claimed that the primary method of interpreting legal texts should be semantic interpretation. It was only where that method proved unsatisfactory in determining how a certain rule should be applied that other methods of interpretation should be applied. Lastly, the applicant agreed with the District Court that the provision in question could be regarded as unclear, ambiguous and deficient, but pointed out that any possible ambiguities or deficiencies should not be interpreted to his detriment.
On 29 May 2012 the Ljubljana Higher Court rejected the appeal lodged by the applicant and upheld the first-instance judgment, reiterating the lower court’s reasoning. In the Higher Court’s opinion, the District Court had correctly assessed that the legislature had not intended to permit individuals convicted of several offences from benefiting from a lower maximum term of imprisonment than they would have had to serve if they had been convicted of only one of those offences. According to the Higher Court, such an interpretation would lead to a situation “defying the law as well as common sense”.
The applicant applied to the Supreme Court for the protection of legality (an extraordinary legal remedy), reiterating his arguments. He also argued that the rule of law was a principle which should not be applied at the courts’ discretion.
On 6 December 2012 the Supreme Court by its judgment I Ips 58203/2011 rejected the application for the protection of legality, disagreeing with the applicant that semantic interpretation should take precedence over all other methods of legal interpretation. The Supreme Court referred to the Higher Court’s judgment, pointing out that the latter court’s reasoning evidently showed that the historical interpretation of the rule on combining multiple sentences also had to be taken into account in assessing the aim of the legislature in enacting the provision at issue. That method of interpretation entailed the examination of not only the provision in its original form, as relied on by the applicant, but also the subsequent amendment, which showed the true aim of the provision. In addition, the Supreme Court relied on the systematic interpretation of the rule in question, emphasising that it could not be interpreted entirely separately from the provisions prescribing that individual prison sentences for various criminal offences must be combined to form an overall sentence. Since under the un-amended 2008 Criminal Code a prison sentence could be imposed for a term not shorter than fifteen days and not longer than thirty years, it was not logical that an overall sentence combining several prison terms, one of which was for thirty years, could be ten years lower than the highest individual prison sentence imposed. According to the Supreme Court, the rules on multiple offences were aimed not at reducing the general maximum prison sentence, but at ensuring that the overall length of several sentences did not exceed the general maximum prison sentence, which in the applicant’s case was thirty years.
The applicant lodged a constitutional complaint, reiterating that the imposition of an overall sentence of thirty years’ imprisonment contravened Article 53 § 2 (2) of the Criminal Code, which clearly provided that such a sentence could not exceed twenty years. In the applicant’s opinion, the purpose of the provision at issue could be drawn from interpreting it semantically and no additional means of interpretation were therefore required in order to understand the legislature’s intention.
On 24 April 2013 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint, finding that it did not concern an important constitutional question or entail a violation of human rights with serious consequences for the applicant.
On 24 March 2015 the applicant was convicted of another murder committed on an undefined date between 30 June and 15 September 2002. For that murder he was sentenced to thirty years’ imprisonment, but a new overall sentence of thirty years was imposed. The latter overall sentence covered the previous overall sentence imposed by the judgment of 13 January 2012 (see paragraph 13 above), another sentence of four months imprisonment, which in the meantime had been imposed on him following a conviction for yet another criminal offence, and the thirty years’ imprisonment imposed by that last judgment of 24 March 2015. An appeal and an application for the protection of legality by the applicant were dismissed, the latter by the Supreme Court on 2 June 2016.
Article 28 (Principle of Legality in Criminal Law) of the Slovenian Constitution provides as follows:
The Criminal Code adopted by the Slovenian legislature on 6 October 1994 (Official Gazette no. 63/1994 with amendments – hereinafter “the 1994 Criminal Code”) was in force until 1 November 2008. Initially, the 1994 Criminal Code prescribed a general maximum term of imprisonment of fifteen years, which could be increased to twenty years’ imprisonment for exceptionally serious crimes. In 1999 an amendment (Official Gazette no. 23/1999, KZ-A – hereinafter “the 1999 Amendment”) to the Criminal Code introduced a maximum term of thirty years’ imprisonment for the most serious criminal offences committed with intent, such as certain categories of murder. It came into force on 23 April 1999. The rules on combining multiple sentences into an overall sentence, which were applicable from 23 April 1999 to 1 November 2008, provided as follows:
 22.  On 1 November 2008 a new Criminal Code (Official Gazette no. 55/2008, KZ-1 – hereinafter “the 2008 Criminal Code”) entered into force, setting the general maximum term of imprisonment at thirty years and introducing life imprisonment for some of the most serious crimes. While an overall sentence of life imprisonment was to be imposed when combining two or more sentences of thirty years’ imprisonment, the new rule on combining most other prison sentences (except for the mildest ones) was worded in an identical manner to the one in the 1994 Criminal Code. No special rule was provided in respect of the situation where one of the prison sentences that was being combined amounted to a term of thirty years. The relevant provisions of the 2008 Criminal Code applicable at the material time read as follows:
“(1) A prison sentence may be imposed for a term not shorter than fifteen days and not longer than thirty years.
(2) A sentence of life imprisonment may be imposed for the criminal offences of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and aggression, and under the terms ... of this Criminal Code for two or more criminal offences ...
(3) The lowest sentence for criminal offences, for which the prescribed prison sentence is up to thirty years, is fifteen years’ imprisonment.
...”
“(1) If an offender is being tried for two or more criminal offences simultaneously, the court shall first determine the sentence for each offence concerned and thereafter impose an overall sentence for all of the multiple criminal offences.
(2) A combined sentence shall be imposed under the following conditions:
“(1) In the event of an offender being tried for a criminal offence committed either prior to the commencement of or during the serving of an earlier sentence, an overall sentence shall be imposed on him for all the criminal offences pursuant to Article 53; the court shall take into account the fact that his former sentences have already been determined. The sentence or part thereof that has already been served by the convicted person shall be deemed part of the overall sentence imposed.
(2) Earlier sentences shall not be taken into account in the sentencing of an offender who commits a criminal offence while serving a prison sentence, in so far as the application of Article 53 would lead to an unreasonably short term left to be served.
(3) A disciplinary sanction shall be imposed on a convicted person who while serving a sentence commits a criminal offence for which a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year is prescribed by statute.”
.  On 2 November 2011 the legislature adopted the 2011 Amendment to the Criminal Code (Official Gazette no. 91/2011, KZ-1B – hereinafter “the 2011 Amendment”) which entered into force on 15 May 2012. Under the amended rules, if one of the prison sentences to be joined in an overall sentence was imposed for a term of thirty years, the overall sentence would contain only that sentence. Furthermore, if a term of imprisonment was imposed for all of the multiple offences, the overall prison term could not exceed thirty years, rather than the previous maximum term of twenty years.
Section 407 of the Criminal Procedure Act (Official Gazette no. 63/1994 with amendments), which concerns the so-called irregular reopening of proceedings, reads, as far as relevant, as follows:
According to the Supreme Court’s judgment no. I Ips 21381/2011 of 10 January 2013, and its judgment no. I Ips 11622/2012 of 8 May 2014, the criminal law valid at the time the conditions for an overall sentence were met, that is to say the time when the last judgment of conviction became final, should be used when setting an overall sentence. The Supreme Court also expressed an opinion that the requirement of applying the more lenient sentence should not be used when determining the overall sentence. The Constitutional Court by its decision no. Up-200/13 of 23 October 2014 found the above position incompatible with Article 28 of the Constitution, which, in the Constitutional Court’s view, required that when setting the overall sentence the court should use the penal law applicable at the time when the last offence considered in the overall sentence had been committed or a subsequent law if it was more lenient.
In its judgment I Ips 11622/2012 of 8 May 2014 the Supreme Court dealt with the determination of an overall sentence under the 2008 Criminal Code prior to its amendment (see paragraph 22 above). It elaborated on the difference between the situation where none of the individual sentences that were being combined exceeded a term of twenty years such as in the case under consideration and the situation in the applicant’s case (see paragraph 16 above) to which it explicitly referred. The judgment, in the relevant part, reads as follows: