The case originated in an application (no. 48105/17) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksandr Aleksandrovich Borisov (“the applicant”), on 21 June 2017.
The applicant was represented by Ms I. Khrunova, a lawyer practising in Kazan. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 15 November 2017 notice of the complaint concerning the alleged unfairness of the criminal proceedings against the applicant was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1988 and is currently serving a prison sentence in the Tambov Region.
In mid-February the Federal Drug Control Service was informed that the applicant had plans to sell amphetamines on 17 February 2016.
On 16 February 2016 the Moscow City Court authorised a search of the applicant’s flat.
On 17 February 2016 at approximately 8.15 p.m. the applicant and D. were stopped by the police inside a block of flats where D. lived. According to the applicant, the police officers took him up to the first floor where they searched him and found no illegal substances on him. During the search one of the police officers slipped something into the left pocket of the applicant’s jacket. Then the police officers handcuffed the applicant and put him and D. in the police car. At 9.36 p.m., when police officer G. and two lay witnesses arrived, the police officers took the applicant out of the car and searched him in the presence of the lay witnesses. G. checked the left pocket of the applicant’s jacket and took out two small white plastic bags. It was later established that the plastic bags contained amphetamines. The police also searched the flat where the applicant lived with his mother. They did not find any illegal substances. The applicant was then taken to a hospital where he underwent a medical examination which established that he had been under the influence of amphetamines and cannabis.
On 18 February 2016 an investigator issued a record of the applicant’s arrest.
Also on 18 February 2016 a forensic expert carried out an examination of the plastic bags allegedly found on the applicant and of the swabs taken from the applicant’s hands. The expert did not find the applicant’s fingerprints on the bags or any traces of illegal substances on the applicant’s hands.
On 22 September 2016 the Timiryazevskiy District Court of Moscow found the applicant guilty of possession of illegal substances and sentenced him to four and a half years’ imprisonment. The court relied on statements made by police officers G. and M. who claimed that in February 2016 they had received information from their sources that the applicant and an unidentified person had been selling amphetamines that the applicant had been storing in his flat. They further submitted that on 17 February 2016, during a surveillance operation, they had detained the applicant. It had taken them approximately forty minutes to find lay witnesses so that they could conduct a search of the applicant, during which they had found amphetamines on him. The court also questioned P. and Ch. who had been the lay witnesses present during the search of the applicant. The court further relied on a record of the search, a report of 17 February 2016 of the medical examination of the applicant, and a forensic report identifying the substances contained in the plastic bags as amphetamines. As regards the applicant’s allegation that G. had planted the drugs on him, the court interpreted it as an attempt on the applicant’s part to avoid criminal liability.
On 21 December 2016 the City Court upheld the applicant’s conviction on appeal.