The case originated in an application (no. 26338/06) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Danyal Abdulovich Murtazin (“the applicant”), on 22 May 2006.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant complained about the continued non-enforcement of the judgment in his favour and its subsequent quashing by way of supervisory review.
On 6 September 2006 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1937 and lives in , a town in the Rostov Region. He is a retired military officer.
On 10 August 2004 the applicant brought proceedings against the Military Service Commissariat of Novocherkassk (Военный комиссариат г. Новочеркасска – “the Commissariat”) seeking to recover his pension arrears from January 1995 to March 1998 to take account of the increase of the minimum monthly wage.
On 15 September 2004 the Novocherkassk Town Court of the Rostov Region granted the applicant’s claim and awarded him 261,343.87 roubles (RUB) in arrears. On the applicant’s request the court held that the judgment should be enforced immediately since it concerned the applicant’s main source of income and was of considerable importance for the applicant’s financial situation. The Commissariat did not appeal against the judgment and on 25 September 2004 it became final.
On 12 October 2004 the applicant’s representative submitted the copy of the judgment and the writ of execution to the Social Welfare Office of the Military Commissariat of the Rostov Region.
On 24 February 2005 the enforcement proceedings were opened. In the same month the applicant was informed that the sums awarded to him could not be paid as the Commissariat was conducting an examination of his case.
On 19 September 2005 the Commissariat filed an application for supervisory review of the judgment of the Novocherkassk Town Court of 15 September 2004, referring to the lack of grounds in domestic law for increasing the applicant’s pension, and asked for a stay of enforcement.
On 9 December 2005 the  examined the above application and remitted the case for examination on its merits by the Presidium of the .
On 22 December 2005 the Presidium of the  quashed the judgment of 15 September 2004 and remitted the case to the Oktyabrskiy District Court for a fresh consideration. It concluded that the first-instance court had erroneously applied the substantive law and that the matter should have been examined by a district court rather than by a town court.
On 20 March 2006 the Oktyabrskiy District Court of Rostov-on-Don dismissed the applicant’s claim.
The Code of Civil Procedure of the  (“the new Code”) was enacted on 14 November 2002 and replaced the RSFSR Code of Civil Procedure (“the old Code”) from 1 February 2003. It provides as follows:
Article 209. Entry into force of judicial decisions
“1.  A judicial decision becomes legally binding upon expiry of the time-limit for lodging an appeal against it if no such appeal had been lodged.”
Article 210. Enforcement of judicial decisions
“A judicial decision is to be enforced after it becomes legally binding, unless it provides for immediate enforcement...”
Article 362. Grounds for quashing or altering judicial decisions by appeal courts
“1.  The grounds for quashing or altering judicial decisions by appeal courts are:
...
(4)  a violation or incorrect application of substantive or procedural law.”
Article 376. Right to apply to a court exercising supervisory review
“1.  Judicial decisions that have become legally binding, with the exception for judicial decisions by the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation, may be appealed against ... to a court exercising supervisory review, by parties to the case and by other persons whose rights or legal interests have been adversely affected by these judicial decisions.
Judicial decisions may be appealed against to a court exercising supervisory review within one year after they became legally binding...”
Article 387. Grounds for quashing or altering judicial decisions
by way of supervisory review
“Judicial decisions of lower courts may be quashed or altered by way of supervisory review on the grounds of substantial violations of substantive or procedural legal provisions.”
Article 390. Competence of the supervisory-review court
“1.  Having examined the case by way of supervisory review, the court may...
(2)  quash the judicial decision issued by a court of first, second or supervisory-review instance in whole or in part and remit the matter for a fresh examination...
(5)  quash or alter the judicial decision issued by a court of first, second or supervisory-review instance and issue a new judicial decision, without remitting the matter for a fresh examination, if the substantive law has been erroneously applied or interpreted.”
Once instituted, enforcement proceedings must be completed within two months upon receipt of the execution warrant by the bailiff (Section 13).
Collection of funds from the recipients of the federal budget is carried out through the local branches of the Federal Treasury upon submission of warrants of execution and court orders (Section 133 and Section 109 respectively).
Pensions to the retired military servicemen are paid by the specialised territorial services of the Ministry of Defence (Section 56).
The local branches of the Savings Bank (the Sberbank) distribute the funds allocated by the federal budget for payment of pensions to the retired military servicemen to the specialised territorial services of the Ministry of Defence (Section 2.2.2).