The case originated in an application (no. 45830/99) against the  lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Finnish national, Mr Juha Nuutinen (“the applicant”), on 2 October 1998.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Setälä, a lawyer practising in . The Finnish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr A. Kosonen of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged a breach of Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (a) and (b) of the Convention.
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
By a decision of 17 January 2006, the Court declared the application partly admissible. Judge Pellonpää, who at the time of the decision sat in respect of , continued to participate in the examination of the case (Article 23 § 7 of the Convention).
The applicant and the Government each filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1). The Chamber having decided, after consulting the parties, that no hearing on the merits was required (Rule 59 § 3 in fine), the parties replied in writing to each other's observations.
The applicant was born in 1950 and lives in .
On 7 September 1995 the public prosecutor charged the applicant and the managing director of company X before the District Court (käräjäoikeus, tingsrätten) with two counts of aggravated tax fraud and two counts of tax fraud, as they had allegedly produced false invoices to the Turku County Tax Office (lääninverovirasto, länsskatteverket). They were also charged with an accounting offence (count 9), as they had allegedly entered false data in the accounts of X. The prosecutor claimed that the applicant was responsible for the offences together with the managing director as, even though he did not have an official status in the management of the company, he had in fact participated in its management.
In the indictment dated 12 June 1995, count 1, for example, read as follows:
On 23 November 1993 [the managing director] and [the applicant] together, [the former] as the managing director of [company X] and chairman of the board of directors and [the latter] as a person who was de facto responsible for the management of the company, submitted the company's application for a VAT refund in the amount of FIM 342,760 [some EUR 57,000] as regards November 1993 to the County Tax Office of Turku. The application stated that [company Y] had sold electrical relays to [company X] for FIM 1,900,000 [some EUR 319,000] and the latter company had sold the said products further to an Estonian company for FIM 1,680,000 [EUR 282,000]. The invoice relating to the sales transaction between [company X] and [company Y] was fabricated. By submitting such false information which affected the amount of taxes to the authorities for the purposes of taxation, [the managing director] and [the applicant] have attempted to evade taxes.
Applicable law: Chapter 29, section 2 of the Penal Code”
As a further example, count 2, which concerned the co-defendant H.A., read as follows:
By preparing the invoice in the amount of FIM 1,900,000 referred to in count 1, and by handing it over to [the managing director] and [the applicant] to be attached to the application for a tax refund, [H.A.], on 23 November 1993, intentionally furthered the criminal act committed by [the managing director] and [the applicant].
Applicable law: Chapter 29, section 2 and Chapter 5, section 3 (1) of the Penal Code”
The applicant pleaded not guilty, arguing that he did not have such a status in company X and therefore could not be held responsible for the alleged offences. Furthermore, he argued that he had not been involved in compiling the documents and that the transactions concerned had not been forged.
On 8 February 1996 the District Court found that the business transactions referred to in the relevant invoices were not genuine, that the invoices were false and that the applicant had, together with the managing director, produced false information to the County Tax Office and entered false data in the accounts of X. The District Court referred to the evidence given by the co-accused and the witnesses, finding it proved, inter alia, that the applicant had actually acted in the company in such a position that he was to be held responsible for the offences together with the managing director. Thus, the District Court convicted them both as charged and sentenced them to a suspended term of one year's imprisonment. The co-defendant, H.A., was also convicted as charged.
The applicant appealed to the Court of Appeal (hovioikeus, hovrätten) against his conviction. He maintained that since he had not had any legal or de facto status in X, he had not produced any documents to the County Tax Office and he had not entered false data in X's accounts. Furthermore, the invoices had not been fabricated. He also claimed that the witness evidence was contradictory and that the District Court's assessment of it was erroneous. At the end of his writ of appeal, he stated:
“... [C]onsidering that the conduct of [the applicant], on the whole, cannot be considered aggravated, he could not be found guilty of more than aiding and abetting a tax fraud if he were, against all reason, to be found guilty of any offence ...”
The public prosecutor did not submit any written response to the applicant's appeal. In its response to the applicant's appeal the County Tax Office did not refer to a reclassification of the offences as aiding and abetting.
On 13 March 1997 the Court of Appeal held a hearing at which the parties and the witnesses were heard. It appears that there was no discussion as to whether the applicant's alleged conduct could be classified as aiding and abetting the above offences.
In its judgment of 28 August 1997 the Court of Appeal convicted the applicant of two counts of aiding and abetting an aggravated tax fraud and two counts of aiding and abetting a tax fraud and an accounting offence and sentenced him to a term of nine months' suspended imprisonment. The Court of Appeal reasoned inter alia:
During the pre-trial investigation [the managing director] stated that [the applicant] had given instructions to [H.A.] as to the details to be included in the documents that were attached to the applications for a tax refund ... and had also otherwise taken care of matters and the business transactions of [company X].
[H.A.] stated during the pre-trial investigation that he had prepared documents to be attached to applications for a tax refund ... in accordance with [the applicant's] and [the managing director's] instructions. According to [H.A.], [the applicant] was in practice responsible for the operation of [company X].
Witness [V.M.] stated in the Court of Appeal that he had dealt with the invoice ... together with [the managing director] and [the applicant].
In the light of the statements given by [the managing director] and [H.A.] during the pre-trial investigation, and of the witness statement of [V.M.], which supports those statements, it has been established that [the applicant] participated in the planning of the offences referred to in the indictment and in the preparation of the documents needed for the commission of the offences.
... [the applicant] did not have such a position in [company X] as would have made it possible for him to commit, as a principal offender, the offences with which he was charged. When participating in the planning of the offences and in the preparation of the documents needed for the commission of the offences, however, he contributed to producing false information to the County Tax Office and [on count 9] to entering false data in the accounts. Thus he intentionally furthered the criminal acts of which [the managing director] has been found guilty.”
The applicant sought leave to appeal from the Supreme Court (korkein oikeus, högsta domstolen), arguing that he had been convicted of offences differing from those with which he had been charged. He submitted that the public prosecutor had not even claimed that he had been involved in the planning of the offences and compiling the documents. During the proceedings the applicant had not been informed of the nature and cause of these accusations and was thus not given any opportunity to defend himself against them. Furthermore, the assessment of the evidence was unfair since the Court of Appeal had found the evidence sufficient even though the oral statements were contradictory.
On 18 June 1998 the Supreme Court refused leave to appeal.
Chapter 5, section 3(1) of the Penal Code, in force at the relevant time, provided that a person who, during or before the commission of an offence by someone else, intentionally furthers the act through advice, action or exhortation, shall be convicted of aiding and abetting the principal offence. The sentence imposed on the person who aids and abets shall be reduced to three quarters of the maximum penalty prescribed for the principal offence.
The present case was commenced and therefore also concluded under the then provisions on criminal procedure in the Code of Judicial Procedure (oikeudenkäymiskaari, rättegångsbalken). The rule according to which an accused might not be convicted of an offence other than the one with which he had been charged was not included in the legislation until the coming into force on 1 October 1997 of the Criminal Procedure Act (laki oikeudenkäynnistä rikosasioissa, lag om rättegång i brottmål; Act no. 689/1997). The rule was however established through case-law and it was codified upon the enactment of the new Act.
Chapter 11, section 3, of the Criminal Procedure Act provides that the court may only pass a sentence for an act for which a punishment has been requested. The court is not bound by the heading or the reference to the applicable provision in the indictment. The court is however bound by the conduct described in the indictment. The prosecutor is under an obligation to define the alleged offence and the accused must be provided with an opportunity to defend himself or herself within the limits of the indictment.
According to the Government, the court may e.g. convict an accused of aiding and abetting a tax fraud even if the prosecutor has charged him or her with the principal offence, as long as the conduct described in the indictment is not altered. This is based on the principle of jura novit curia, i.e. on the principle that the court itself is responsible for the legal assessment of the criminal act in question without being bound by the views of the prosecutor or of the accused. This was contested by the applicant.
Chapter 30, section 3 (Act no. 104/1979), of the Code of Judicial Procedure reads in relevant part:
“Leave to appeal may be granted only if it is important to bring the case before the Supreme Court for a decision with regard to the application of the law in other, similar cases or because of the uniformity of legal practice; if there is a special reason for this because of a procedural or other error that has been made in the case on the basis of which the judgment is to be reversed or annulled; or if there is another important reason for granting leave to appeal.”