The case originated in seven applications (nos. 23226/16, 43059/16, 57738/16, 59152/16, 60178/16, 63211/16 and 75362/16) against the Republic of Estonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by seven Estonian nationals, Mr Vladimir Nikitin, Mr Martin Villems, Mr Igor Karp, Mr Peeter Jeret, Mr Aleksei Savva, Mr Guntars Kaziks and Mr Vitali Tarasovski (“the applicants”), on 19 April 2016, 8 July 2016, 28 September 2016, 4 October 2016, 12 October 2016, 30 October 2016 and 30 November 2016 respectively.
The applicant Mr Jeret was represented by Mr Risto Käbi; the applicants Mr Nikitin, Mr Villems, Mr Kaziks and Mr Savva were represented by Mr Denis Piskunov; the applicant Mr Karp was represented by Mr Leonid Olovyanishnikov; and the applicant Mr Tarasovski was represented by Mr Janek Valdma, all lawyers practising in Tallinn. Mr Nikitin, Mr Jeret, Mr Kaziks and Mr Tarasovski were granted legal aid. As Mr Nikitin failed to respond to the Registry’s letters of 19 October 2017 and 9 January 2018 requesting that he return to the Court a duly completed claim form for fees and expenses and a bank transfer payment form, he was not reimbursed through the legal aid scheme.
The Estonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Maris Kuurberg, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that they had been detained in inhuman and degrading conditions. Mr Nikitin, Mr Villems, Mr Jeret, Mr Kaziks and Mr Tarasovski also complained that they had not had effective domestic remedies at their disposal. Mr Savva also complained of limited contact with his family.
On 16 May 2017 the Government were given notification of the applications of Mr Nikitin, Mr Villems, Mr Jeret, Mr Kaziks and Mr Tarasovski concerning the complaints under Articles 3 and 13 of the Convention and the remainder of application no. 59152/16 lodged by Mr Jeret was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. On 11 July 2017 the Government were given notification of the applications of Mr Karp and Mr Savva concerning the complaints under Article 3 and Mr Savva’s complaint under Article 8 of the Convention.
All seven applicants were detained in Tallinn Prison in Estonia. Their individual circumstances are detailed below.
The applicant was born in 1968 and is serving a life sentence. He was detained in Tallinn Prison from 27 November 2007 to 22 October 2013. Subsequently, he was transferred to Viru Prison, where he is currently serving his sentence.
According to the applicant, during his stay in Tallinn Prison he was detained in inadequate conditions of detention. In particular, the cells in which he was placed were overcrowded, providing less than 3 square metres of personal space throughout his confinement.
According to the Government, during the material time, the applicant was held in different cells which provided less than 3 square metres of personal space for 1,023 days. Out of that time, the applicant spent 898 days in open-section cells with no in-cell lavatory, and 125 days in locked cells with an in-cell lavatory. The Government also submitted that in the period from 2008-13 the applicant had been engaged in employment. In particular, he had worked from February to July 2008 for an average of 140 hours per month; from February to December 2009 for an average of 165 hours per month; every month in 2010 for an average of 168 hours per month; every month in 2011 for an average of 169 hours per month; every month in 2012 for an average of 168 hours per month; and from January to April 2013 for an average of 147 hours per month. He had also participated in social programmes from May 2007 to April 2009, had been on two short-term visits and five long-term visits, and on three occasions had attended court hearings.
According to data provided by the Government, during the relevant period the applicant was detained in twelve different cells under different prison regimes, as follows:
The applicant did not contest those data.
On 27 April 2014 the applicant lodged a complaint with Tallinn Prison, seeking compensation for non-pecuniary damage resulting from inadequate conditions of detention. Tallinn Prison did not respond to his complaint.
On 6 July 2014 the applicant lodged a complaint against Tallinn Prison with the Tartu Administrative Court, seeking compensation in the amount of 40,000 euros (EUR) for non-pecuniary damage resulting from inadequate conditions of detention. On 6 January 2015 the Tartu Administrative Court partially granted the applicant’s claim and awarded him EUR 250 (administrative case no. 3-14-51413). The first-instance court held, inter alia, that the applicant’s failure to use preventive remedies under section 7(1) of the State Liability Act did not hinder granting the claim because the overcrowding in Tallinn Prison was a well-known problem. The applicant and Tallinn Prison challenged the first-instance judgment by lodging appeals before the Tartu Court of Appeal.
By a judgment of 1 October 2015 the Court of Appeal quashed the first-instance judgment in part. The court applied the statutory time-limit separately with regard to the periods the applicant had spent in each different cell and held that the time-limit had therefore started to run after each transfer to a new cell. The court thus refused to examine the applicant’s complaint with regard to the period from 27 November 2007 to 9 February 2009 on the grounds that he had not complied with the mandatory pre-action procedure as required under Article 47 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Court Procedure, namely because the complaint had been lodged outside the time-limit provided for under section 17(3) of the State Liability Act. The Court of Appeal reasoned its refusal to examine part of the claim as follows:
“15.  In order to establish whether the applicant has met the pre-action procedure requirements, in the instant case the three-year statutory time-limit, the Court of Appeal will consider the change in the relevant conditions of the applicant’s detention which occurred in connection with his transfer from one cell to another. In these circumstances, the time-limit started running each time a change occurred.”
The court also refused to examine the complaint with regard to the period after 23 October 2013 as by that date he had already been transferred to Viru Prison.
With regard to the period from 10 February 2009 to 22 October 2013, the Court of Appeal found that the applicant had had less than 3 square metres of personal space for 815 days and more than 3 square metres for 895 days. The court also found that he had not been kept in less than 2.5 square metres of personal space, which had been the minimum requirement under domestic law at the material time. The court was of the view that the applicant’s detention in cells with less than 3 square metres of personal space had been degrading within the meaning of Article 3 of the Convention. However, the applicant had had the right to a walk for an hour a day and the use of a gym once a week. Moreover, for most of the period under consideration (720 days) he had been in an open section (cell no. 15), where he had been required to stay in the cell only at night. He had therefore been able to move freely around the section during the day. He had spent nineteen days in a punishment cell, and had also been engaged in several social programmes. Taking the above factors into consideration, the court dismissed the applicant’s claim for damages as unfounded because the violation of his rights had not reached the minimum level of severity to justify monetary compensation.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court, which refused leave to appeal on 28 March 2016.
The applicant was born in 1971. He was detained in Tallinn Prison from 7 July 2011 to 6 March 2013 as a remand prisoner and from 7 March 2013 to 17 April 2013 as a convicted prisoner. Subsequently, he was transferred to Tartu Prison where he is currently serving his sentence.
According to the applicant, during his stay in Tallinn Prison he was detained in inadequate conditions of detention. In particular, the cells in which he was placed were overcrowded and lacked basic hygiene and sanitary requirements. Throughout his confinement he had less than 3 square metres of personal space at his disposal. Moreover, he was locked in the cell day and night except for one hour of outdoor exercise daily. The outdoor exercise yard did not exceed the measurements of the cell and was used together with other inmates. However, as the applicant was not separated from smokers, he could not go to the outdoor exercise yard for six months. The shower could only be used once a week for twenty minutes, while the detainees also had to wash their clothes there because there was no hot water in the cells. There was also no privacy in the shower room.
According to the information submitted by the Government, from 9 October to 27 November 2012 the applicant attended a training course on communication skills (seven sessions lasting 1.5 to 2 hours each). He was also able to spend time outside the cell during meetings with his lawyer and while attending court hearings (on eleven occasions from September 2011 to March 2013).
According to the data provided by the Government, the applicant was detained in different cells in a closed section:
On 9 May 2013 the applicant lodged a complaint with Tallinn Prison, seeking compensation for non-pecuniary damage resulting from inadequate conditions of detention. On 2 July 2013 Tallinn Prison dismissed his complaint as unfounded.
On 25 July 2013 the applicant lodged a complaint against Tallinn Prison with the Tartu Administrative Court, seeking fair compensation at the discretion of the court for non-pecuniary damage resulting from inadequate conditions of detention. On 12 February 2014 the Tartu Administrative Court granted the applicant’s claim in the amount of EUR 1,700 (administrative case no. 3-13-1589).
On 14 January 2014 the applicant lodged a further complaint with Tallinn Prison, seeking compensation for non-pecuniary damage resulting from the fact that he had not been separated from smokers during his out-of-cell walks from 22 March to 17 October 2012. On 13 March 2014 Tallinn Prison dismissed his complaint.
On 25 March 2014 the applicant lodged another complaint against Tallinn Prison with the Tartu Administrative Court, seeking compensation in the amount of EUR 2,000 for non-pecuniary damage resulting from the fact that he had not been permitted to take walks separately from smokers. By a judgment of 15 September 2014 the Tartu Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint (administrative case no. 3-14-344).
The applicant and Tallinn Prison challenged the first-instance judgment of 12 February 2014 (administrative case no. 3-13-1589). The prison administration explained in its appeal that at the material time it had in any event been unable to provide the applicant with more than 2.7 square metres of personal space and that transferring him to another prison would probably not have solved the issue of over-crowding. The applicant also challenged the first-instance judgment of 15 September 2014 (administrative case no. 3-14-344). On 1 October 2015 the Tartu Court of Appeal joined the cases.
By its judgment of 3 November 2015 the Tartu Court of Appeal quashed the first-instance judgments and upheld the applicant’s complaint, partially awarding him compensation in the amount of EUR 100 for non-pecuniary damage resulting from not being permitted to take walks without smokers. The second-instance court dismissed the remainder of the applicant’s complaints on the grounds, inter alia, that he had no right to claim compensation for damage because he had failed to use the preventive remedies under section 7(1) of the State Liability Act, as he had not submitted a request for transfer to another prison or cell.
The applicant then lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court, which refused leave to appeal on 14 January 2016.
The applicant was born in 1970. He was detained in Tallinn Prison on five occasions: from April to October 2008; from September to October 2009; from January to February 2010; from 23 February to 9 November 2012; and from 27 December 2012 to 31 October 2013. Subsequently, he was transferred to Viru Prison. He was released on 29 September 2017.
The applicant alleged that during his stay in Tallinn Prison, he had been detained in inadequate conditions of detention. In particular, the cells in which he had been placed were overcrowded. Throughout his confinement he had had at his disposal less than 3 square metres of personal space. The cell had had poor lighting and lacked ventilation, and the walls had been covered with thick mould as the prisoners had had to wash and dry their clothes there.
According to the data provided by the Government, the applicant was detained in Tallinn Prison in five different periods under different prison regimes as follows:
The applicant did not contest those data.
On 7 April 2014 the applicant lodged a complaint with Tallinn Prison, seeking compensation for non-pecuniary damage resulting from inadequate conditions of detention. The prison did not respond to his complaint.
On 17 June 2014 the applicant lodged a complaint against Tallinn Prison with the Tartu Administrative Court, seeking compensation in the amount of EUR 500 per month or EUR 17 per day for twenty-six months for non-pecuniary damage resulting from inadequate conditions of detention. The prison administration explained in its reply with regard to out-of-cell-activities that, owing to statutory requirements and restrictions placed on remand prisoners, it could not permit the applicant to use the gym or participate in other recreational activities.
On 15 December 2014 the Tartu Administrative Court refused to examine the applicant’s complaint with regard to the periods from April to September 2008, from September to October 2009, and from January to February 2010, on the grounds that he had not complied with the mandatory pre-action procedure as required under Article 47 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Court Procedure as the complaint had been lodged outside the time-limit provided for under section 17(3) of the State Liability Act. With regard to the periods from 23 February to 9 November 2012 and from 27 December 2012 to 31 October 2013, the first-instance court dismissed the complaint as unfounded. The applicant challenged the first-instance judgment by lodging an appeal before the Tartu Court of Appeal.
In its judgment of 1 December 2015 the Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal on the grounds that he had no right to claim compensation because he had failed to make use of the preventive remedies provided for under section 7(1) of the State Liability Act, since he had not submitted a request for transfer to another prison or cell. Although the incell sanitary facility had not been deducted from the measurements of the cell, previous domestic case-law showed that prisoners had not generally had less than 3 or 2.5 square metres of personal space at their disposal in Tallinn Prison. The second-instance court noted that in his appeal the applicant had not complained either about the court’s refusal to examine his complaints regarding the periods from April to September 2008, from September to October 2009, and from January to February 2010, or about the other conditions of detention allegedly constituting violations, with the exception of overcrowding.
The applicant then lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court, which refused him leave to appeal on 28 March 2016.
The applicant was born in 1959. He was placed in Tallinn Prison on 25 February 2011. From 25 February to 17 May 2011 he was in pre-trial custody; he was then subjected to the reception regime (vastuvõturežiim) and from 12 July 2011 was detained as a convicted prisoner. On an unspecified date he was transferred to Viru Prison, where he is currently serving his sentence.
According to the applicant, during his stay in Tallinn Prison he was detained in inadequate conditions of detention. In particular, the cells in which he was placed were overcrowded and lacked basic hygiene and sanitary requirements. Throughout his confinement he had less than 3 square metres of personal space at his disposal. He had to tolerate high temperatures and rodents in the cell. Moreover, he was not provided with a lactose-free diet from 25 February 2011 to 21 November 2013, even though it had been prescribed by a doctor. He suffered back pain because he did not have sufficient opportunity to do physical exercise. His eyes hurt because of the poor lighting in the cell. He was also not given adequate medical treatment for a foot and nail infection.
According to the Government, during the material time, the applicant was held for 416 days in different cells which provided less than 3 square metres of personal space. For most of that time he was held in a semi-open unit for convicted prisoners. In 2012, 2013 and 2014 the applicant was engaged in employment working one hour a day. In particular, in October, November and December 2012 he worked a total of eighteen, sixteen and fifteen hours respectively; in November and December 2013, a total of five and thirteen hours; and in January and February 2014, eleven and five hours respectively. He was also able to spend time outside the cell to attend eight short meetings and six court hearings.
According to data provided by the Government, the applicant was detained in Tallinn Prison under different regimes as follows:
The applicant did not contest those data.
On 21 January 2014, while still serving his sentence in Tallinn Prison, the applicant lodged a complaint with the prison administration, seeking compensation for non-pecuniary damage suffered as a result of being held in inadequate conditions of detention from 25 February 2011 to 21 November 2013. Tallinn Prison did not decide on his complaint in due time.
On 27 May 2014 the applicant lodged a complaint against Tallinn Prison with the Tallinn Administrative Court, seeking compensation in the amount of EUR 87,600 euros for non-pecuniary damage resulting from inadequate conditions of detention.  On 19 March 2015 the Tallinn Administrative Court partially granted the applicant’s claim and awarded him EUR 1,100 (administrative case no. 3-14-50937).  The applicant and Tallinn Prison challenged the first-instance judgment by lodging appeals before the Tallinn Court of Appeal.
By its judgment of 17 February 2016 the Court of Appeal dismissed the appeals but changed the reasoning of the first-instance judgement. The court granted the applicant EUR1100 on the grounds that he had been in inadequate conditions of detention and had not been provided with a lactose-free diet for two years, even though it had been prescribed by a doctor. The court held, inter alia, that it was a well-known fact that in Tallinn Prison the sanitary conditions and the conditions of the cells were poor.
The applicant then lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court, which refused leave to appeal on 25 April 2016.
The applicant was born in 1973. He was detained in Tallinn Prison on four occasions: from 25 August to 23 September 2004, from 28 February to 4 October 2007, from 28 October 2008 to 2 June 2009, and from 20 May 2010 to 14 July 2011.
According to the applicant, during his stay in Tallinn Prison, he was detained in inadequate conditions of detention. In particular, the cells in which he was placed were overcrowded and he had less than 3 square metres of personal space at his disposal. Moreover, throughout his confinement, except from 28 October 2008 to 2 June 2009, he was locked in the cell day and night, except for one hour of outdoor exercise per day. The outdoor exercise yard measured 15 square metres and was used by his cellmates at the same time. He had no access to a gym. His eyes hurt and his vision was impaired because of the poor lighting in the cell. The cell lacked fresh air and ventilation. The walls were covered with mould because the prisoners had to wash and dry their clothes there. The applicant contracted a skin infection due to the excessive moisture in the cells. The shower could be used only once a week. Music was played all day at a high volume. Meetings and phone calls with his family were limited. From 28 October 2008 to 2 June 2009, when the applicant was in the open section, the conditions of detention were no better. The cells were small, damp and cold. As there was no toilet in the cell, he sometimes had to wait for an hour until the guard let him use the communal toilet.
According to the data provided by the Government, the applicant was detained in Tallinn Prison during four different periods under different prison regimes, as follows:
The applicant did not contest those data.
On 30 January and 13 March 2014 the applicant lodged complaints with Tallinn Prison, seeking compensation for non-pecuniary damage resulting from the inadequate conditions of detention. Tallinn Prison did not respond to his complaints.
On 21 May 2014 the applicant lodged a complaint against Tallinn Prison with the Tartu Administrative Court, seeking compensation in the amount of EUR 20,000 for nonpecuniary damage resulting from inadequate conditions of detention.
On 21 May 2015 the Tartu Administrative Court granted the applicant’s claim and awarded him EUR 750 with regard to the period from 20 May 2010 to 14 July 2011. It dismissed the complaint with regard to the periods from 28 February to 4 October 2007 and from 28 October 2008 to 2 June 2009 on the grounds that it had been lodged outside the time-limit provided for under section 17(3) of the State Liability Act. The court of first instance refused to examine his complaints with regard to restrictions on communication with his family, infrequent access to a shower, and the playing of loud music in the prison, because the applicant had not raised those issues with the prison administration. The applicant and Tallinn Prison challenged the first-instance judgment by lodging appeals with the Tartu Court of Appeal.
In its judgment of 23 February 2016 the Court of Appeal quashed the first-instance judgment with regard to both the period from 20 May 2010 to 29 January 2011 and the amount of money the applicant had been awarded. It refused to examine the applicant’s complaint with regard to the impugned period on the grounds that he had not complied with the mandatory preaction procedure as required under Article 47 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Court Procedure as the complaint had been lodged outside the time-limit provided for under section 17(3) of the State Liability Act. The Court of Appeal reasoned the refusal to examine part of the claim as follows:
“14.  According to the appeal Mr Savva had repeatedly been detained in Tallinn Prison already before May 2010. Therefore, he should have immediately perceived the lack of personal space and the impact of it ...
The argument by Tallinn Prison, that the claim can be seen as [having been lodged] in due time only for the period of three years before the complaint was lodged, i.e. from 30.01.2011 to 14.07.2011, is correct. ...
The Court of Appeal is of the opinion that a person who is (allegedly) detained in degrading conditions for a long period has to realise the unlawfulness of those conditions and the damage sustained already when he is being kept in those conditions ...”
With regard to the period from 30 January to 14 July 2011, the Court of Appeal granted the applicant’s claim and awarded him EUR 50 on the grounds that for nineteen days the personal space available to him had fallen below 3 square metres of floor surface in the cell and he had been locked in the cell for twenty-three hours per day.
The applicant then lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court, which refused him leave to appeal on 14 April 2016.
The applicant was born in 1967. From 28 December 2009 to 9 November 2011 and from 7 to 21 December 2011 he was detained in Tallinn Prison. Until 20 October 2011 he was held in pre-trial custody and for the remaining period he was detained as a convicted prisoner under the reception regime.
According to the applicant, during his stay in Tallinn Prison, he was detained in inadequate conditions of detention. In particular, the cells in which he was placed were overcrowded and lacked basic hygiene and sanitary requirements. Throughout his confinement he had less than 3 square metres of personal space at his disposal. Moreover, he was locked in the cell day and night except for one hour of outdoor exercise per day. The cell had poor lighting and lacked ventilation, which could be felt especially in summer when there was not enough fresh air and it was too hot. He had to wash the dishes with cold water and without dishwashing liquid.
According to data provided by the Government, the applicant was detained in Tallinn Prison in two different periods as follows:
The applicant did not contest those data.
On 21 January 2014 the applicant lodged a complaint with Tallinn Prison, seeking compensation for non-pecuniary damage for inadequate conditions of detention. Tallinn Prison did not decide on his complaint in due time.
On 29 May 2014 the applicant lodged a complaint against Tallinn Prison with the Tartu Administrative Court, seeking compensation in the amount of EUR 11,954 for non-pecuniary damage resulting from inadequate conditions of detention.
On 29 September 2015 the Tartu Administrative Court partially granted the applicant’s claim and awarded him EUR 315 (administrative case no. 3-14-50997). The applicant and Tallinn Prison challenged the first-instance judgment by lodging appeals before the Tartu Court of Appeal.
By its judgment of 10 March 2016 the Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal, allowed the appeal of Tallinn Prison and quashed the first-instance judgment. It refused to examine the applicant’s complaint with regard to the period from 28 December 2009 to 20 January 2011 on the grounds that he had not complied with the mandatory pre-action procedure requirements under Article 47 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Court Procedure as the complaint had been lodged outside the time-limit provided for under section 17(3) of the State Liability Act. The Court of Appeal reasoned the refusal to examine part of the claim as follows:
“17.  The Court of Appeal is of the opinion that given the nature of the suffering described by the applicant, he should have realised the impact of the relevant circumstances practically from the first day of his detention in Tallinn Prison ...
The Court of Appeal is of the opinion that the applicant, who was allegedly living in degrading conditions for nearly two years, should have realised the unlawfulness of such conditions and the damage that was being caused to him already when he was living in those conditions and [the fact that] the time-limit for lodging a complaint had also started running. It follows from the nature of non-pecuniary damage that the damage occurs as soon as the relevant action takes place and the person is therefore immediately aware of the damage. Therefore, the applicant became aware of the damage and the body [responsible for] causing that damage already while he was living in the relevant conditions and thus did not abide by the three-year statutory time-limit when lodging his complaint with the prison administration with regard to the period from 28.12.2009 to 20.01.2011.”
With regard to the periods from 21 January to 9 November 2011 and from 7 December to 21 December 2011, the Court of Appeal dismissed the complaint as unfounded. It reasoned that the general conditions of the applicant’s detention had been appropriate. Considering also the short period, namely thirteen days spent in a cell affording less than 3 square metres of personal space, the conditions of his detention had not attained the minimum level of severity to amount to degrading treatment.
The applicant then lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court, which refused him leave to appeal on 28 April 2016.
The applicant was born in 1978. From 24 October 2008 to 26 July 2011 and from 23 April to 7 May 2013 the applicant was detained in Tallinn Prison. He was in pre-trial detention until 30 July 2010, under the reception regime until 18 August 2010 and was detained as a convicted person from 19 August 2010. Subsequently he was transferred to Viru Prison where he is currently serving his sentence.
According to the applicant, he was detained in inadequate conditions of detention in Tallinn Prison. In particular, the cells in which he was placed were overcrowded. Throughout his confinement he had less than 3 square metres of personal space at his disposal. Moreover, he was locked in the cell day and night except for one hour of outdoor exercise per day. The outdoor exercise yard measured 15 square metres and was used together with other inmates. He had no access to a gym.
According to the data provided by the Government, the applicant was detained in Tallinn Prison in two different periods under different regimes as follows:
The applicant did not contest those data.
On 9 June 2013 the applicant lodged a complaint with Tallinn Prison, seeking compensation for non-pecuniary damage resulting from inadequate conditions of detention.  On 8 August 2013 Tallinn Prison refused to examine his complaint with regard to the period from 24 October 2008 to 10 June 2010 and dismissed the rest of his complaint as unfounded.
On 8 September 2013 the applicant lodged a complaint against Tallinn Prison with the Tartu Administrative Court, seeking compensation in the amount of EUR 10,000 for non-pecuniary damage resulting from inadequate conditions of detention. On 11 March 2014 the Tartu Administrative Court partially granted the applicant’s claim in the amount of EUR 7,061 (administrative case no. 3-13-1885). The prison administration explained in those proceedings that it was not able to place the applicant in a cell which would afford him personal space of more than 3 square metres and it was not possible to transfer him to another prison for the same reason. The court of first instance refused to examine the applicant’s complaints with regard to alleged physical suffering, lack of privacy and lack of sports facilities. The applicant and Tallinn Prison challenged the first-instance judgment by lodging appeals before the Tartu Court of Appeal.
By a judgment of 16 December 2015 the Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal, partially upheld the appeal of Tallinn Prison and quashed the first-instance judgment. It refused to examine the applicant’s complaint with regard to the period from 24 October 2008 to 10 June 2010 on the grounds that he had not complied with the mandatory pre-action procedure as required under Article 47 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Court Procedure as the complaint had been lodged outside the time-limit provided for under section 17(3) of the State Liability Act. The Court of Appeal reasoned the refusal to examine part of the claim as follows:
“Given the nature of the suffering described by V. Tarasovski, he should have realised the impact of the relevant circumstances practically from the first day of his detention in Tallinn Prison. The prison [administration] explained that in 2008 when he had arrived in Tallinn Prison, he had been placed in cell no. 216 together with five other detainees. If the space of a toilet is excluded, the personal space afforded to one person was 2.55 square metres. Therefore, V. Tarasovski must have perceived the scarcity of space and realised its impact right away.”
The Court of Appeal granted the remainder of the applicant’s complaint and awarded him EUR 200, taking into account the different periods when he had been detained on remand and as a prisoner. The court held, inter alia, that the applicant’s failure to use preventive remedies under section 7(1) of the State Liability Act did not hinder granting the claim because a complaint by the applicant could not have alleviated the damage he had suffered.
The applicant then lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court, which refused him leave to appeal on 30 May 2016.
According to the Government, the general conditions of detention in Tallinn Prison were adequate. In particular, all prisoners had their own bed. Whether there was an in-cell lavatory depended on the particular unit of the prison. In the newer buildings, the cells had a lavatory and a washbasin with a cold water supply. Prisoners could get hot water by using a kettle or by contacting an officer with such a request. For washing dishes and clothes, the prison would lend a kettle. In older buildings accommodating convicted prisoners who were free to move around the section throughout the day, prisoners could use common rooms which had lavatories and washbasins with a hot water supply. All prisoners were ensured access to a shower at least once a week; additional opportunities were provided after use of the sports hall and, for prisoners engaged in employment, at the end of each working day.
Air circulation in the cells was ensured by natural ventilation. All cells had windows which could be opened either fully or in part. Cells were heated through a central heating system. The heating was automatically regulated in accordance with the outside temperature. During the summer, prisoners were allowed to take additional walks and since 2012 additional showers, and drinking water and fans were provided in each cell. Sufficient natural light was provided by means of windows. Artificial light was dependent on the size of the cell and the need, and was provided by means of two to three 75W lightbulbs. Additional lamps could be bought from the prison shop if needed.
All prisoners had the right to walk in the fresh air. Prisoners on remand and under the reception regime were ensured a one-hour daily walk. Exercise yards for prisoners on remand measured 14 to 15 square metres. The yards were furnished with benches; they had an open roof and a canopy. Since 2014 smokers and non-smokers could use separate yards. Convicted prisoners had an exercise yard measuring 152.93 to 270.47 square metres. Yards were furnished with benches and permanent equipment for exercises. Convicted prisoners were ensured at least four hours’ walk per day. They also had the opportunity to engage in sports (various ball games, running, table tennis and general physical activities) at the prison gym. Since 2014 smokers and non-smokers were allowed to walk in separate exercise yards upon request.
The prison organised basic and general secondary education for prisoners who wished to continue learning. Prisoners also had the opportunity to learn the national language. Upon request a prisoner was allowed to study in an educational establishment outside the prison. Prisoners could participate in further professional development and various social programmes, and attend recreational art, handicraft or music groups. All prisoners could use the library at least twice a month and subscribe to publications. The prison provided daily newspapers and the opportunity to listen to the radio.
The prison provided hot meals three times a day. The menu was based on the energy and nutritional needs of a person of average weight and height. Additional food could be bought from the prison shop. Personal dietary needs were reviewed during a health check by the prison doctor. The medical personnel were always present. General and specialist healthcare services were available at the prison and, if necessary, outside the prison.
The Government stressed that the current premises of Tallinn Prison would be closed on completion of the construction of a new prison facility at the end of 2018. According to the Government, the new prison would not raise any issues of inadequate conditions of detention under the Convention.
Article 46 § 4 of the Code of Administrative Court Procedure provides that an action for compensation or reparation may be lodged within three years of the date on which the applicant became aware, or should have become aware, of the harm and of the physical or legal person causing the harm, or of the consequences of the administrative decision or measure the elimination of which the applicant seeks. Nevertheless, the action must be lodged no later than ten years after the issuance of the administrative decision or legislative act, the taking of the administrative measure or notification of the decision in relation to the administration of justice which caused the damage or gave rise to the consequences.
Article 47 § 1 describes the mandatory pre-action procedure as follows:
“The law may prescribe mandatory challenge proceedings or other mandatory pre-action procedures for resolving certain types of claims. In that case, an action may be lodged only if the person has complied with the pre-action procedure prescribed for dealing with the claim and only to the extent that the person’s claim has not been allowed in the pre-action proceedings in due time.”
Section 1-1(5) and (8) of the Imprisonment Act provides:
 “(5) Convicted and remand prisoners have the right to lodge complaints with an administrative court against administrative decisions issued or measures taken by a prison on the basis of and pursuant to the procedure provided for in the Code of Administrative Court Procedure, provided that the prisoner has previously lodged a complaint with the prison administration or the Ministry of Justice and that they have rejected the claim, granted the claim in part, dismissed the claim or failed to adjudicate in due time.”
“(8) A convicted or remand prisoner has the right of recourse to an administrative court to seek compensation for damage caused by a prison if the prisoner has previously applied to the prison for compensation for damage pursuant to the procedure provided for in the State Liability Act and the prison has refused to hear or dismissed the claim or failed to adjudicate in due time.”
Under section 1-1(7) such complaint must be resolved within thirty days of the date on which it was lodged with the authority responsible for reviewing the complaint. Section 1-1(1) provides that administrative proceedings are conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act.
Section 85 of the Administrative Procedure Act provides that when adjudicating a matter on the merits, the authorities are empowered to allow the complaint, revoke an administrative decision either wholly or partially and eliminate its factual consequences; instruct that an administrative decision be issued for a measure to be taken or for fresh resolution of the matter; instruct the reversal of a measure; or dismiss the complaint.
Section 7(1) of the State Liability Act provides:
“(1) A person whose rights have been violated by unlawful actions of a public authority in a public-law relationship (hereinafter ‘the injured party’) may claim compensation for damage caused to the person if the damage could not have been prevented and cannot be eliminated by the protection or restoration of rights in the manner provided for in sections 3, 4 and 6 of this Act.”
Sections 3, 4 and 6 provide that a person has the right to request the revocation of an administrative decision which is in violation of his or her rights. A person may request the termination of a violation of his or her rights resulting from a continuing administrative measure if the termination is possible without excessive costs. A person also has the right to request that an administrative decision be issued or a measure taken if the public authority is required to issue the administrative decision or take the measure and that decision or measure concerns the rights of that person.
Section 9 of the State Liability Act sets out the rules concerning compensation for non-pecuniary damage:
“(1)  A person may claim financial compensation for non-pecuniary damage resulting from wrongful undermining of dignity, damage to health, deprivation of liberty, violation of the inviolability of the person’s home or private life or of the confidentiality of their correspondence, or defamation of the person’s honour or good name.
(2)  Non-pecuniary damage shall be compensated for in proportion to the gravity of the violation, taking into account the form and gravity of the fault (süü vorm ja raskus).
(3)  Fault for causing damage is not taken into consideration if compensation for non-pecuniary damage is claimed on the basis of a decision by the European Court of Human Rights establishing a violation of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms or any of its protocols by a public authority.”
Section 17(3) of the State Liability Act provides procedural rules for lodging a claim for damages:
“(1)  In order to claim compensation for damage, an application may be lodged with the administrative authority which caused the damage or an action may be lodged with an administrative court. Applications for compensation for damage caused by the courts shall be lodged with the Ministry of Justice.”
“(3)  An application or action shall be lodged within three years of the date on which the injured party became aware or should have become aware of the damage and of the physical or legal person who caused it, but no later than ten years after the causing of damage or the event which caused the damage, regardless of whether the injured party became aware of the damage and of the person who caused it.”
Sections 8 and 16 of the Treatment Plan provide that a prisoner will be relocated at the request of the director of the prison in which the prisoner is detained. Section 2(2) provides that the Ministry of Justice will decide whether to grant the request.
Section 6(2) provides that prisoners will be held in closed or open prisons. Section 8(1) provides for the general conditions of a closed prison as follows:
“(1) Prisoners shall be permitted to move about within the grounds of a closed prison at the locations and times provided for in the prison’s internal rules and rules of procedure. Prisoners shall be separated in locked cells allocated to them from lights-out until wake-up and at other times, as provided for in the prison’s internal rules and rules of procedure.”
The general conditions of open prisons are set out in section 10(1) and (2):
“(1) Prisoners are permitted to move about freely within the grounds of an open prison from wake-up until lights-out. With the permission of the prison administration, prisoners are also permitted to go outside the grounds of an open prison in connection with their studies, work or to receive healthcare services.”
“(2) From lights-out until wake-up, prisoners shall be separated in the cells allocated to them, which shall be locked, if necessary. With the permission of a prison officer, prisoners shall be permitted to stay from lights-out until wake-up within or outside the grounds of an open prison in connection with their work.”
Section 90(3) sets out the general conditions for remand prisoners as follows:
“Remand prisoners shall be kept in locked cells twenty-four hours a day, except when they are working or studying. Remand prisoners who are accused in the same criminal case shall be kept separately.”
Under section 93(5), a remand prisoner is allowed to be in the open air for at least one hour daily, if he or she so wishes. Under section 37 working is mandatory for convicted prisoners.
Under section 45 prison cells have to meet the general requirements established for dwellings on the basis of the Building Code. Cells must be well ventilated and light, and have an ambient temperature. They must have a window and sufficient artificial lighting. The Minister of Justice is responsible for the internal rules of prisons, establishing the size of cells and listing the items of furniture. Prisoners are required to clean their cells and the furnishings and keep them in order.
Section 19(1) and (2) of the Imprisonment Act provides for a prisoner’s transfer as follows:
“A prisoner may be transferred from one closed prison to another or from one open prison to another if such transfer is necessary for the implementation of the individual treatment plan of the prisoner, to achieve the objectives of the prison sentence or for reasons of security. The minister responsible shall approve the procedure for transfer of prisoners.”
Section 8 of the Internal Prison Rules deals with restrictions on convicted prisoners’ movement and provides as follows:
“(1) Convicted prisoners, except those in an open prison, are not obliged to stay in their cell if they are engaged in social reintegration activities. Convicted prisoners are allowed to spend time outside their cell within the section in accordance with the relevant prison house rules. Prisoners must be provided with at least 4 hours of free time to move around within their section.”
The Internal Prison Rules, in force until 31 December 2013, provided that there had to be at least 2.5 square metres of floor space per prisoner in a room or cell. Since 1 January 2014 the Rules provide that there has to be at least 2.5 square metres of floor space in a room and at least 3 square metres in a cell per prisoner.
In a judgment of 11 November 2008 (no. 3-3-1-68-08) the Supreme Court explained that section 1-1(8) of the Imprisonment Act provided that the court may only examine a claim for damages lodged by a prisoner insofar as he or she had complied with the mandatory pre-action procedure. In its judgment of 3 March 2004 (no. 3-4-1-5-04) the Supreme Court’s Constitutional Review Chamber held that the mandatory pre-action procedure was in conformity with the right to effective legal protection and fair administration of justice, provided that it was not excessively long and the right to appeal to a court was guaranteed.
The Supreme Court has repeatedly explained that section 7(1) of the State Liability Act gives rise to the principle that, if possible, an injured party must try to prevent any damage by lodging a timely complaint about the actions of a public authority causing the damage. In a judgment of 11 March 2004 (no. 3-3-1-8-04) the court explained as follows:
“Section 7(1) of the State Liability Act reflects the principle that a claim for damages is dismissed if the person could have avoided suffering the damage by lodging, either in challenge proceedings or in administrative court proceedings, an application for annulment of an administrative decision, termination of a measure, the issuing of an administrative decision, or the taking of a measure.”
The court further explained that failing to use those preventive remedies would exclude the granting of damages if it had been clear to the injured party that they could have used a preventive remedy to avoid the damage and the person had no good reasons for failing to lodge the relevant complaint. The court then noted:
“Failing to use preventive remedies does not therefore always give grounds to dismiss a claim for damages.”
In a judgment of 27 May 2016 (case no. 3-3-1-21-16) the Supreme Court explained that the failure to use preliminary remedies could not be imputed to an applicant if using it would not have prevented or eliminated the damage or restricted its extent. According to the reasoning of the Supreme Court, the prison administration itself had confirmed in many domestic proceedings that lack of personal space was a result of a general problem of overcrowding in prisons and it was not in the prison administration’s power to resolve the issue. If a prison administration had any remedies to reduce the impact of overcrowding, it was obliged to use them on its own motion. It had not been shown that this had been done. Using preventive remedies would therefore not have had any reasonable prospect of success. Failure to use such remedies could not be held as grounds for refusing to award compensation for non-pecuniary damage. The Supreme Court maintained that position in subsequent judgments. In its decision of 15 June 2016 (case no. 3-3-1-16-16) it reiterated that as the prison administration itself had explained, it did not have the means to afford prisoners more personal space, and allocating prisoners to other prison facilities was impeded. Therefore, failure to use the preventive remedies did not give grounds to dismiss an applicant’s claim for damages.
In a judgment of 6 March 2014 (in case no. 3-3-1-93-13) the Supreme Court explained how the statutory time-limit for lodging a claim for damages was calculated, as set out in section 17(3) of the State Liability Act, in cases concerning inadequate conditions of detention. The Supreme Court stated that the running of the time-limit in the event of a continuous situation may start at a different time depending on when the injured person became aware or should have become aware of the damage and of the physical or legal person causing it. In the event of inhuman or degrading conditions of detention, a claim for damages was inseparably related to the duration of such treatment. Both the overall duration of the detention and the duration of particular periods of time had to be taken into account, as the conditions in different periods might differ and have different effects on the detainee. Lastly, the particular circumstances of each case, the gravity of the violation and its cumulative effect had to be taken into account. Detention was a continuous action during which circumstances might change. It was therefore not always possible to determine when the detainee had become or ought to have become aware of the damage caused.
The court further explained that in the event of a continuous situation, the time-limit usually started running after the situation had ended:
“14.  The applicant’s detention in degrading conditions in the period from 31 August 2007 to 15 February 2008 was a continuous administrative action. When establishing the damage that is caused by degrading conditions of detention, the cumulative effect of the circumstances, their intensity and gravity, and the duration of the detention have to be taken into account. Damage was caused to the applicant throughout this period and the final extent of the damage appeared only after the end of the continuous action. In these circumstances, the time a person becomes aware of the damage caused, within the meaning of section 17(3) of the State Liability Act and section 9(4) of the Administrative Procedure Act, occurs after the end of the continuous action causing the damage, and the preconditions of section 17(3) of the State Liability Act are fulfilled. Therefore, in the case of continuous action, the time-limit for lodging a claim for damage usually starts running when the continuous action ends. The time-limit may start running before the end of the continuous action in exceptional circumstances if it is clear that the person already became aware or should have become aware of the final extent of the damage.
The applicant lodged his claim (on 15 February 2011) within three years of the date of the end of his detention in degrading conditions (on 15 February 2008). In the instant case the applicant was held in these conditions continuously for approximately six months. His claim for damages for the period from 31 August 2007 to 15 February 2008 was therefore lodged in due time.”
The Supreme Court reiterated those criteria in its judgments of 15 June 2015 (case no. 3-3-1-20-15) and 27 April 2016 (no. 3-3-1-68-15). It held that if the conditions of an applicant’s detention significantly changed, his detention in different conditions must be regarded as separate actions and he therefore had to have become aware of the damage after the end of such action. The court also explained:
“12.  The longer the alleged period of action causing the damage that exceeds the three-year time-limit, the more significant the arguments have to be as to why the applicant could not and should not have become aware of the damage before the end of the continuous situation. Otherwise the time-limit set out in section 17 of the State Liability Act would become illusory and considerable accumulation of damage may occur as a result of delay with lodging the claim. Delaying the lodging of a complaint must not be motivated by an aim to obtain greater compensation.”
In its judgments of 12 May 2017 (case no. 3-3-1-68-15) and 17 March 2017 (case no. 3-3-1-89-16) the Supreme Court did not find it credible that the applicants had not understood, within a reasonable time, the unlawfulness of the conditions of their detention. In its judgment of 12 May 2017 (case no. 3-3-1-98-16) the Supreme Court, referring to its previous case-law, reiterated that the time-limit for lodging a claim for damages usually started running when the continuous act ended, unless it was clear that the person had become or should have become aware of the damage at an earlier stage. The Supreme Court explained:
“12.  Even if the applicant realised immediately after his placement in the prison that the scarcity of personal space might violate his human dignity, the time-limit for lodging a claim starts running after he realises that he is suffering damage. The case-law does not consider a short allocation to scarce personal space to be such a serious violation of human rights that it would justify awarding compensation. Similarly, the time-limit for lodging a claim for compensation does not start running when the person is placed in such conditions and each day in inadequate conditions does not constitute a separate action.”
In pursuance of Article 7 of the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, a delegation of the CPT carried out a periodic visit to Estonia from 30 May to 6 June 2012. It was the Committee’s fifth visit to Estonia. The Committee adopted its report at its 79th meeting, held from 5 to 9 November 2012.
The relevant parts of the report (CPT/Inf (2014) 1) read as follows:
“Preliminary remarks
...
Tallinn Prison has been visited by the Committee on several occasions. This establishment is one of the last vestiges of a previous era remaining to be removed from the prison estate. Its replacement by a new prison in the Tallinn area has long been planned. However, the delegation was informed that the completion of the new prison – previously announced for 2011 – was not now envisaged before 2017 due to planning difficulties and budgetary constraints.
The prison has an official capacity of 1,179 places and at the time of the visit was accommodating 1,094 inmates, 664 sentenced and 430 on remand. The inmates included eight persons serving a life sentence, and the CPT is pleased to note that these prisoners were not held separately but instead had been integrated into the general sentenced inmate population. This is an example that certain other countries could usefully follow.
...
Representatives of the Ministry of Justice indicated that prisoners in multi-occupancy cells had at least 4 m² of living space in the recently opened prisons of Tartu and Viru. However, the minimum legal standard of 2.5 m² of living space per prisoner as laid down in the Internal Prison Rules of the Ministry of Justice remained unchanged and was still applied in the other prisons. As the CPT has repeatedly made clear, this standard is too low. The authorities indicated that they intended to raise the minimum standard to 4 m² when the new Tallinn Prison became operational.
Section 111 of the Imprisonment Act – entitled "Prohibition of overcrowding" – provides that "the number of prisoners in a prison shall not exceed the maximum number of prisoners established for the prison by the Minister of Justice". The Ministry should determine this maximum number, based on the individual prison’s capacity to organise the living conditions, work, study and leisure activities of its prisoners. Section 111 will enter into force on 1 January 2015 and to implement this provision, the authorities intend – if necessary – to establish a waiting list of prisoners.
...
Tallinn Prison
general conditions of detention
Material conditions at Tallinn Prison have been described in detail in previous CPT reports and there has been no fundamental change since the last visit in 2007. The conditions were substandard, a fact acknowledged by both the management of the prison and the national authorities.
The occupancy levels in all areas of the prison remained high. For example in the two main accommodation blocks, E1 and E2, many 15 m² cells were accommodating six persons. Such a rate of occupancy may be in accordance with the current internal prison rules, but for the CPT it amounts to serious overcrowding (see paragraph 43).
Further, most of the cells were dilapidated, poorly ventilated and in a poor state of hygiene (leaking pipes, mould in the sanitary facilities, etc.). One of the few positive points was that the incell sanitary facilities were fully partitioned.
...
As for the regime, it remained impoverished for all remand prisoners as well as for a large proportion of the convicted population. The vast majority of remand prisoners spent 23 hours a day confined to their poorly equipped and often overpopulated cells; their only regular out-of-cell activity was one hour of daily outdoor exercise which was taken in small yards (14 m²) of oppressive design. The delegation was informed that remand prisoners were allowed to follow a limited number of programmes (anger management, life style education, social skills, Estonian language course and stop smoking programmes) as well as to have access to the sports hall one hour every week. However, many remand prisoners interviewed were apparently not aware of the programmes available; steps should be taken to remedy this situation.
As regards the convicted population, only 138 out of 664 prisoners had work; they were involved in domestic duties including cleaning, cooking and food distribution. The Director expressed his regret that no further work could be provided to prisoners. In addition to the programmes available to remand prisoners, sentenced inmates were offered further activities including ‘aggressiveness replacement’ training, traffic safety or pre-release programmes. However, as far as the delegation could ascertain, only a small number of inmates benefited from them.
The CPT has already recommended that in the context of the entry into force of Section 111 of the Imprisonment Act in January 2015, the maximum authorised number of prisoners per establishment should be calculated on the basis of 4 m² of living space per prisoner (not counting the area taken up by any in-cell toilet facility). Obviously, this recommendation should apply to Tallinn Prison if it is still in service at that time.
Further, the CPT calls upon the Estonian authorities to ensure that the detention areas, related sanitary/washing facilities and outdoor exercise areas are maintained in – and as necessary restored to – a satisfactory state of repair and hygiene. This constitutes a basic obligation of the State vis-à-vis persons who it deprives of their liberty.
The Committee also invites the Estonian authorities to allow more frequent access to shower facilities, taking into account Rule 19.4 of the European Prison Rules. At the time of the visit, prisoners were entitled to shower only once a week.
The cells in units III and IV, which were used to accommodate sentenced prisoners including those with a job, did not have in-cell sanitation. A number of prisoners complained about delays – on occasion, for up to one hour – in gaining access to the toilet during the night. Recently, the NPM drew similar conclusions. The CPT recommends that steps be taken to ensure that all prisoners held in the establishment who need to use a toilet facility are able to do so without delay at all times, including at night.
It is clearly unrealistic in the present premises of the Tallinn Prison to offer a satisfactory programme of out-of-cell activities (education, sports and recreational activities) to remand prisoners. However, the introduction of association periods with prisoners from other cells for some hours per day should certainly be feasible from a practical standpoint. The CPT recommends that such periods be introduced; if necessary, the relevant provisions of the Imprisonment Act should be amended.
As regards sentenced inmates, the CPT recommends that efforts be made to enhance the programme of out-of-cell activities and in particular to provide work (preferably of a vocational value) to a larger number of prisoners.
...
Recommendations
–  the minimum standard of living space per prisoner to be raised to 4 m² (not counting the area taken up by any in-cell toilet facility) at Tallinn Prison by 1 January 2015, if the establishment is still in service at that time (paragraph 53);
–  the Estonian authorities to ensure that the detention areas, related sanitary/washing facilities and outdoor exercise areas are maintained in – and as necessary restored to – a satisfactory state of repair and hygiene (paragraph 53);
–  steps to be taken to ensure that all prisoners who need to use a toilet facility are able to do so without delay at all times, including at night (paragraph 54);
–  association periods with prisoners from other cells to be introduced for remand prisoners; if necessary, the relevant provisions of the Imprisonment Act should be amended (paragraph 55);
–  efforts to be made to enhance the programme of out-of-cell activities for sentenced prisoners and in particular to provide work (preferably of a vocational value) to a larger number of them (paragraph 55);
–  the Estonian authorities to take Block K1 out of service without delay (paragraph 57);
–  juveniles temporarily placed at Tallinn Prison to be accommodated in facilities which fully respect their physical and mental integrity (paragraph 58);
–  the Estonian authorities to take steps to ensure that female prisoners are held in accommodation which is physically separated from that occupied by male prisoners (paragraph 59);
–  association periods with prisoners from other cells to be introduced for the female remand prisoners (paragraph 59);
–  the Estonian authorities to ensure that female prisoners have access to adequate quantities of essential hygiene products (paragraph 60).
Comments
–  steps should be taken to ensure that remand prisoners at Tallinn Prison are aware of the programmes available (paragraph 52);
–  the Estonian authorities are invited to allow prisoners more frequent access to shower facilities, taking into account Rule 19.4 of the European Prison Rules (paragraphs 53 and 60).”
On 11 January 20016 the Committee of Ministers of the Counsil of Europe noted that the European Prison Rules, adopted on 12 February 1987 to establish the minimum standards to be applied in prisons, “needed to be substantively revised and updated in order to reflect the developments which ha[d] occurred in penal policy, sentencing practice and the overall management of prisons in Europe”, adopted Recommendation Rec(2006)2 on the European Prison Rules. The new, 2006 version of the Rules featured as an appendix to that Recommendation. It reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“Part I
Basic principles
All persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated with respect for their human rights.
Persons deprived of their liberty retain all rights that are not lawfully taken away by the decision sentencing them or remanding them in custody.
3  Restrictions placed on persons deprived of their liberty shall be the minimum necessary and proportionate to the legitimate objective for which they are imposed.
Prison conditions that infringe prisoners’ human rights are not justified by lack of resources.
Life in prison shall approximate as closely as possible the positive aspects of life in the community.
All detention shall be managed so as to facilitate the reintegration into free society of persons who have been deprived of their liberty.
...
Scope and application
1.  The European Prison Rules apply to persons who have been remanded in custody by a judicial authority or who have been deprived of their liberty following conviction.
2.  In principle, persons who have been remanded in custody by a judicial authority and persons who are deprived of their liberty following conviction should only be detained in prisons, that is, in institutions reserved for detainees of these two categories.
3  The Rules also apply to persons:
who may be detained for any other reason in a prison; or
who have been remanded in custody by a judicial authority or deprived of their liberty following conviction and who may, for any reason, be detained elsewhere.
...
Part II
Conditions of imprisonment
...
Allocation and accommodation
...
1.  The accommodation provided for prisoners, and in particular all sleeping accommodation, shall respect human dignity and, as far as possible, privacy, and meet the requirements of health and hygiene, due regard being paid to climatic conditions and especially to floor space, cubic content of air, lighting, heating and ventilation.
2.  In all buildings where prisoners are required to live, work or congregate:
the windows shall be large enough to enable the prisoners to read or work by natural light in normal conditions and shall allow the entrance of fresh air except where there is an adequate air conditioning system;
artificial light shall satisfy recognised technical standards; and
there shall be an alarm system that enables prisoners to contact the staff without delay.
3.  Specific minimum requirements in respect of the matters referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be set in national law.
4.  National law shall provide mechanisms for ensuring that these minimum requirements are not breached by the overcrowding of prisons.
5.  Prisoners shall normally be accommodated during the night in individual cells except where it is preferable for them to share sleeping accommodation.
6.  Accommodation shall only be shared if it is suitable for this purpose and shall be occupied by prisoners suitable to associate with each other.
7.  As far as possible, prisoners shall be given a choice before being required to share sleeping accommodation.
8.  In deciding to accommodate prisoners in particular prisons or in particular sections of a prison due account shall be taken of the need to detain:
untried prisoners separately from sentenced prisoners;
male prisoners separately from females; and
young adult prisoners separately from older prisoners.
9.  Exceptions can be made to the requirements for separate detention in terms of paragraph 8 in order to allow prisoners to participate jointly in organised activities, but these groups shall always be separated at night unless they consent to be detained together and the prison authorities judge that it would be in the best interest of all the prisoners concerned.
10.  Accommodation of all prisoners shall be in conditions with the least restrictive security arrangements compatible with the risk of their escaping or harming themselves or others.
...
Hygiene
1  All parts of every prison shall be properly maintained and kept clean at all times.
2  When prisoners are admitted to prison the cells or other accommodation to which they are allocated shall be clean.
3  Prisoners shall have ready access to sanitary facilities that are hygienic and respect privacy.
4  Adequate facilities shall be provided so that every prisoner may have a bath or shower, at a temperature suitable to the climate, if possible daily but at least twice a week (or more frequently if necessary) in the interest of general hygiene.
5  Prisoners shall keep their persons, clothing and sleeping accommodation clean and tidy.
6  The prison authorities shall provide them with the means for doing so including toiletries and general cleaning implements and materials.
...
Clothing and bedding
...
Every prisoner shall be provided with a separate bed and separate and appropriate bedding, which shall be kept in good order and changed often enough to ensure its cleanliness.
Nutrition
1  Prisoners shall be provided with a nutritious diet that takes into account their age, health, physical condition, religion, culture and the nature of their work.
...
Prison regime
1  The regime provided for all prisoners shall offer a balanced programme of activities.
2  This regime shall allow all prisoners to spend as many hours a day outside their cells as are necessary for an adequate level of human and social interaction.
3  This regime shall also provide for the welfare needs of prisoners.
...
Work
1  Prison work shall be approached as a positive element of the prison regime and shall never be used as a punishment.
2  Prison authorities shall strive to provide sufficient work of a useful nature.
...
Exercise and recreation
1  Every prisoner shall be provided with the opportunity of at least one hour of exercise every day in the open air, if the weather permits.
2  When the weather is inclement alternative arrangements shall be made to allow prisoners to exercise.
3  Properly organised activities to promote physical fitness and provide for adequate exercise and recreational opportunities shall form an integral part of prison regimes.
4  Prison authorities shall facilitate such activities by providing appropriate installations and equipment.
5  Prison authorities shall make arrangements to organise special activities for those prisoners who need them.
6  Recreational opportunities, which include sport, games, cultural activities, hobbies and other leisure pursuits, shall be provided and, as far as possible, prisoners shall be allowed to organise them.
7  Prisoners shall be allowed to associate with each other during exercise and in order to take part in recreational activities.
Education
1  Every prison shall seek to provide all prisoners with access to educational programmes which are as comprehensive as possible and which meet their individual needs while taking into account their aspirations.
...
Part VIII
Sentenced prisoners
Objective of the regime for sentenced prisoners
1  In addition to the rules that apply to all prisoners, the regime for sentenced prisoners shall be designed to enable them to lead a responsible and crime-free life.
2  Imprisonment is by the deprivation of liberty a punishment in itself and therefore the regime for sentenced prisoners shall not aggravate the suffering inherent in imprisonment.
Implementation of the regime for sentenced prisoners
1  The regime for sentenced prisoners shall commence as soon as someone has been admitted to prison with the status of a sentenced prisoner, unless it has commenced before.
2  As soon as possible after such admission, reports shall be drawn up for sentenced prisoners about their personal situations, the proposed sentence plans for each of them and the strategy for preparation for their release.
3  Sentenced prisoners shall be encouraged to participate in drawing up their individual sentence plans.
4  Such plans shall as far as is practicable include:
work;
education;
other activities; and
preparation for release.
...
Work by sentenced prisoners
1  A systematic programme of work shall seek to contribute to meeting the objective of the regime for sentenced prisoners.
...
Education of sentenced prisoners
1  A systematic programme of education, including skills training, with the objective of improving prisoners’ overall level of education as well as their prospects of leading a responsible and crime-free life, shall be a key part of regimes for sentenced prisoners.
...”