The case originated in four applications (nos. 35090/09, 35845/11, 45694/13 and 59747/14) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Russian nationals (“the applicants”). The applicants’ details and those of their representatives, as well as the dates on which they lodged their applications are set out in the “Facts” section below.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants alleged, in particular, violations of their respective right to respect for family life stemming from the Russian authorities’ decisions on allocation of post-conviction prisoners. Mr Palilov also complained under Article 6 of the Convention that he could not attend court hearings in the civil proceedings.
Between 13 October 2014 and 15 April 2015 questions under Articles 8 and 13 of the Convention, as well as under Article 6 of the Convention as regards Mr Palilov’s complaint, were put to the Government, and the remainder of application no. 35845/11 was declared inadmissible.
The applicants in each case were affected by decisions of the Russian Federal Penal Authority («Федеральная служба исполнения наказаний», “the FSIN”) on prisoners’ allocation to post-conviction penal facilities. The applicants’ individual circumstances are detailed below.
The application was lodged on 13 June 2009 by Ms Elvira Vasilyevna Polyakova, who was born in 1976 and lives in Vladivostok, Primorskiy Region. She was represented before the Court by Ms L. Ovchinnikova, a lawyer practising in Vladivostok.
The applicant is the live-in partner of Mr R. The couple originally set up home in Vladivostok in the Primorskiy Region. They have a son born in 2003.
On 22 May 2008 Mr R. was convicted of drug-related crimes and sentenced to ten years’ imprisonment in a strict-regime penal facility. After the conviction became final he was allocated to IK-33 in the Primorskiy Region, close to his family home.
In September 2008 the head of the Primorskiy regional department of the FSIN decided to transfer Mr R. to the Krasnoyarsk Region, some 5,000 kilometres from Vladivostok. It appears that the basis for this decision was a telegram of 18 April 2008 from the deputy head of the FSIN of Russia that read as follows:
“The Primorskiy regional department of the FSIN are allowed, until special notice, to send up to thirty convicts per month from remand prisons to the care of the Krasnoyarskiy regional department of the FSIN pursuant to Article 73 § 2 of the CES.”
On 30 September 2008 the Primorskiy regional department of the FSIN informed Ms Polyakova that her request for Mr R. to be allowed to remain in the facility in the Primorskiy Region had been refused, and advised the applicant as follows:
“... pursuant to Article 73 § 2 of the CES and the instruction by the FSIN of Russia, on 14 September 2008 Mr R. was sent to serve the remainder of his sentence in the care of the Krasnoyarskiy regional department of the FSIN. You will be notified of his arrival at a penal facility.”
The applicant challenged the FSIN’s decision before a court, asking for her partner to be transferred back to the Primorskiy Region so that she and their son could afford to visit him.
On 28 October 2008 the Sovetskiy District Court of Vladivostok examined the applicant’s complaint under Article 258 of the Russian Code of Civil Procedure (“CCP”) and dismissed it. It found, referring to Article 73 § 2 of the Russian Code on the Execution of Sentences (“CES”), that strict-regime facilities in the Primorskiy Region were overcrowded and that transfers of a number of detainees to other facilities had been necessary for their own safety, as there could be conflicts among inmates fighting for a sleeping place. The District Court dismissed the applicant’s argument related to her family life as unsubstantiated, stating that she could apply to the FSIN for permission to visit Mr R. in the Krasnoyarsk Region.
On 30 December 2008 the FSIN of Russia dismissed the applicant’s request for Mr R. to be transferred from the penal facility in the Krasnoyarsk Region to one in the Primorskiy Region, stating that under Article 81 of the CES prisoners should, as a rule, serve the entirety of their sentence in the same penal facility, and that there were no reasons for Mr R.’s transfer.
On 13 January 2009 the Primorskiy Regional Court summarily dismissed the applicant’s appeal.
The applicant and her son visited Mr R. in the penal facility in the Krasnoyarsk Region on three occasions.
The application was lodged on 6 June 2011 by Ms Natalya Anatolyevna Kibalo, born in 1979, Miss Linda Aliyevna Kibalo, born in 2006, and Miss Iman Aliyevna Kibalo, born in 2009. The applicants live in the village of Dubovskaya in the Shelkovskiy District of the Chechen Republic. They were represented before the Court by lawyers of the Memorial Human Rights Centre.
Ms Natalya Kibalo is the wife of Mr Kh. The couple are the parents of Linda and Iman Kibalo.
On 29 May 2007 the Supreme Court of Dagestan found Mr Kh. guilty of kidnapping, illegal possession of arms, and attempted murder of a law-enforcement officer. Mr Kh. was sentenced to twenty years’ imprisonment in a strict-regime penal facility. The judgment was upheld on appeal.
On an unspecified date the FSIN decided to send Mr Kh. to serve his sentence outside the North Caucasus area.
On 7 February 2008 Mr Kh. arrived at UV14/8, a strict-regime penal facility in the town of Blagoveshchensk in the Amur Region, some 8,000 kilometres from Dubovskaya village.
Ms Natalya Kibalo asked the FSIN to transfer Mr Kh. to a penal facility located closer to their home village, arguing that she had been de facto deprived of the opportunity to visit her husband because it would take her about eight days to travel from her home village to Blagoveshchensk by train, and because the cost of the trip was prohibitive for her as an unemployed mother of two young children.
On 25 May 2009 the head of a department of the FSIN dismissed the first applicant’s request, referring to the lack of grounds for transfer listed in Article 81 of the CES. Ms Natalya Kibalo challenged the refusal before a court.
On 21 August 2009 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court of Moscow refused to examine Ms Natalya Kibalo’s complaint on the merits, stating that she had no standing to bring a complaint on behalf of her husband. The Moscow City Court quashed that ruling on 14 January 2010 on appeal.
On 17 June 2010 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court of Moscow held a hearing in the absence of both parties. It examined Ms Natalya Kibalo’s complaint under Articles 254-6 and 258 of the CCP and dismissed it. The District Court observed that Mr Kh. had been allocated to the penal facility in Blagoveshchensk under Article 73 § 4 of the CES, and that under Article 81 of the CES, as a rule, convicts should serve their sentence in the same facility throughout. It reasoned that Mr Kh. had breached prison rules on multiple occasions both in the remand prison and in UV14/8, and that he had been “convicted of terrorist offences in the Dagestan Republic, shows no remorse, and does not undertake to commit no unlawful actions in the future”. The judgment read, in particular, as follows:
“The claimant’s argument that neither she nor her children could come to visit [Mr A. Kh.] because he is serving his sentence in the Amur Region cannot be taken into consideration, because the possibility of receiving visits is governed by the norms of the CES and is unrelated to the location of a penal facility.”
On 7 December 2010 the Moscow City Court upheld the judgment of 17 June 2010 on appeal. It reasoned that the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court had not erred in finding that there were no grounds listed in Article 81 of the CES that would warrant Mr Kh.’s transfer to another penal facility, and that “the appeal statement contain[ed] no references to circumstances that would refute the [first-instance] court’s findings and demonstrate that there were grounds for Mr Kh.’s transfer from one facility to another within the meaning of Article 81 of the CES”.
Between 2008 and 2012 Ms Natalya Kibalo visited her husband in Blagoveshchensk on eight occasions. On six of those occasions, between 2008 and 2010, her travel expenses were sponsored. She visited her husband once in 2011 and once in 2012 but could not afford to travel at all in 2013 or 2014. Miss Linda Kibalo accompanied her mother on her trip to visit Mr Kh. once. Miss Iman Kibalo, born during Mr A. Kh.’s detention, has never seen her father.
The application was lodged on 13 July 2013 by Mr Ivan Dhzimsherovich Yeliashvili, who was born in 1979 and lives in Noginsk, the Moscow Region. He is currently serving his sentence in IK-8 in Labytnangi, the Yamalo-Nenetskiy Region. The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented before the Court by Mr V. Shukhardin, a lawyer practising in Moscow.
By a final judgment of 8 September 2009 the Moscow Regional Court convicted the applicant of robbery and sentenced him to eleven years’ imprisonment in a strict-regime facility.
On 15 September 2009 the FSIN decided to send the applicant to serve his sentence in IK-8 in the settlement of Labytnangi in the YamaloNenetskiy Region, located about 3,300 kilometres from Noginsk.
The applicant asked the FSIN to transfer him to a facility closer to Noginsk, arguing that his father, brother, sister and nephew all lived in that town and that they would have no realistic opportunity to visit him in Labytnangi. On 21 November 2011 the FSIN dismissed his request, noting that the applicant had been allocated to the penal facility in Labytnangi under Article 73 § 2 of the CES because of the lack of strict-regime penal facilities in the Moscow Region, and that under Article 81 of the CES prisoners should serve their entire sentence in the same penal facility.
The applicant challenged the FSIN’s refusal before a court. On 11 April 2012 the FSIN submitted their objections to the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court of Moscow, which read, in particular, as follows:
“The claimant’s arguments that he is unable to receive visits from his relatives cannot be taken into account, because the possibility of receiving visits from next of kin and relatives is governed by the norms of the Russian Code on the Execution of Sentences and is unrelated to the location of any penal facility.”
On 5 June 2012 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court of Moscow examined the applicant’s complaint under Articles 254-5 and 258 of the CCP, and dismissed it with reference to Articles 73 and 81 of the CES. The judgment read, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“The claimant’s arguments that it is difficult to receive visits from relatives owing to the remoteness of the [place of] the sentence is being served cannot be taken into account by the court, because the possibility of receiving visits is governed by the norms of the Russian CES and is unrelated to the location of any penal facility.”
On 14 January 2013 the Moscow City Court upheld the first-instance judgment.
To date, the applicant’s relatives have not been able to afford to visit him in Labytnangi.
The application was lodged on 6 November 2014 by Mr Vladimir Aleksandrovich Palilov, who was born in 1968 and lives in the Yaroslavl Region. He is currently serving his sentence in IK-18 in the settlement of Kharp, the Yamalo-Nenetskiy Region. The applicant, who had been granted legal aid. was represented before the Court by Mr E. Markov, a lawyer practising in Strasbourg.
On 11 August 2006 the Yaroslavl Regional Court convicted the applicant of murder and sentenced him to life imprisonment. The conviction was upheld on appeal and became final.
On 19 February 2007 the applicant was sent to serve his sentence in a special-regime facility for those sentenced to life imprisonment in the village of Kharp in the Yamalo-Nenetskiy Region, 2,000 kilometres from the Yaroslavl Region.
On 9 January 2013 the applicant asked the FSIN to transfer him to any detention facility located closer to his elderly mother’s and sister’s place of residence.
On 14 February 2013 the FSIN dismissed the request, stating that the applicant had been sent to serve his sentence in a remote penal facility under Article 73 § 4 of the CES, and noting that under Article 81 of the CES a prisoner must serve their entire sentence in the same facility. The applicant challenged the decision before a court. In his statement of claims he requested to be present at court hearings.
On 19 July 2013 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court of Moscow held a hearing in the applicant’s absence, which was referred to in the judgment as follows: “[t]he applicant was notified of the date of the hearing. He has failed to appear at the court hearing owing to the fact that he is serving a sentence”. The representative of the FSIN was also absent. The District Court examined the complaint pursuant to Articles 254-5 and 258 of the CCP and dismissed it, noting that there were “no grounds listed in Article 81 § 2 of the CES that would preclude Mr Palilov from continuing to serve his sentence in the penal facility in the Yamalo-Nenetskiy Region”. The applicant’s argument related to the difficulties of maintaining his family ties was rejected as follows:
“The claimant’s arguments that he cannot receive visits from his relatives does not give grounds for allowing the claims, because the possibility of receiving visits from family members and relatives, receiving correspondence, or using the telephone, are all governed by the norms of the Code on Execution of Sentences and are unrelated to the location of any penal facility.”
The applicant appealed against the judgment and requested that an appeal hearing be held in his presence.
On 4 June 2014 the Moscow City Court held a hearing in the applicant’s absence, which was explained as follows: “under Article 167 of the Code of Civil Procedure the appellate collegium deems it possible to examine the case in the absence of the parties to the proceedings; they have been notified of the date and place of the court hearing”. The appellate court upheld the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court’s judgment. Referring to Article 73 § 4 of the CES, it stated that the rule on serving a sentence in a particular region close to a detainee’s permanent residence was inapplicable to the applicant given the nature of the crime of which he had been convicted. The City Court also found that the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court had correctly interpreted Article 81 § 2 of the CES, reasoning as follows:
“... there were no medical recommendations that would contain contraindications for Mr Palilov’s serving his sentence in the penal facility in the Yamalo-Nenetskiy Region. Other exceptional circumstances that the law connects with the FSIN’s obligation to grant a claimant’s request to be transferred to another penal facility were not referred to in the appeal statement and cannot be discerned from the circumstances of the case.
The argument that Mr Palilov is being deprived of the opportunity to maintain contact with his relatives because of the remoteness of the penal facility cannot serve, in the context of Article 73 § 4 of the CES, as grounds for declaring the actions of the penal authority’s officials unlawful.”
The applicant’s mother and sister could not afford to visit him in Kharp. The mother died in 2013.
The relevant constitutional provisions are the following:
“1.  Everyone has the right to inviolability of private life, personal and family confidentiality, the protection of his/her honour and good name.”
Article 55
“1.  The enumeration in the Constitution of the basic rights and freedoms should not be interpreted as the denial or belittling of other widely recognised human and civil rights and freedoms.
No laws denying or belittling human and civil rights and freedoms may be enacted in the Russian Federation.
Human and civil rights and freedoms may be limited by federal law only to the extent necessary for the protection of the fundamental principles of the constitutional system, morality, health, the rights and lawful interests of other people, or for ensuring the defence of the country and security of the State.”
Article 73 § 1 of the CES reads as follows:
“Those sentenced to deprivation of liberty, save for [those] listed in paragraph 4 of this Article, serve punishment in correctional penal facilities within the territory of the constituent entity of the Russian Federation, in which they resided or in which they were convicted. In exceptional cases, where the health of prisoners so demands, or where there is a need to secure their safety, or upon their consent convicts may be sent to an appropriate penal facility situated within the territory of another constituent entity of the Russian Federation.
Article 73 § 2 of the CES, as amended by Federal Law no. 142-FZ of 19 July 2007, reads as follows:
“Should there be no appropriate facility within the constituent entity of the place of residence or the place of conviction or in case of impossibility to place a convicted person in existing penal facilities, convicts shall be sent, subject to consent by the appropriate higher bodies of management of the penal system to correctional penal facilities located within the territory of another constituent entity of the Russian Federation, in which there are conditions for their placement.”
Prior to the introduction of the amendments to Article 73 § 2 on 19 July 2007, the provision stipulated as follows:
“In the absence of an appropriate penal facility at the place of residence or the place of conviction or in the event of impossibility to place convicts in the existing penal facilities, convicts shall be sent to closest penal facilities located within the territory of that constituent entity of the Russian Federation or, subject to consent by the appropriate higher bodies governing the penal system, to penal facilities located within the territory of another closest constituent entity in which there are places for convicts’ placement available.”	
Article 73 § 4 of the CES provides:
“Those convicted of the crimes punishable under Article 126 [kidnapping], Article 127.1 §§ 2 and 3 [aggravated human trafficking], Articles 205 – 206 [terror attacks and the taking of hostages], Articles 208 – 211 [the creation of or participation in an unlawful armed group, banditry, the creation of or participation in an organised crime group, aircraft hijacking], Article 275 [high treason], Articles 277 – 279 [attempted killing of a State official or a public figure, hostile anti-Constitutional seizure of power, armed mutiny], Article 281 [sabotage], Article 282.1 [the creation of an extremist network], Article 282.2 [management of an extremist organisation’s activities], Article 317 [attempted killing of a lawenforcement officer], Article 321 § 3 [organisation of disorders in prisons], Article 360 § 2 [an attack on diplomats and members of international organisations and their property with a view to provoking a war] of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation, convicted particularly dangerous repeat offenders, convicts sentenced to life imprisonment, convicts sentenced to serve deprivation of liberty in prison, convicts in respect of whom capital punishment has been replaced with life imprisonment by pardon, shall be sent to serve their punishment to appropriate penal facilities located in places which are designated by the federal body of the penal system.”
Article 74 § 2 of the CES reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“Correctional penal facilities are designed for serving of [a sentence in the form of] deprivation of liberty by major convicts. They are subdivided to colonysettlements, common-regime facilities, strict-regime facilities, special-regime facilities. Correctional penal facilities may include isolated areas with different types of regime, as well as isolated areas functioning as a prison. ...”
Article 75 of the CES provides:
“1.  Those convicted to deprivation of liberty shall be sent to serve the punishment no later than ten days following receipt by the administration of a remand prison of a notification that the conviction has entered into force. Within this period a convict has a right to a short-term visit from relatives or other persons. The order of sending convicts to correctional penal facilities shall be defined by the federal body of the executive which performs the functions of elaboration and implementation of the State policy and legal regulation in the area of execution of criminal punishments.
The administration of a remand prison is obliged to notify one of the relatives designated by a convict of the place to which he is being sent to serve the punishment.”
Article 81 §§ 1 and 2 of the CES reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“1.  Those sentenced to deprivation of liberty ought to serve the whole term of their sentence, as a rule, in the same correctional penal facility or remand prison, including in case of their sentencing to a new punishment during the period of serving [the sentence in the form of] deprivation of liberty, if a court has not varied the type of a correctional facility.
Transfer of a convict to continue to serve his sentence from one correctional penal facility to another of the same type is allowed in case of illness of the convict; or in order to ensure his personal safety; in cases of reorganisation or liquidation of a penal facility; as well as in other exceptional circumstances that preclude the convict’s further stay in that penal facility. Transfer of those convicted of offences listed in Article 73 § 4 of this Code from one penal facility to another of the same type is also allowed on the basis of a decision by the federal body of the penal system. The order of transfer of convicts is to be determined by the federal body of the executive, which performs the functions of elaboration and implementation of the State policy and legal regulation in the area of execution of criminal punishments. ...”
Article 89 of the CES reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“1.  Those convicted to deprivation of liberty shall be entitled to receive short-term visits lasting for four hours, and to long-term visits lasting for three days in the penal facility’s premises. In cases provided for by this Code convicts may be entitled to receive long-term visits with residence outside a penal facility lasting for five days. In that case, the governor of a facility shall determine the order and place of the visit.
Short-term visits are provided [for a meeting] with relatives or other persons in the presence of a representative of the administration of a penal facility. Long-term visits with a right of joint stay are provided [for a meeting] with a spouse, parents, children, adoptive parents and adopted children, siblings, grandparents, grandchildren and, with the authorisation of the governor of a penal facility, other persons. ...”
In a case brought by a convicted prisoner, A., the Constitutional Court of Russia ruled as follows:
“Mr A., who is serving a life sentence ... challenges the constitutionality of Articles 92, 113 and 125 of the CES, which set restrictions on convicted prisoners relating, in particular, to a right to receive telephone calls, visits, and parcels ...
Imposition on a person who committed a crime of such punishment as imprisonment, which is aimed at protection of the interests of the State, civil society and its members, implies changes in his habitual way of life and in his relations with others, as well as the exercise of a certain moral and psychological influence on him, which affects his rights and freedoms as a citizen and changes his status as an individual.
 In any event, a person deliberately committing a crime must envision that as a result [of the criminal act] he or she may be deprived of liberty. In this way the person in question consciously condemns himself or herself and his or her relative to restrictions, including on the right to contact family members, privacy, and personal and family confidentiality.
The combination of restrictions imposed by the ... law on convicts, including, in particular, restrictions on the number of visits allowed, their duration and conditions, ... differs depending on, first and foremost, the gravity of the sanction imposed by the court, which corresponds to the nature and degree of public danger posed by the crime, the circumstances under which it was committed, and the individual characteristics of the person responsible, as well as depending on the convict’s behaviour while serving the sentence. All this ensures proportional and fair application of the coercive measures ...”
In a case brought by Ms G., the mother of a prisoner sentenced to life imprisonment, the Constitutional Court of Russia declared the application inadmissible on the following grounds:
“... Ms G. challenges the constitutionality of Article 73 § 4 of the CES ... According to the applicant, this provision is not compatible with ... the Constitution because it does not provide for transfer of those sentenced to life imprisonment to a penal facility located near their home and that of their close relatives.
...
Having examined the materials presented before it, the Constitutional Court finds no grounds to declare the application admissible.
The Constitution of the Russian Federation ... empowers the federal legislator to introduce restrictive measures in respect of those who committed crimes and were subjected to punishment.
The provisions of Article 73 § 4 of the CES, as well as a number of other provisions of this Code, are aimed at individualisation of punishment and differentiation of the conditions under which it is served, taking into account the nature of the crime, the danger it poses to the values protected by the Constitution of the Russian Federation and the criminal law, its intensity, its causes, and other circumstances under which it was committed, and information concerning the person who committed it. In this way prerequisites are created to enable attainment of the aims of punishment, which are, according to Article 42 § 2 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation, restoration of social justice, correction of the convict, and prevention of new crimes (Ruling of the Constitutional Court of 29 January 2009 No. 59-O).
Moreover, the provisions of Article 73 of the CES, being an integral part of the law on execution of criminal sentences, which governs the rules and conditions of the execution and serving of sentences, chooses the means of correction of convicts, protection of their rights, freedoms and legitimate interests, [and measures taken with a view to] assisting social adaptation of convicts, are applicable to convicts, and therefore cannot be considered as breaching the applicant’s rights ...”
In a case brought by a convicted prisoner, T., the Constitutional Court of Russia dismissed the application as inadmissible on the following grounds:
“... Mr T. asserts that Article 73 § 2 of the CES does not allow him to be transferred to a penal facility within the territory of a constituent entity of the Russian Federation which is the closest to the place of his conviction ...
Article 73 § 2 of the CES taken in conjunction with the first paragraph of the same Article allows for convicts to be sent to serve their sentence outside the constituent entity of the Russian Federation in which they resided or were convicted only if there are no penal facilities of a particular type in that constituent entity of the Russian Federation or if it is impossible to place convicts in the penal facilities available. The said norms correspond to the provisions of international law on prisoners’ rights, in particular the European Prison Rules (2006), which provide that prisoners shall be allocated, as far as possible, to prisons close to their homes or places of social rehabilitation. The said Rules are of a recommendatory nature and should be implemented if the requisite economic and social resources are available (Article 3 § 4 of the CES).
Moreover ... the applicant challenges the constitutionality of Article 73 § 2 of the CES not because it served as grounds to send him to serve the sentence in the penal facility in the Krasnoyarsk Region, but in connection with the refusal to transfer him to a penal facility in the Khabarovskiy or Primorskiy Regions, which are the closest to the place of conviction. However, this provision does not govern issues of this kind.
... the applicant de facto asks for the application of [Article 73 § 2 of the CES] to be reviewed in his case ... However, assessment of the lawfulness and well-foundedness of the application of the law falls outside the jurisdiction of the Constitutional Court ...”
In a case brought by a convicted prisoner, S., the Constitutional Court of Russia ruled as follows:
“In his application Mr S., who is serving a sentence, challenges the constitutionality of Article 73 § 2 ... and Article 81 §§ 1 and 2 ... of the CES. According to the applicant, these provisions permit [the authorities] to send convicts to penal facilities located more than 1,000 kilometers away from the home of a convict, and his or her family and relatives, and allow [the authorities] to abstain from taking a decision on transfer of such convicts to penal facilities located closer than 1,000 kilometers from their home.
According to the general rule established by the Code of Execution of Criminal Sentences, those receiving a custodial sentence shall serve the whole term in the same penal facility or remand prison within the territory of the constituent entity of the Russian Federation in which they resided or were convicted, including instances of imposition of a new sentence over the course of the term of imprisonment, provided that the type of correctional facility has not been changed by a court (Articles 73 § 1 and 81 § 1 of the CES). At the same time, Article 73 § 2 of the CES taken in conjunction with the first paragraph of the same Article allows for convicts to be sent to serve their sentences outside the constituent entity of the Russian Federation in which they resided or were convicted only if there are no penal facilities of a particular type in that constituent entity of the Russian Federation, or if it is impossible to place convicts in the existing penal facilities. The said norms correspond to the provisions of international law on prisoners’ rights, in particular the European Prison Rules (2006), which provide that prisoners shall be allocated, as far as possible, to prisons close to their homes or places of social rehabilitation. The said Rules are of a recommendatory nature and should be implemented if the requisite economic and social resources are available (Article 3 § 4 of the CES) (Ruling of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation of 16 December 2000 No. 1700OO).
As regards the transfer of convicts to continue serving their sentences from one penal facility to another of the same type, this is permissible in exceptional circumstances – in the event of the convict’s illness or in order to ensure his personal safety, in cases of reorganisation or liquidation of the penal facility, as well as in other exceptional circumstances that would hinder the convict’s further stay in the correctional facility (Article 81 § 2 of the CES), the list of which is not exhaustive. The said provision is correlated with the principles of lawfulness, humanism, democracy, equality before the law, differentiation and individualisation of the serving of criminal sentences, rational application of coercive measures, and the means of convicts’ rehabilitation (Article 8 of the CES), [and] is aimed at the protection of the lawful interests of convicts (Ruling of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation of 16 July 2015 No. 1611-O).
Therefore, the contested provisions do not breach the applicant’s constitutional rights and, accordingly, the application is inadmissible ...”
By Order No. 235 of 1 December 2005 the Russian Ministry of Justice approved of the Instruction on Allocation of Convicted Prisoners to Serve Their Sentences, Transfer from One Facility to Another, and on Sending Prisoners for Treatment and Examination to Medical Preventive and Penal Facilities (“the Instruction on Allocation of Prisoners”). As regards allocation and transfer of prisoners, the Instruction reproduces Articles 73 and 81 of the CES (see paragraphs 45, 46 and 51 above). In addition, it contains a list of administrative formalities to be performed by a facility’s administration in case of a prisoner’s transfer to another facility.
Recommendation Rec(2006)2 of the Committee of Ministers to Member States on the European Prison Rules (“European Prison Rules”), adopted on 11 January 2006, reads as follows:
Part I
“Basic principles
All persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated with respect for their human rights.
Persons deprived of their liberty retain all rights that are not lawfully taken away by the decision sentencing them or remanding them in custody.
Restrictions placed on persons deprived of their liberty shall be the minimum necessary and proportionate to the legitimate objective for which they are imposed.
Prison conditions that infringe prisoners’ human rights are not justified by lack of resources.
Life in prison shall approximate as closely as possible the positive aspects of life in the community.
All detention shall be managed so as to facilitate the reintegration into free society of persons who have been deprived of their liberty.
...”
Part II
“Allocation and accommodation
1 Prisoners shall be allocated, as far as possible, to prisons close to their homes or places of social rehabilitation.
...
3 As far as possible, prisoners shall be consulted about their initial allocation and any subsequent transfer from one prison to another.
...
Contact with the outside world
1 Prisoners shall be allowed to communicate as often as possible by letter, telephone or other forms of communication with their families, other persons and representatives of outside organisations and to receive visits from these persons.
2 Communication and visits may be subject to restrictions and monitoring necessary for the requirements of continuing criminal investigations, maintenance of good order, safety and security, prevention of criminal offences and protection of victims of crime, but such restrictions, including specific restrictions ordered by a judicial authority, shall nevertheless allow an acceptable minimum level of contact.
...
4 The arrangements for visits shall be such as to allow prisoners to maintain and develop family relationships in as normal a manner as possible.
5 Prison authorities shall assist prisoners in maintaining adequate contact with the outside world and provide them with the appropriate welfare support to do so.
...
8 Prisoners shall be allowed to inform their families immediately of their imprisonment or transfer to another institution and of any serious illness or injury they may suffer.”
The CPT Standards 2002 (revised in 2015) (Extract from the 2nd General Report [CPT/Inf (92) 3]) read, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“51.  It is also very important for prisoners to maintain reasonably good contact with the outside world. Above all, a prisoner must be given the means of safeguarding his relationships with his family and close friends. The guiding principle should be the promotion of contact with the outside world; any limitations upon such contact should be based exclusively on security concerns of an appreciable nature or resource considerations.
The CPT wishes to emphasize in this context the need for some flexibility as regards the application of rules on visits and telephone contacts vis-à-vis prisoners whose families live far away (thereby rendering regular visits impracticable). For example, such prisoners could be allowed to accumulate visiting time and/or be offered improved possibilities for telephone contacts with their families.”
APPENDIX