The case originated in application (no. 12018/16) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Uzbek national, Mr U.A. (“the applicant”), on 30 March 2016.
The applicant was represented by Ms D. Trenina and Ms E. Davidyan (“the representatives”), lawyers practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and subsequently by his successor in that office Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant raised complaints under Articles 3, 5, 8 and 13 of the Convention.
On 2 March 2016 the applicant’s request for interim measures preventing his removal from Russia to Uzbekistan was granted by the Court under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court. The application was further granted priority (Rule 47) and confidentiality (Rule 33) and the applicant was granted anonymity (Rule 47 § 4).
On 23 February 2017 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant is a national of Uzbekistan born on 5 November 1972. The relevant details of the application are set out in the appended table.
On 21 July 2015 the applicant was charged in Uzbekistan with religious and politically motivated crimes. On 22 July 2015 his pre-trial detention was ordered in absentia, and international search warrant was issued by the authorities.
Subsequently the Russian authorities decided to deport the applicant (see the appended table), despite his consistent claims that in the event of removal he would face a real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Convention in his country of origin.
A summary of the domestic law and practice concerning extraditions was provided in the case of Mukhitdinov v. Russia (no. 20999/14, §§ 29-31, 21 May 2015, with further references).
The relevant reports by the UN agencies and international NGOs on the situation in Uzbekistan up until 2015 were cited in the case of Kholmurodov v. Russia (no. 58923/14, §§ 46-50, 1 March 2016).
Furthermore, the most recent Amnesty International’s Report 2017/18 “The State of the World’s Human Rights” reveals some steps taken for improving the human rights protection in Uzbekistan:
“In November, the President issued a decree explicitly prohibiting the use of torture to obtain confessions and their admission as evidence in court proceedings.”
However, the relevant chapter of the same report on Counter-Terror and Security issues reads as follows:
“The authorities continued to secure forcible returns, including through extradition proceedings, of Uzbekistani nationals they identified as threats to the “constitutional order” or national security. NSS officers continued to abduct wanted individuals (socalled renditions) from abroad. Those abducted or otherwise forcibly returned were placed in incommunicado detention, often in undisclosed locations, and tortured or otherwise ill-treated to force them to confess or incriminate others. In many cases, security forces pressured relatives not to seek support from human rights organizations, and not to file complaints about alleged human rights violations.”
Similar conclusions were drawn in Human Rights Watch World Report 2016 and Amnesty International’s Submissions to the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe in the group of cases Garabayev v. Russian Federation (No.38411/02).