The case originated in an application (no. 33809/08) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Algerian national, Mr Mustapha Labsi (“the applicant”), on 18 July 2008.
The applicant was initially represented by Ms M. Kolíková, a lawyer practising in . As from 9 July 2010 Mr M. Hrbáň, a lawyer practising in Bratislava, took over defending the applicant’s rights before the Court in agreement with Ms M. Kolíková (for further details see paragraphs 62-67 below). The Government of the Slovak Republic (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková.
The applicant alleged that his expulsion to  amounted to a breach of Articles 3, 13 and 34 of the Convention.
On 8 June 2010 the Court decided to communicate the application to the Government. It also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1969. At present he is detained in El Harrach prison in .
The applicant left Algeria for  in 1991. He subsequently spent time in Spain Switzerland Canada Pakistan and . In 1999 the applicant arrived in the  where he applied for asylum. His request was dismissed.
On 13 January 2001 the applicant was placed in custody in the  as a result of several accusations made against him in different countries. The only one that was pursued was that of “association de malfaiteurs”. It was imputed to the applicant that, when living in Montreal he had been involved in the supply of false documents which had been used by individuals in  when they had fled arrest for offences committed there.
The United Kingdom extradited the applicant to . On 7 April 2006 he was found guilty by a French court of involvement, as a member of an organised group, in the preparation, between 1996 and 1998, of a terrorist act in  and several other countries and of forging identity documents. He received a five-year sentence and was excluded from the . The applicant did not appeal and was released immediately upon conviction on the ground that he had served the sentence in the context of his prior detention while awaiting extradition. On 11 April 2006 the applicant arrived in .
In the meantime, on 1 June 2005, an Algerian court had convicted the applicant, in absentia, of membership of a terrorist organisation acting both in  and abroad, and of forgery. He was sentenced to life imprisonment.
In January 2001 the applicant married a Slovakian national in . A child was born to the couple on 2 August 2001.
With effect from 25 October 2007 the applicant’s wife was deprived of legal capacity to act. The child was entrusted to the care and custody of the applicant’s wife’s mother. On 29 May 2008 the latter, acting as guardian of her daughter, petitioned for divorce. The divorce proceedings are pending before the Bratislava IV District Court; it is not clear from the parties’ submissions whether a final decision has been given.
On 18 July 2006 the Migration Office dismissed the applicant’s first asylum request. The  dismissed the applicant’s action challenging that decision.
On 24 September 2007 the Migration Office dismissed his second request for asylum. It held that there were no obstacles to the administrative expulsion of the applicant to . On 30 October 2007 the applicant’s lawyer waived the right to challenge that administrative decision. It thus became final on that date.
On 6 October 2008 the Migration Office dismissed the applicant’s third request for asylum. It further decided not to afford the applicant the status of “subsidiary protection” (doplnková ochrana) under the Asylum Act 2002.
On 4 February 2009 the  quashed that decision. It ordered the administrative authority to establish all the relevant facts and to give comprehensive reasons for its conclusion.
On 5 June 2009 the Migration Office again decided not to grant asylum to the applicant and not to provide him with subsidiary protection under the Asylum Act 2002.
It was found that the applicant’s fears were subjective in nature and unsubstantiated by objective facts, that he had failed to show that he was subjected to persecution and that such persecution was politically motivated. If returned to Algeria the applicant could seek a retrial on the ground that he had already been convicted in  and had served the sentence imposed in that context. Moreover, the applicant represented a security risk to the  and to society. His arguments under Article 3 of the Convention could not be taken into account because the matter under review concerned his asylum status and not his extradition.
On 28 October 2009 the  upheld the Migration Office’s decision on the applicant’s third asylum request.
The applicant appealed. He argued that he risked being subjected to torture and inhuman and degrading treatment and being sentenced to death if returned to . The applicant also argued that he had family ties in  and that he wished to take care of his wife, who suffered from an illness, and their son.
On 30 March 2010 the Supreme Court upheld the ’s judgment of 28 October 2009. The Supreme Court held, in particular, that the applicant’s wish to maintain ties with his wife and child, who were Slovakian nationals, was not a relevant ground for granting him asylum. Furthermore, the applicant had been convicted in Algeria of criminal offences linked to the activities of the Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat, the aim of which was to establish, by violent means, a fundamentalist Islamic State in . Armed attacks carried out by the group could not be considered as a means of political struggle justifying the applicant’s protection from persecution for political opinions within the meaning of the Asylum Act 2002.
As to the alleged risk of the applicant’s ill-treatment in , the Supreme Court held that the Court’s case-law under Article 3 of the Convention concerned cases of expulsion or extradition but not those relating to requests for asylum.
The applicant had not shown that justified reasons existed to believe that he could be persecuted for any of the reasons laid down in section 8 of the Asylum Act 2002, namely on the ground of his race, ethnic origin, belonging to a social group, for religious reasons or because of his political opinion.
In the Supreme Court’s view, the purpose of granting subsidiary protection was to avoid unsuccessful asylum seekers being removed from  in certain justified cases. However, such subsidiary protection was excluded, inter alia, where there were serious reasons to believe that an asylum seeker represented a risk to society or the safety of the State in which he or she applied for asylum. Reference was made to Articles 12 and 17 of the Council of the European Union Directive 2004/83/EC and subsections 2(d) and (e) of section 13c of the Asylum Act 2002.
The applicant’s conviction in France, on 7 April 2006, of involvement in a terrorist organisation and his admission that he had been trained in Afghanistan in handling weapons and explosives, as well as other information gathered by the Office for the Fight Against Organised Crime, justified the conclusion that the applicant could provide assistance to persons suspected of involvement in terrorist groups operating worldwide. The decision not to grant subsidiary protection to the applicant was therefore lawful. That conclusion could not be affected by the express admission by the Migration Office, in the context of the asylum proceedings, that the applicant could be exposed to a real risk of inhuman treatment if returned to .
Finally, the Supreme Court noted that the applicant had unlawfully left for Austria while proceedings concerning his asylum request in Slovakia had been pending and that he had lodged an asylum request in . It concluded that the applicant was not genuinely interested in protection by the Slovakian authorities.
The Supreme Court’s judgment was served on the applicant and became final on 16 April 2010.
On 20 July 2006, the Border and Foreigners Police Department in Bratislava ordered the applicant’s expulsion and banned him from entering  for ten years. The decision became final and binding on 12 October 2006. The applicant was expelled to  on the basis of the decision.
In May 2007 the Austrian authorities returned the applicant to  where he was placed under provisional arrest. On 20 June 2007 he was remanded in custody pending his extradition on a warrant in connection with the above-mentioned Algerian court’s judgment of 1 June 2005.
On 30 November 2007 the  gave its consent to the applicant’s extradition to . On 22 January 2008 the Supreme Court approved that decision. On 13 March 2008 the  suspended the effect of the Supreme Court’s decision pending its decision on the applicant’s complaint that he would run the risk of ill-treatment if he were extradited to his country of origin.
On 26 June 2008 the  quashed the Supreme Court’s decision of 22 January 2008. It instructed the latter to re-examine the case with particular emphasis on the alleged threat of the applicant being subjected to treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Convention in the event of his extradition.
On 7 August 2008 the Supreme Court found that the applicant’s extradition to  was not permissible. On the same date the applicant was released.
In its judgment the Supreme Court relied on a number of international documents, such as reports of the UN Human Rights Committee of 2007 and the UN Committee against Torture of 2008, a document prepared by the UNHCR, documents issued by Amnesty International, the United States Department of State, the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Human Rights Watch and the Court’s judgment in Saadi v.  [GC], no. 37201/06, ECHR 2008).
In particular, the Supreme Court referred to the broad powers of investigation of the Department of Intelligence and Security (DRS), documented reports on detention of suspects incommunicado in secret DRS centres, and numerous reports of torture and inhuman or degrading treatment of people at the hands of the DRS. The information available indicated that the DRS had systematically used torture and other forms of ill-treatment in respect of individuals deemed to have information about terrorist activities.
Furthermore, the law and practice in  did not exclude the use in judicial proceedings of evidence which had been extracted under torture. The Algerian authorities had refused to co-operate with special rapporteurs or working groups established within the UN system and with non-governmental organisations with a view to clarifying the position. Similarly, the Algerian authorities had refused to allow monitoring the situation of people who had been returned to that country.
The Supreme Court noted that the relevant regulation did not list  as a safe country of origin. It concluded that there were justified reasons to fear that the applicant would be exposed to treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Convention in the event of his extradition to .
Subsequently the applicant was apprehended and placed in a detention centre for foreigners in Medveďov on the basis of the Border and Foreigners Police decision of 7 August 2008. Reference was made to the above-mentioned decision of 20 July 2006 to expel the applicant and to exclude him from the  for ten years. The decision stated that proceedings concerning the applicant’s expulsion were still under way.
On 17 October 2008 the applicant requested leave to stay in  (tolerovaný pobyt). The police dismissed the request.
On 3 February 2009 the applicant was released from the detention centre for foreigners in Medveďov. He was placed in an accommodation facility for asylum seekers in Opatovská Nová Ves and, later, in a similar facility in Rohanovce. During his stay in those facilities the applicant’s freedom of movement was restricted. He unsuccessfully sought redress before the Supreme Court and the , which decided on his claim on 3 March 2009 and 16 December 2009 respectively.
On 19 December 2009 the applicant left the facility in Rohanovce and arrived in a centre for refugees in . The Austrian authorities returned him to  on 11 March 2010.
On 22 April 2010 the Minister of the Interior informed the media that the applicant had been expelled from Slovakia and escorted to Algeria in accordance with the decision of the Border and Foreigners Police Department in  of 20 July 2006. The applicant’s representative learned about his expulsion from press articles.
A letter from the Algerian Ministry of Justice of 2 July 2007 indicated that the Algiers Criminal Court had convicted the applicant in absentia, on 1 June 2005, of belonging to a terrorist organisation acting both in Algeria and abroad and of forgery under Articles 87bis, 87bis §§ 3 and 6 and Article 222 of the Criminal Code. His extradition was requested with a view to re-trying him for the same offences. His previous conviction in absentia would lose effect upon his return to  pursuant to Article 326 of the Criminal Code. In the event of his extradition the applicant would have an adversarial trial before the criminal court, the judgment of which could be appealed against to the Supreme Court. Assistance by legal counsel was mandatory in such proceedings. Under the Criminal Code the offences imputed to the applicant were not punishable by capital penalty.
In a letter of 25 September 2007 a representative of the Algerian Ministry of Justice indicated that his country had not yet ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Nevertheless, the law in force established a system of control permitting detained persons to seek redress in the event of a breach of their rights. Furthermore, the collaborators of the International Committee of the Red Cross had the possibility of visiting detained persons in private. Torture and other forms of ill-treatment were subject to heavy penalties under the Algerian Criminal Code.
In a letter of 22 September 2010 the Algerian Ministry of Justice indicated that the applicant’s conviction by the judgment of 1 June 2005 had lost effect following his return to . He was being detained in El Harrach prison under an order issued by the indictment chamber of the Algiers Criminal Court. The applicant had the right to meet an advocate in private, to receive visits by members of his family, to file complaints and to medical care. The applicant’s trial was scheduled for October 2010. He had the right to assistance by counsel and could avail himself of a variety of procedural rights incorporated in the Code of Criminal Procedure. Finally, the letter indicated that several persons suspected of terrorism had been extradited or expelled to Algeria from the United Kingdom Spain or the  and that all those persons had been treated in accordance with the law.
On 13 December 2010 the Slovakian Ministry of the Interior asked the Algerian Embassy in  for a visit of the former’s State Secretary to be arranged during which he could discuss the applicant’s situation with the Algerian penitentiary administration. The Government submitted no further information as regards that initiative.
In a verbal note of 5 April 2011 the Algerian Embassy in  informed the Slovakian Ministry of Foreign Affairs that the Algiers Criminal Court had convicted the applicant, on 12 January 2011, of having belonged to a terrorist group acting abroad. The trial had been public and covered by the media and the applicant had been defended by counsel of his choice. He had been sentenced to a three-year prison term with twelve months suspended and to a fine of 500,000 Algerian dinars. The applicant had also been prohibited from exercising public functions after his release and from exercising his property rights.
The verbal note further stated that the charges of having belonged to a terrorist group acting within  and of complicity in forgery and use of forgeries had not been upheld by the tribunal. Both the prosecution and the applicant’s counsel had appealed against the judgment on 17 January 2011.
No further information has been provided.
On 18 July 2008 the Acting President of the Court’s Chamber decided, in the interests of the parties and the proper conduct of the proceedings before the Court, to indicate to the respondent Government, under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, that the applicant should not be extradited to .
On 13 August 2008 the Acting President of the Chamber again decided to indicate to the respondent Government under Rule 39 that the applicant should not be expelled to . The measure was to remain in force “for a period of two weeks following the outcome of the asylum proceedings, the ensuing expulsion proceedings as the case [might] be and, as appropriate, of any complaint which [the applicant] lodge[d] with the Constitutional Court in respect of those proceedings.”
On 15 April 2010 the applicant’s legal representative requested the Court to clarify the conditions of the interim measure of 13 August 2008. The advocate explained that the applicant’s asylum case had been dismissed by the Supreme Court two weeks before and, in the absence of the written version of the judgment with reasons, the applicant had not had an opportunity to challenge it before the .
On 16 April 2010 the Section Registrar informed the applicant that, in applying Rule 39, the Acting President had wished to ensure that the applicant would not be expelled before he had exhausted domestic remedies. The relevant part of the letter reads:
“The Rule 39 measure remains in force until the  has pronounced on the applicant’s constitutional complaint.
It is clear that the applicant needs the reasons given by the Supreme Court for refusing his asylum case to enable him to lodge a complaint under Article 127 of the Constitution with the .
The two-week period referred to in the Registry’s letter of 13 August 2008 runs from the date on which the final decision is given with reasons and is intended to allow the Court, in the light of the reasons given by the Constitutional Court, to decide whether to lift or continue to apply Rule 39.”
A copy of the letter was sent to the Government with specific mention that the Rule 39 measure was still in force.
On 22 April 2010 the applicant’s representative informed the Court that it was impossible to contact the applicant and that, according to media reports, he had been expelled to  earlier that week.
On 22 April 2010, on instruction by the President of the Section, the Section Registrar requested the Government to confirm or deny the reports of the applicant’s expulsion.
On 26 April 2010 the Government informed the Court that the applicant had been expelled on 19 April 2010. The expulsion had been carried out on the basis of the final and binding decision of the Border and Foreigners Police Department of 20 July 2006. Since the Supreme Court’s judgment in the asylum proceedings had become final on 16 April 2010, on the national level the applicant was considered to be a foreigner without permission to stay in .
On 28 April 2010 the Registrar of the Court sent the following letter to the Government:
“The President of the Court ... has instructed me to express on his behalf his profound regret at the decision taken by your authorities to extradite Mr Mustapha Labsi to  in disrespect of the Court’s interim measure adopted under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court.
The President has noted in this connection that on 16 April 2010 your authorities were reminded in clear terms by the Registrar of Section IV of the Court that the Rule 39 measure, first applied on 13 August 2008, continued to remain in force. Nevertheless, the Government extradited the applicant to  on 19 April.
The President is deeply disturbed at this development and is particularly concerned about its implications for the authority of the Court and the unfortunate message which it sends both to other Contracting States faced with a Rule 39 measure and to applicants and potential applicants liable to extradition or expulsion to countries where they may be exposed to the risk of violation of their rights under Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention. As an indication of the seriousness with which he views this turn of events, the President has asked that the Chairman of the Committee of Ministers, the President of the Parliamentary Assembly and the Secretary General of the Council of Europe be informed immediately.
The President also notes that notwithstanding the Court’s request of 22 April 2010 for clarification of the circumstances surrounding Mr Labsi’s extradition, your letter of 26 April failed to explain why the Rule 39 measure was not complied with. The President expects your authorities to provide an explanation. He would in particular request your authorities to confirm or deny reports that the spokesperson of the Ministry of the Interior declared that his authorities were prepared to run the risk of being found to be in breach of the Convention and that other States which had failed to comply with a Rule 39 measure only had to pay ‘a few thousand euros’”.
In a reply dated 10 May 2010 the Vice-Prime Minister holding the post of the Minister of the Interior stated that all the relevant facts and legal issues had been taken into account prior to the applicant’s expulsion to , which had been carried out in accordance with the police decision of 20 July 2006.
The letter indicated, inter alia, that the offences of which the applicant had been convicted in absentia did not carry a capital penalty. The Algerian authorities had confirmed that the applicant would receive a new trial in which his defence rights would be respected and that all forms of violence against individuals were punishable under Algerian law.
The applicant had been convicted and sentenced to five years’ imprisonment in ; he had also been banned from the territory of that State. Information about the applicant, including his involvement in the activities of terrorist groups and the fact that an international arrest warrant had been issued by Algerian authorities, was entered in the Schengen information system. The Slovakian police’s decision to expel the applicant was also based on the obligation resulting from Council Directive 2001/40/EC of 28 May 2001, which requires the police in Slovakia to ensure the enforcement of an expulsion decision issued in one of the States within the European Economic Area where a foreigner was sentenced to a prison term of at least one year.
On the basis of all the information available the Slovakian police had concluded that the applicant represented a real risk to the security of the  and to society. The Supreme Court, in its decision concerning the applicant’s third request for asylum, had reached the same conclusion.
The Ministry of the Interior believed that the need to protect society from a person who had been convicted of involvement in a terrorist group prevailed in the present case and that the applicant’s expulsion had not been contrary to ’s undertakings under the Convention. The statements which the spokesperson of the Ministry of the Interior had made about the applicant’s case and the Court’s practice were to be interpreted in that context.
At the time of lodging the application the applicant was represented by Ms M. Kolíková, a lawyer practising in . In a letter of 9 July 2010 Ms Kolíková informed the Court that her right to practice as an advocate had been suspended as of that date following her appointment as Secretary of State at the Ministry of Justice. The letter further stated that Mr M. Hrbáň, a lawyer practising in , was prepared to take over the applicant’s representation before the Court. It was impossible to contact the applicant for practical reasons, but the necessary steps would be taken with a view to ensuring his proper representation.
On 30 July 2010 Mr M. Hrbáň confirmed that, upon agreement with Ms Kolíková, he undertook to protect the applicant’s rights and to submit a power of attorney from the applicant as soon as he could obtain one.
On 31 March 2011 and 5 September 2011 Mr Hrbáň informed the Court that he had sent three letters to the applicant in El Harrach prison in  to which he had received no reply. The Ministry of the Interior of the  had refused to inform Mr Hrbáň of the applicant’s address on the ground that he had not produced a power of attorney to represent the applicant. Efforts were being made, in co-operation with Amnesty International, to obtain more information about the applicant’s whereabouts.
Mr Hrbáň stated, with reference to section 17 of the Bar Act 2003, that Ms Kolíková had appointed him as her substitute on the basis of their mutual agreement. The client’s consent and submission of a new power of attorney were not required in such circumstances.
In a letter of 11 April 2011 Mr Hrbáň submitted information about the applicant’s fresh trial and conviction in  which he had obtained from representatives of Amnesty International, one of whom had talked to the applicant’s brother. That information corresponds to that which the Algerian Ministry of Justice had furnished to the respondent Government (see paragraph 45 above).
On 5 September 2011 Mr Hrbáň informed the Court that he had been unable to establish contact with the applicant. He maintained that he acted in good faith with a view to defending the applicant’s interests and that he had not modified the subject-matter of the application as submitted by the representative whom the applicant had appointed. He would continue in his efforts to contact the applicant in  and asked the Court to consider his submissions as an amicus curiae intervention.
Section 13a entitles the Ministry of the Interior to grant subsidiary protection to unsuccessful asylum seekers. Except for cases where the Asylum Act 2002 provides otherwise, such subsidiary protection is to be granted where there are serious grounds to believe that an asylum seeker would be exposed to a real threat of serious lawlessness in the event of his or her return to the country of origin.
Pursuant to sub-sections (2)(e) and (d) of section 13c, the Ministry of the Interior should not grant subsidiary protection to an unsuccessful asylum seeker who represents a security threat to the  or a danger to society.
Pursuant to section 16(1) and (3), within the framework of a power of attorney issued by a client, a lawyer may ask a different lawyer to represent him or her. However, such substitution of lawyers is not permissible contrary to the client’s will.
Pursuant to section 17(1), an individually practising lawyer who encounters an obstacle preventing him or her from carrying out his or her duties is obliged, unless other steps are taken with a view to protecting the client’s rights and interests, to appoint a different lawyer as his or her substitute, based on an agreement with the latter and within one month at the latest. The client is to be informed of the arrangement without delay. Where an advocate fails to comply with that obligation, the Bar Association is to appoint a substitute lawyer to represent the client.
Section 20(1) provides that a request for proceedings to be started before the  must indicate, inter alia, the decision which the plaintiff seeks to obtain, specify the reasons for the request and indicate evidence in support.
Pursuant to section 50(2), a plaintiff has to enclose to his or her complaint a copy of the final decision, measure or the evidence of any other interference in issue.
Section 52(1) provides that the filing of a complaint has no automatic suspensive effect. Under subsection 2 the  can issue an interim measure, at the request of the plaintiff, suspending the enforceability of a final decision, measure or other interference.
Section 53(3) provides that a complaint to the  can be lodged within two months of the date on which the decision in question has become final and binding or on which a measure has been notified or notice of other interference with the plaintiff’s interests has been given. As regards measures and other types of interference, this period commences when the complainant has a practical possibility of becoming aware of them.
In a statement published on 29 April 2010 the Secretary General of the Council of Europe expressed his regret that the Slovak authorities had extradited the applicant in disregard of the interim measure ordered by the Court.
In a separate statement published on the same day the chairpersons of two committees of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe expressed their shock and concern at the decision taken by the Slovak authorities to extradite the applicant to .
The Human Rights Committee considered the third periodic report of  submitted under Article 40 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and adopted its concluding observations on 1 November 2007. The relevant parts read as follows:
“11. While noting the assurances given by the State party’s delegation on the periodic and unannounced inspections that the authorities and the International Committee of the Red Cross conduct in prisons, the Committee is concerned about the numerous reports from non-governmental sources pointing to the existence of secret detention centres located, allegedly, at Houch Chnou, Oued Namous, Reggane, El Harrach and Ouargla, among others, where persons deprived of their liberty are allegedly being held. (...)
The Committee takes note with concern of the information regarding cases of torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment in the State party, for which the Intelligence and Security Department reportedly has responsibility. (...)
The Committee is concerned that confessions obtained under torture are not explicitly prohibited and excluded as evidence under the State party’s legislation.”
On 13 May 2008 the Committee against Torture adopted its concluding observations in respect of the third periodic report submitted by  under Article 19 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. They comprise the following parts:
“6. The Committee takes note of the State party’s assurances that Intelligence and Security Department officers are placed under the control of the Public Prosecutor’s Office, and that secure detention centres no longer exist as of November 1996. The Committee nevertheless remains concerned about reports of the existence of secret detention centres run by the Department in its military barracks in Antar, in the Hydra district of Algiers, which are outside the control of the courts. The Committee is also concerned about the lack of information showing that the competent judicial authority has taken steps to look into these allegations. (...)
While taking note of the information provided by the delegation of the State party concerning its efforts to provide human rights training for law enforcement personnel, the Committee nevertheless remains concerned at the many serious allegations which it has received of cases of torture and abuse inflicted on detainees by law enforcement officers, including officers of the Intelligence and Security Department. (...)
While noting the Algerian delegation’s assurances that confessions are used only for information purposes in legal proceedings, in accordance with article 215 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the Committee remains concerned about the lack of a provision in the State party’s legislation clearly specifying that any statement that is proved to have been obtained as a result of torture may not be cited as evidence in any proceedings, in accordance with article 15 of the Convention. In addition, the Committee is concerned that article 213 of the Code of Criminal Procedure specifies that, ‘as with any evidence, the evaluation of confessions is a matter for the judge’, as well as information received that confessions obtained as a result of torture have been admitted in legal proceedings.”
The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held the review of  on 14 April 2008.
While presenting the national report the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Algeria stated that torture and similar practices were prohibited by the fundamental law in all places and circumstances. He also firmly denied the existence of secret detention centres in the country.
In the ensuing interactive dialogue it was acknowledged that progress had been made in respect of the criminalisation of torture, human rights training for police officers and improving standards in prisons, but reference was also made to information concerning cases of suspects detained for months or years without notification to the judiciary and without any possibility to communicate with their family or lawyers.
The recommendations included, among others, that  should implement measures to protect detainees from torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, ensure that all cases of persons detained are brought to the attention of the judiciary without delay, and consider facilitating visits by the UN human rights mandate holders.
The Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment solicited an invitation to visit  for the first time in 1997. The visit request is still pending.
The request by Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism to visit  has been pending since 2006.
On 21 July 2010, those two Special Rapporteurs issued a press statement in which they expressed concern about, inter alia, transfer of Guantánamo Base detainees to  without a proper assessment of the risks they could face in their country of origin.
A press release on the applicant’s case issued on 30 November 2007 (EUR 72/012/2007) contains the following background information:
“Anyone in Algeria suspected of involvement in terrorist activities, or who is believed to possess information about terrorist activities, whether in  or abroad, faces a real risk of secret detention and torture. Amnesty International has received dozens of reports of detainees treated in this way, among them people who had returned to  from overseas, either voluntarily or at the hands of foreign governments.
Under Article 51 of the Algerian Criminal Procedures Code, detainees suspected of “terrorist or subversive acts” may be held without charge for a maximum of 12 days. The arresting authorities must immediately give them the opportunity to communicate with their families and to receive visits from them. In addition, any detention beyond four days has to be authorized in writing by the public prosecutor. These requirements are routinely violated in the cases of people held by the Department for Information and Security (...) which specializes in interrogating those thought to have information about terrorist activities.
Before they are either brought before the judicial authorities or released without charge, those arrested are systematically held incommunicado for up to 12 days, and sometimes longer. It is while they are in secret detention in barracks operated by the DRS that detainees are most at risk of torture and other ill-treatment.
Amnesty International has received information on several cases where detainees were held by the DRS for months without contact with the outside world in violation of Algerian and international law, during which time they were reportedly subjected to torture and other ill-treatment. ’s civilian authorities have no effective control over the activities of the DRS.”
In a briefing to the UN Committee Against Torture in respect of Spain in November 2009, Amnesty International referred to the case of M.S., who had been returned to Algeria from  in November 2008. According to information received by Amnesty International, upon arrival in Algeria M.S. was arrested by the Department for Information and Security military intelligence agency and held incommunicado for approximately two weeks. He was subsequently released without charge.
In its briefing to the UN Committee Against Torture in respect of France in April 2010, Amnesty International mentioned the case of Rabah Kadri who, upon his arrival in  on 16 April 2008, was detained by plain-clothes security officers and held incommunicado for twelve days. He was released without charge on 27 April 2008. After his release he said that he had been interrogated about the activities which had led to his conviction and prison sentence in . He also said that he had signed a statement saying that he had been treated well in detention before his release. Amnesty International noted that, in its experience, the fact that someone had just been released from DRS custody would weigh heavily on their mind when they spoke about their treatment in detention, in case this exposed them to possible reprisals.
In a public statement of 28 April 2010 Amnesty International condemned the actions of the Slovak authorities in forcibly returning the applicant from Slovakia to  despite an order for the application of an interim measure from the European Court of Human Rights and the ruling of the Constitutional Court of June 2008. Amnesty International expressed a fear that, upon his arrival in Algeria, the applicant might have been arrested by the DRS. Reference was made to documented cases where suspects detained by the DRS had been held in unrecognised places of detention, usually military barracks, and denied any contact with the outside world, often for prolonged periods, in violation of Algeria’s international obligations as well as the Algerian Code of Criminal Procedure. Amnesty International was further concerned that Algerian courts continued to accept “confessions” extracted under torture or duress.
In a public statement of 17 May 2010 Amnesty International urged the Algerian authorities to immediately open an investigation into allegations that detainees in El Harrach Prison in  had been subjected to ill-treatment. Reference was made to the lack of proper investigations into previous reports of abuse of detainees. The statement drew attention to the hunger strike of four detainees in El Harrach Prison. According to information obtained by Amnesty International, the strike had been provoked by actions of the prison guards, including routine verbal abuse of the detainees, all of whom were awaiting trial on terrorism-related charges, such as calling them “terrorists”, stripping them naked in front of other detainees and a large number of guards, seemingly to humiliate them, and occasionally slapping them.
The statement further indicated that there existed persistent reports of torture or other ill-treatment in , particularly at the hands of the Department for Information and Security but also at El Harrach Prison. One of the detainees concerned had reported being tied up, drenched in water and beaten with wooden sticks all over his body, including the soles of his feet, by prison guards in the office of the Director of the First Department of the El Harrach Prison on 30 March 2008. After the beating, he had been reportedly placed in solidarity confinement without water or access to the toilet for two days. Even though his lawyer had filed a complaint, no independent, full or impartial investigation had been conducted.
The Amnesty International Report 2011, in its relevant part, reads:
“Officers of the Department of Information and Security (DRS), military intelligence, continued to arrest security suspects and detain them incommunicado, in some cases for more than the 12 days permitted by law, at unrecognized detention centres where they were at risk of torture or other ill-treatment. Impunity for torturing or otherwise abusing security suspects remained entrenched. (...)
Mustapha Labsi was detained for 12 days by the DRS after he was forcibly returned to Algeria from  on 19 April [2010]. He was then transferred to El Harrach prison. At the end of 2010, he was awaiting trial on charges of belonging to a ‘terrorist group abroad’. (...)
In April, security suspects held in El Harrach prison went on hunger strike to protest against alleged ill-treatment by guards who, they said, had insulted, slapped and humiliated them. No official investigation into their allegations was held.
Suspects in terrorism-related cases faced unfair trials. Some were convicted on the basis of ‘confessions’ that they alleged were extracted under torture or other duress, including some who were sentenced to death by military courts. Some were denied access to lawyers of their choice. Other security suspects were detained without trial. (...)
Hasan Zumiri and Adil Hadi Bin Hamlili were transferred to Algeria from  custody in Guantánamo By in January; Abdelaziz Naji was transferred in July. All three remained at liberty while investigations continued to determine whether they would face charges of belonging to a ‘terrorist group abroad’. Two former Guantánamo detainees, Mustafa Ahmed Hamlily and Abdul Rahman Houari, were acquitted of similar charges in February and November, respectively. Another former Guantánamo detainee, Bachir Ghalaab, was sentenced to a suspended prison term.”