The application concerns the applicant’s alleged ill-treatment during his unrecorded detention by police and the lack of an effective investigation into his complaints.
The applicant was born in 1984 and lives in Belgorod. He was represented by Mr E.I. Rozhkov, a lawyer practising in Belgorod.
The Government were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 18 April 2007 officers of the Belgorod regional branch of the Federal Service for Drug Control (“the drugs police” or “the police”) arrested a certain Mr V.G., searched him and found 10.6 g of marijuana, which he said he had bought from the applicant. V.G. agreed to cooperate with the police and to participate in a “test purchase” (проверочная закупка – a kind of sting operation) of drugs from the applicant.
Acting on the instructions of the police, V.G. called the applicant and asked him to sell him more drugs. At around 1 p.m. on 20 April 2007, after the attempted sale of 3.9 g of marijuana to V.G. as part of the test purchase conducted by the police, the applicant was arrested by the officers. Between 1.40 p.m. and 2.02 p.m. they conducted a body search of the applicant and between 2.05 p.m. and 2.25 p.m. they searched his car and seized, inter alia, 7 g of marijuana and the banknotes used for the test purchase. The applicant was taken to the regional office of the Federal Service for Drug Control.
According to the applicant, the police officers beat him up and made him confess to drug dealing. They then drove him to his grandparents’ summer house, which is where the applicant said he had kept drugs. Finding no drugs, the officers, according to the applicant, put him in the police car and started making threats that they would shoot him in the legs; they allegedly punched him and hit him with a pistol and choked him with the collar of his clothes, demanding to know where he kept drugs. The applicant allegedly lost consciousness several times as a result of being choked.
The applicant’s self-incriminating statements in the form of an “explanation” were signed by him and Officer A.D. They concerned, inter alia, his procuring drugs in 2006 and storing them, in particular near his grandparents’ summer house, and the attempted sale of drugs to V.G. on 20 April 2007. He also stated that on 19 April 2007 he had consumed drugs.
On the same day the applicant was taken to the Belgorod regional drug dispensary, where he tested positive for drugs. At 6.10 p.m. the officers issued a record, according to which at 6.10 p.m. the applicant had been escorted to the regional office of the Federal Service for Drug Control in order for an administrative-offence record under Article 6.9 of the Code of Administrative Offences (consumption of drugs) to be drawn up. At 6.30 p.m. they drew up the applicant’s administrative-arrest record and an administrative-offence record (drugs consumption on 19 April 2007), and placed him in the temporary detention facility (IVS) of the Belgorod town police.
On 21 April 2007 the Justice of the Peace of the Vostochniy Circuit of Belgorod found the applicant guilty of the administrative offence under Article 6.9 of the Code of Administrative Offences and ordered his detention for five days. The applicant was kept in the IVS.
On 25 April 2007 the applicant was detained for forty-eight hours on suspicion of having committed, inter alia, the attempted sale of drugs on 20 April 2007 during the test purchase conducted by the police. On 26 April 2007 the applicant was examined as a suspect in the presence of a Stateappointed lawyer and charged with drug dealing, including for the episode of 20 April 2007. On 27 April 2007 he was released on bail.
On 23 April 2007 an investigator of the Belgorod prosecutor’s office ordered a forensic medical examination of the applicant following his complaints of alleged ill-treatment. According to the applicant, on 23 April 2007, he was taken to the Belgorod regional forensic medical bureau by the same police officers who had allegedly ill-treated him, and that these officers talked in private with the expert before the examination. The expert issued a report (dated 23 April 2007), indicating a “dotted” haemorrhage in the eyelids and subconjunctival haemorrhages in both eyes.
On 27 April 2007, after his release on bail, the applicant went to the traumatology department of Belgorod town hospital no. 1, where the doctor diagnosed him with a possible contusion of both kidneys, with a question mark next to the diagnosis. The traumatology department reported the applicant’s alleged ill-treatment to the Belgorodskiy district police.
On 28 April 2007 the applicant was examined by a urologist, who diagnosed him with a contusion of the right kidney and a contusion of the lumbar region. On the same day he was examined by an ophthalmologist who diagnosed him with subconjunctival haemorrhages in both eyes.
The applicant further provided his photograph, taken on 28 April 2007 at a photographer’s studio, which shows signs of blood effusion into both eyes. It is accompanied by the studio’s receipt and certified by the applicant’s lawyer.
The applicant submitted that his contusions had been caused during the beatings by the officers on 20 April 2007 while the blood in his eyes had been caused by the officers choking him the same day.
The applicant complained of his alleged ill-treatment to the Belgorod police on 23 April 2007, while detained in the IVS. On 11 June 2007 he reiterated his grievances in an application lodged with the Belgorod town and regional prosecutor’s offices, as well as the Prosecutor General of the Russian Federation, stating that he had been arrested on 20 April 2007 on suspicion of having committed a criminal offence, without being informed of his rights as a suspect and without access to a lawyer. In support of his allegations that the police officers had tortured him in order to obtain his confession to a criminal offence and information about his drugs cache, the applicant referred to the forensic medical expert’s report, the traumatology department’s certificate and his photograph, taken after his release on 27 April 2007, which showed signs of blood effusion into both eyes. His parents also lodged complaints against the police officers.
On the dates specified below, investigators of the Belgorod town prosecutor’s office issued successive refusals to open criminal proceedings against the officers. The refusals, except for the most recent one, were systematically annulled by their superiors for being unsubstantiated or unlawful, and the investigators were ordered to carry out additional preinvestigation inquiries.
According to the applicant, he did not receive copies of all the refusals to institute criminal proceedings against the officers.
According to the refusal of 11 June 2007, police officers M., D., K., Sh., and B. denied ill-treating the applicant. They alleged that no physical force or special devices had been applied to him on 20 April 2007. After the applicant had given his explanation concerning his involvement in drug dealing, he was taken to his grandparents’ summer house, which the applicant had said had been a place where he had hidden drugs, while it was being searched.
On 13 August 2007 the applicant’s case in the criminal proceedings against him was transferred to the Oktyabrskiy District Court of Belgorod for trial.
The most recent refusal to open a criminal case against the police officers was issued on 3 September 2007 under Article 24 § 1 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCrP”) on account of the absence of constituent elements of a crime in the officers’ actions. It referred in particular to the officers’ denial of the applicant’s ill-treatment. It also referred to the forensic medical expert report of 23 April 2007 and stated, without providing any further details, that the applicant’s injuries might have been caused by his own “imprudent actions”.
On 25 September 2007 the applicant appealed against the refusal of 3 September 2007 to the Oktyabrskiy District Court in accordance with Article 125 of the CCrP. On 28 September 2007 his appeal was received by the District Court which admitted it to the case file for examination during the trial.
On 9 November 2007 the applicant appealed to the Belgorod town prosecutor’s office against the refusal to institute criminal proceedings into his complaints against the police officers. Having received a negative reply from the prosecutor’s office, on 21 November 2007 the applicant lodged a court appeal complaining about the prosecutor’s inaction.
The applicant’s other complaints, in particular that at 1 p.m. on 20 April 2007 he had been unlawfully arrested on suspicion of having committed the criminal offence of drug dealing and detained until 6.10 p.m., that he had not been informed of his rights as a suspect and had not received access to a lawyer, were not examined by the Oktyabrskiy District Court under Article 125 of the CCrP on the grounds that they could be examined during the applicant’s trial (the District Court’s decision of 4 December 2007 was upheld by the Belgorod Regional Court on 23 January 2008).
On 11 December 2007 the Oktyabrskiy District Court convicted the applicant for the attempted sale of drugs to V.G. on 18 April 2007 and acquitted him of the remaining charges, in particular those related to the police operation of 20 April 2007, which it found to have been entrapment. It sentenced him to two years’ imprisonment. The trial court dismissed the applicant’s allegations of ill-treatment, endorsing the results of the investigating authority’s pre-investigation inquiry into his complaints and the most recent refusal, of 3 September 2007, to open a criminal case against the officers, which the court found to be lawful and well-founded.
The applicant and the prosecution appealed against the judgment. On 27 February 2008 the Belgorod Regional Court allowed the prosecutor’s appeal and quashed the judgment of 11 December 2007, finding the trial court’s reasoning in acquitting the applicant and sentencing him flawed.
On 14 April 2008 the Oktyabrskiy District Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal of 21 November 2007, holding that the pre-trial stage of the criminal proceedings against the applicant had been completed and his case was awaiting examination by the trial court, and that it would be open to the applicant to raise his complaints about the prosecutor’s inaction during the trial of his criminal case. That decision was upheld on appeal on 21 May 2008.
On 7 May 2008 the Oktyabrskiy District Court, having established the facts as shown in paragraphs 5 and 6 above, convicted the applicant of sale of drugs to V.G. on 18 April 2007, attempted sale of drugs to V.G. on 20 April 2007 during the test purchase conducted by the police, and preparation for a sale of drugs in relation to the drugs found in his car on the same date, and sentenced him to two years and six months’ imprisonment. The applicant pleaded guilty to the charges on which he was convicted. He did not appeal against that judgment, which came into effect on 26 May 2008.
Under Article 91 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCrP”), as in force at the material time, an investigating authority or a prosecutor could arrest a person on suspicion of a criminal offence punishable with a prison term in the following circumstances: (i) where the person had been arrested during or immediately after committing the offence; (ii) where a crime victim or an eyewitness had identified the person as the perpetrator of the crime; or (iii) where manifest evidence of the crime had been discovered on the person’s body, clothes, belongings or in his or her residence. In other situations disclosing suspicion against a specific person, it was possible to arrest him or her in a situation where he or she had attempted to flee; had no fixed place of residence; his or her identity had not been established; or where an application had been lodged for judicial authorisation to remand the suspect in custody (Article 91 § 2 of the CCrP).
Following the escorting of the person before the investigating authority or the prosecutor, it was necessary to draw up, within three hours, an arrest record, noting that the arrestee had been apprised of his or her procedural rights. The arrest record had to indicate the time and date it had been drawn up; the time, date, place and grounds for the arrest; and other circumstances of the arrest. It had to be signed by the official who had drawn it up and the suspect (Article 92 §§ 1 and 2 of the CCrP). Written notice had to be given to a prosecutor within twelve hours and the suspect was to be given access to a lawyer and questioned (Article 92 §§ 3 and 4 of the CCrP).
If no court order to place the person in custody or to extend his arrest had been issued or received within forty-eight hours, the detained suspect was to be immediately released (Article 94 §§ 2 and 3 of the CCrP).