The case originated in an application (no. 36407/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Lyudmila Aleksandrovna Igusheva (“the applicant”), on 22 September 2002.
The applicant was represented by Ms N. M. Bartova, a lawyer practising in Ukhta. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. A. Laptev, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 27 April 2004 the Court decided to communicate the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1956 and lives in Ukhta in the .
In March 1995 the applicant was charged with murder and an obligation not to leave the place of her residence without permission was imposed on her as a preventive measure. During the subsequent criminal investigation she was detained on remand from 24 May 1995 to 29 May 1996. On the latter date an obligation not to leave the place of her residence without permission was again imposed on her. In January 1997 she was convicted of murder and sentenced to one year’s imprisonment. The sentence was considered to have been served in view of the applicant’s detention on remand. In June 1997, on appeal, the Supreme Court of the  found that the applicant had not committed the crime as she had acted in self-defence. It quashed the judgment and discontinued the criminal proceedings.
On 28 January 2002 the applicant brought proceedings against the Ministry of Finance of the , claiming non-pecuniary damages caused by her unlawful prosecution, detention and conviction. On 15 February 2002 the  held that the applicant was entitled to compensation on account of her unlawful prosecution, detention and conviction. It found, inter alia, that the applicant had never been prosecuted earlier, that she had a minor child at the time, that her deprivation of liberty had involved stress and sufferings, that her health had deteriorated as a result of her stay in the detention facility and that she had had no liberty of movement and freedom to choose her residence for a long time. It allowed her claim in part and awarded her 70,000 Russian roubles (RUR) for nonpecuniary damage at the expense of the Federal Treasury. The parties appealed. On 28 March 2002 the Supreme Court of the  upheld the judgment which came into force on the same day.