The case concerns the question whether it was necessary in a democratic society for the Bulgarian courts to refuse to register an association which advocates the idea that there exists an oppressed Macedonian ethnic minority in Bulgaria, chiefly on the grounds that (a) the association was directed against the unity of the Bulgarian nation and the territorial integrity of Bulgaria, and that (b) its goals were political and therefore only capable of being pursued by a political party rather than a regular association.
The first applicant, Mr Stoyan Gerasimov Vasilev, is a Bulgarian national and also a Macedonian/citizen of the Republic of North Macedonia who was born in 1948 and lives in Blagoevgrad, Bulgaria; he is the second applicant’s chairman (see paragraph 4 below). The second applicant, the “Society of the Repressed Macedonians in Bulgaria Victims of the Communist Terror”, is an association set up in 2013 in Blagoevgrad, Bulgaria.
The applicants were represented before the Court by Mr K. Kanev, chairman of the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee, a non-governmental organisation based in Sofia, Bulgaria. On 15 January 2016 the President of the Section gave Mr Kanev leave to represent applicants in all pending and future cases in which he personally acts as a representative (Rule 36 § 4 (a) in fine of the Rules of Court). The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V. Obretenov of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as established by the Court, may be summarised as follows.
On 9 December 2013 the eight founders of the applicant association held a meeting at which they resolved to form the association, adopted its articles, and elected its board, chairman (the first applicant), vice-chairman and cashier. They went on to instruct the first applicant to take the necessary steps to have the association registered.
On an unknown later date the first applicant asked the Blagoevgrad Regional Court to register the association.
On 30 July 2014 the judge to whom the case had been assigned recused himself, noting that the case concerned a request for the registration of “Macedonians”, which was not a minority officially recognised by the Bulgarian State, and that he had taken part in local elections as an independent candidate supported by a nationalist political party, which could give rise to doubts about his impartiality. The case was in consequence assigned to another judge.
On 26 September 2014 the Blagoevgrad Regional Court refused to register the applicant association (see реш. № 4022 от 26.09.2014 г. по ф. д. № 44/2014 г., БОС). It found that the association’s goals, as formulated in its articles, suggested that it would be directed against the unity of the nation. In particular, the association had stated that it would strive to preserve and popularise the Macedonian cultural and historical heritage; to “preserve, develop and pass on to future generations the historical truth about the Macedonian question and the work for its resolution”; to restore and build monuments relating to the Macedonian past and heritage; to work to protect the rights of Macedonians; to organise lectures, talks and conferences about the past and present problems faced by the Macedonian people; to organise regional Macedonian gatherings, the commemoration of historical dates and events; to gather memoirs and historical and archive materials relating to the history of the Macedonians; to ensure the recording, preservation and popularisation of the Macedonian folkloric heritage; and so on. These activities and goals, seen against the backdrop of the disputes about Bulgarian historical personalities and events, were directed against the unity of the Bulgarian nation, which was contrary to the prohibition laid down in Article 44 § 2 of the Constitution (see paragraph 15 below).
The first applicant appealed. He submitted that the court had erred by holding that the association’s goals went against Article 44 § 2 of the Constitution. These goals, which were social and cultural, were by no means unlawful. The mere fact that the association would seek to promote a minority ethnic consciousness was not a threat to democracy or the unity of the nation. The refusal to register it had also been discriminatory, since an association having the same articles but called “Union of the Thracian Societies” had earlier been registered without any question being raised about the existence of a Thracian ethnos in Bulgaria. More generally, in approaching these matters the courts had to bear in mind that they were dealing with the fundamental right to freedom of association, and that only the Constitutional Court was competent to ban an organisation for being contrary to Article 44 § 2 of the Constitution.
On 19 December 2014 two of the three Sofia Court of Appeal judges to whom the case had been assigned were removed from it because in 2010 they had taken part in the consideration of a similar case.
On 2 February 2015 the Sofia Court of Appeal upheld the lower court’s decision (see реш. № 213 от 02.02.2015 г. по ф. д. № 3997/2014 г., САС). It noted that the association’s articles consistently insinuated that there existed in Bulgaria an oppressed Macedonian ethnos and called for the promotion of the so-called “Macedonian cause”, which was contrary to Articles 2 § 2 and 44 § 2 of the Constitution (see paragraphs 11 and 15 below). Also, any changes relating to the country’s unitary character and territorial integrity and the unity of the nation were characteristic solely of political parties, and, by Article 12 § 2 of the Constitution (see paragraph 12 below), could not be among the goals pursued by a regular association. The lower court had therefore been correct to refuse registration. Moreover, the possibility, envisaged by the association’s articles, for it to invest in, design and erect buildings, amounted to a secondary business activity which went beyond the bounds of what was permitted to associations, and in effect suggested that the association would operate as a business, in breach of the prohibition in section 3(3) of the Not-For-Profit Legal Persons Act 2000 (see paragraph 16 below).
Article 2 § 2 of the Constitution of 1991 provides that the territorial integrity of the Republic of Bulgaria is inviolable.
By Article 12 § 2 of the Constitution, associations may not pursue political goals or carry out political activities that are characteristic solely of political parties.
In a decision of 21 April 1992 (реш. № 4 от 21.04.1992 г. по к. д. № 1/1991 г., обн., ДВ, бр. 35/1992 г.) the Constitutional Court held, inter alia, that “political activities that are characteristic solely of political parties”, within the meaning of Article 12 § 2, were defined by Article 11 § 3 of the Constitution as those which facilitate “the formation of citizens’ political will” through “elections or other democratic means”. The court went on to say that “what was essential for this type of political activity [was] direct participation in the process of forming the bodies through which, under the Constitution, the people exercise[d] power”.
In January 2015 the plenary of the Supreme Court of Cassation’s Commercial Section asked the Constitutional Court to give a binding interpretation of Article 12 § 2. In a decision of 17 March 2015 (опр. № 1 от 17.03.2015 г. по к. д. № 1/2015 г., обн., ДВ, бр. 23/2015 г.), the Constitutional Court declined the request. It noted that it had not been shown that there existed divergences in the application of that provision, as required under its case-law, and that it was only competent to give a binding interpretation of a constitutional provision if it had been duly established that there was uncertainty about its meaning.
Article 44 § 1 of the Constitution enshrines the right to freedom of association. Article 44 § 2 goes on to say that organisations whose activities are directed against the country’s sovereignty or territorial integrity or against the nation’s unity, or which aim to stir up racial, national, ethnic or religious hatred, or to violate the rights and freedoms of others, as well as organisations creating secret or paramilitary structures, or which seek to attain their goals through violence, are prohibited.
The Not-For-Profit Legal Persons Act 2000 governs the formation, registration, organisation, activities and winding-up of not-for-profit legal persons, such as associations and foundations. It provides, in section 3(3), that a not-for-profit legal person may carry out a secondary business activity only if that activity is connected with its main registered activity and only if the proceeds from it are used for the goals set out in its articles.
Until the end of 2018, the procedure for the registration of associations unfolded at first instance before the territorially competent regional courts. A September 2016 amendment to the Not-For-Profit Legal Persons Act 2000 – in particular to sections 17 and 18 –, which came into force on 1 January 2018, shifted competence to register associations from the regional courts to the Registry Agency attached to the Ministry of Justice (which has since 2008 also kept the register of companies). Since 1 January 2018 the registration procedure is governed by sections 13 to 31 of the Register of Companies and the Register of Not-For-Profit Legal Persons Act 2006 (as amended with effect from the same date).
The explanatory notes to the October 2015 Government bill which led to these amendments (no. 502-01-83) noted, among other things, that there existed systemic divergences in the case-law of the various regional courts relating to the registration of not-for-profit associations, which “gave rise to legal uncertainty, led to an increase in the administrative burden for organisations and in the time for obtaining registration, and was conducive to infringements of the constitutional right to freedom of association”.