The case originated in an application (no. 36600/09) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Boris Karpovich Radzevil (“the applicant”), on 27 June 2009.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr A.V. Leshchenko, a lawyer practising in Odesa. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr I. Lishchyna.
On 7 January 2016 the complaints concerning the alleged violation of the applicant’s rights not to incriminate himself and to defend himself through the legal representative of his choosing, as well as his complaint about the length of the criminal proceedings against him, were communicated to the Government, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
On 12 April 2016 the applicant’s wife, Mrs Nina Ivanivna Radzevil, informed the Court that the applicant had died on 12 January 2016. She expressed the wish to pursue the proceedings on his behalf.
The applicant was born in 1936 and died on 12 January 2016. Until his death he lived in Odesa.
On the morning of 12 September 2002 the applicant was driving to work in a white Toyota car. As he was approaching a pedestrian crossing, a pedestrian, G., started to cross the street. As the applicant subsequently explained in the course of his trial, G. suddenly fell into the applicant’s traffic lane – a short distance away from the applicant’s car – after an oncoming red vehicle had gone past at very high speed. According to the applicant, G. could have been hit by that oncoming vehicle (which has never been identified), or he could have slipped while trying to avoid colliding with that vehicle, or he could have fallen for some other reason. The subsequent investigation and proceedings before the domestic courts, however, were to conclude that G. had been hit by the applicant’s car.
Immediately after the incident, the applicant stopped his car and placed G. in the rear seat. It is not clear from the documents submitted whether the applicant or a passer-by called an ambulance. After the ambulance arrived and took G. to hospital, the applicant left without waiting for the police.
G. died in Illichivsk Hospital later the same day from a number of cerebral, chest and upper-limb injuries.
The applicant came to the hospital on that day to enquire about G.’s health. A police officer, T., who was there for the investigation purposes, asked the applicant about the reason for his visit. As T. later stated, the applicant explained that he had accidentally hit G. with his car. According to the officer, the applicant agreed to show him the site of the accident and to explain how it had happened. According to the applicant’s submissions during his subsequent trial, he came to the hospital because he had helped G., and he was therefore not indifferent to the latter’s fate.
Immediately after, the police took the applicant to the site of the accident, where they drew up a scene inspection report. No traces of the accident were identified. Citing the absence of his signature on that report, the applicant later in the domestic proceedings submitted that he had neither shown the site to the police nor otherwise participated in that investigative measure.
On the same day, 12 September 2002, the applicant signed an “explanation” addressed to the Illichivsk police, according to which G. had unexpectedly emerged from behind a nearby moving vehicle as the applicant had been slowly driving his car through the pedestrian crossing and had suddenly fallen onto the bonnet of the applicant’s car. From there –when the applicant had hit the brakes – G. had fallen onto the road. The “explanation” contained a note to the effect that the applicant had been familiarised with the contents of Article 63 of the Constitution (providing the right not to incriminate oneself – see paragraph 44 below).
According to the applicant’s submissions to the Court, he had not had his glasses with him and had signed the “explanation” without reading it. He denied having stated what was written there. The applicant also denied that his right not to incriminate himself had been explained to him. He pointed out that the note regarding the constitutional provision was written in a different ink, which proved, according to him, that it had been added later.
On 20 September 2002 the Illichivsk police instituted criminal proceedings against the applicant on suspicion of his having breached the traffic regulations, resulting in a fatal accident (see paragraph 45 below).
On an unspecified date K., a licensed advocate, was admitted to the proceedings as the applicant’s defence lawyer.
On 11 December 2002 formal charges were brought against the applicant and his status changed from that of suspect to that of accused. As a preventive measure pending trial he was placed under an obligation not to leave the town.
According to the applicant, on 11 December 2002, during his questioning in the presence of his lawyer, he retracted the “explanation” dated 12 September 2002 (see paragraph 11 above), stating that he had given it under psychological pressure.
On an unspecified date the case was sent for examination to the Illichivsk Town Court (“the Illichivsk Court”).
On 31 July 2003 the Illichivsk Court remitted the case for additional pre-trial investigation.
On 15 October 2003 the case file was again sent to the Illichivsk Court.
The Illichivsk Court adjourned its hearings several times owing to the absence of certain witnesses.
On 19 April 2004 it ordered a comprehensive forensic medical examination and an expert technical examination, as well as a fresh reconstruction of the events in question.
On 24 February 2005 some of the above-mentioned examinations were carried out.
On 30 March 2005 the term of office of V. – the judge who was dealing with the case – expired.
On 29 November 2005 a new judge, B., started examining the case.
On 4 July 2006 B. ordered a fresh reconstruction of the events. Apparently, the previous judicial order to that effect, of 19 April 2004 (see paragraph 21 above) had not been implemented.
On 10 July 2006 the above-mentioned investigative measure was carried out.
During the trial, the applicant denied having breached the traffic regulations or having hit G. with his car. He maintained his account of the events, as outlined in paragraph 6 above. The applicant submitted that there was no expert evidence or other evidence in the case file proving that his car had come into contact with G.’s body.
On 13 December 2006 the Illichivsk Court convicted the applicant as charged. It sentenced him to four years’ imprisonment and divested him of his driver’s licence for two years. However, the court issued an amnesty under the Amnesty Act. Accordingly, the applicant did not have to serve his sentence.
In convicting the applicant, the Illichivsk Court relied, in particular, on the following evidence. The victim’s widow stated that the applicant had paid her 1,000 Ukrainian hryvnias (UAH) after G.’s death (which at the time was the equivalent of about 180 euros (EUR)) and that he had offered her UAH 30,000 (about EUR 5,400) in return for her not pressing criminal charges against him. A witness, V., who had been three metres away from the site of the accident, stated that he had seen a foreign-made car hit a man crossing the street at the pedestrian crossing in question. V. stated that the driver, whom he identified as the applicant, had placed the victim in the rear seat of his car; an ambulance had subsequently arrived and taken the latter to hospital. Another witness, R., submitted that he had been walking near the site of accident when, having heard a noise, he had turned his head and had seen the applicant’s car on a pedestrian crossing and G. in front of the car. The applicant had got out of his car and had remarked that he had been driving slowly. Another witness, Ga., stated that she had been crossing the street at the same time and at the same pedestrian crossing as G., but in the opposite direction. After G. had passed her by, she had heard a car braking. She had turned around and had seen G. falling. The applicant’s car had been there. The applicant had placed G. on the rear seat of his car saying: “I am sorry, I did not mean to”. When Ga. had approached the applicant, he had said to her that he would take G. to hospital and that there was no point in calling the police. Ga. furthermore observed that, after the ambulance had taken G. away, the applicant had left the scene, even though the people present had told him that he should wait for the police.
The Illichivsk Court also examined the statements of two other witnesses, who had given a different version of the events in question. N. (whom the applicant’s son had identified after having posted an appeal for witnesses in a local newspaper) was questioned for the first time before the court. He submitted that he had been driving in the direction of the intersection in question and had seen an oncoming red car driving at high speed. He had then seen a pedestrian falling and the applicant leaving his car and helping the victim. Furthermore, another witness, P., submitted that she had been about twenty metres away when she had seen G. falling without having been hit by any car. The applicant’s car had approached and the applicant had started to help the victim. Given that the statements of the above-mentioned two witnesses ran contrary to all the other evidence, the Illichivsk Court did not consider them credible.
The court also referred to the statement of T., the police officer, who had submitted that on 12 September 2002 the applicant had approached him in the hospital and had volunteered a confession that he had hit G. with his car (see paragraph 9 above). The court held that “an explanation could not be regarded as a source of evidence” and therefore excluded from the body of evidence the “explanation” signed by the applicant in the police station (see paragraph 11 above). It found, however, T.’s statement plausible having assessed it in the light of the assertions made by the applicant in the above-mentioned document and all the other available information. Two other police officers submitted that the applicant had participated in the scene inspection of 12 September 2002. They could not explain, however, the absence of his signature on that report (see paragraph 10 above).
As regards the results of the various forensic examinations – in particular, the examinations of the victim’s body and of the applicant’s car – the reports of those examinations were not conclusive as to whether G. had indeed been hit by the applicant’s car.
On 28 December 2006 K., the applicant’s lawyer, appealed on the applicant’s behalf. In accordance with the applicable rules of criminal procedure, he lodged that appeal through the Illichivsk Court. Referring to the contradictions in the witness evidence, he submitted that the verdict should be quashed and the case remitted for additional pre-trial investigation.
On 14 February 2007 the Illichivsk Court ruled that the lawyer’s appeal should be rejected without examination. On 29 January 2008 the Odesa Regional Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”), however, quashed that ruling.
On 12 May 2008 the applicant modified the appeal lodged by his lawyer. He reiterated his plea of not guilty and submitted that his conviction had not been based on any conclusive evidence. The applicant argued, in particular, that nobody had actually witnessed the accident itself. As regards the statement of V. (see paragraph 29 above), the applicant observed that that witness had initially submitted that he had first heard a noise and had then seen G. falling. Accordingly, in the applicant’s opinion, V.’s statement in court that he had witnessed the accident had been untruthful. In so far as the submissions of G.’s widow were concerned, the applicant observed that they had not been confirmed by any evidence. The applicant also denied having confessed to having hit G. with his car and having participated in the inspection of the scene (see paragraphs 9-12 above). The applicant submitted that the “explanation” signed by him on 12 September 2002 (see paragraph 11 above) had no legal standing and that its contents thus constituted inadmissible evidence, given that: firstly, he had signed it without reading it as he had left his glasses at home, and, secondly, the paragraph asserting that his rights under Article 63 of the Constitution had been explained to him had been added later (see paragraph 12 above). The applicant accordingly insisted that the above-mentioned document should not be taken to confirm the truthfulness of the police officer’s statements. Lastly, the applicant asked the appellate court to disregard his lawyer’s request for the case to be remitted for additional investigation. Instead, he argued that the charges against him should be dropped for lack of evidence.
On the same day, 12 May 2008, the applicant notified the Court of Appeal that he had lost contact with his advocate, K., and asked it to admit to the proceedings in his stead two other lawyers, I. and P., who did not, however, have an advocate license.
On 26 August 2008 the Court of Appeal conducted a hearing at which the applicant reiterated his request for I. and P., who were present in the courtroom, to be admitted as his defence counsel. His request was refused.
On the same date the Court of Appeal upheld the judgment of the first-instance court, having found that it had assessed all the evidence in a correct and objective manner.
On 3 September 2008 the applicant, I. and P. complained to the President of the Court of Appeal that the judicial panel that had examined the applicant’s case had arbitrarily denied him the right to be legally represented during the appeal hearing.
On 11 September 2008 the Deputy President of the Court of Appeal gave a written response to that complaint, noting that the panel had acted in accordance with Article 44 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and with Resolution no. 8 of the Plenary Supreme Court of Ukraine of 24 October 2003 on the application of legislation aimed at ensuring the right to mount a defence in criminal proceedings (see the reference in paragraph 46 below). In particular, under that Resolution, legal practitioners who, like I. and P., had no advocate’s licence could not at the material time be admitted as defence counsel in criminal proceedings, as no statute had yet been enacted setting out the relevant admission criteria.
On 26 September 2008 the applicant lodged a cassation appeal reiterating his plea of not guilty and other previous arguments. In addition, he complained that by refusing to admit I. and P. to the proceedings as his defence counsel, the Court of Appeal had arbitrarily denied him his right to legal assistance.
On 5 January 2009 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s cassation appeal. It noted that the arguments raised by him 	were essentially the same as those properly dismissed by the Court of Appeal in the ordinary appeal proceedings.
On 22 December 2016 the Government informed the Court that the case file concerning the criminal proceedings against the applicant had been destroyed owing to the expiry of its statutory storage period. The Government specified that they only had in their possession the judgment of the Illichivsk Court of 13 December 2006 (see paragraphs 2832 above) and the ruling of the Court of Appeal of 26 August 2008 (see paragraph 38 above). They therefore noted that their observations were based on the documents produced by the applicant and the statement of facts prepared by the Court.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of Ukraine read:
“Everyone has the right to legal assistance. Such assistance is provided free of charge in cases provided for by law. Everyone is free to choose the defender of his or her rights.
In Ukraine, advocacy acts to ensure the right to mount a defence against an accusation, and to provide legal assistance during the determination of cases by courts and other State bodies.”
“A person shall not bear responsibility for refusing to testify or to explain anything about himself or herself, members of his or her family or close relatives in the degree determined by law.
A suspect, an accused, or a defendant shall have the right to mount a defence.
A convicted person shall enjoy all human and citizens’ rights, except for the restrictions determined by law and established in court judgments.”
Under paragraph 2 of Article 286 of the Criminal Code of 2001, a breach by a driver of the rules regarding road safety or the operation and maintenance of his/her vehicle that leads to the infliction of death or grievous bodily harm upon a human being shall be punishable by a term of imprisonment of between three and eight years, and, optionally, by the confiscation of his/her driving licence for up to three years.
The domestic law and practice regarding the right to freely choose one’s defence counsel are summarised in the Court’s judgment in the case of Zagorodniy v. Ukraine (no. 27004/06, §§ 36-43, 24 November 2011).