The case originated in an application (no. 25071/07) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Gyunduz Bakhram Ogly Dzhavadov (“the applicant”), on 29 April 2007.
The applicant was represented by D. Gudkov, a lawyer practising in Samara.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 16 March 2015 the complaint concerning length of pre-trial detention was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1976 and is detained in Togliatti, Samara Region.
On 19 October 2006 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of drug dealing.
On 20 October 2006 the Samarskiy District Court of Samara remanded the applicant in custody. The court held that the applicant was suspected of a serious crime, that he could abscond, commit crimes, destroy evidence, threaten witnesses or in any other way interfere with the investigation.
On 18 December 2006 the District Court extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention. The court reproduced the reasoning of the previous detention order. The court also indicated that the applicant had played a leading part in the criminal activities.
On 15 February 2007 the District Court extended the applicant’s pretrial detention on the ground that the investigation was still pending and it was necessary to conduct some investigative activities. The court further referred to the same grounds as in the previous detention orders.
The Samara Regional Court rejected the applicant’s appeals against the detention orders.
On 1 June 2007 the Bolshechernigovskiy District Court of the Samara Region convicted the applicant of drug trafficking and sentenced him to 11 years’ imprisonment and a fine. On 21 August 2007 the Samara Regional Court upheld his conviction on appeal.