The present case concerns the alleged failure of the domestic courts to provide relevant and sufficient reasons for the applicant’s detention; the refusal of the Criminal Court of Appeal to examine an appeal by the applicant against a court order extending her detention; and respect for the principle of equality of arms at a detention hearing before the Criminal Court of Appeal.
The applicant was born in 1972. At the time of her death on 21 July 2019 she was living in Yerevan. She was represented by Mr A. Zohrabyan, a lawyer practising in Yerevan.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, and subsequently by Mr Y. Kirakosyan, Representative of the Republic of Armenia to the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 21 March 2008 the applicant, who had worked as a cashier at a catering company, was arrested on suspicion of aiding and abetting tax evasion. She alleged that the investigator had urged her to cooperate and promised that she would not be arrested if she made incriminating statements against the manager of the company. Only after she had refused to do so was she taken into custody.
On 24 March 2008 she was charged.
On the same date the investigator applied to the court to have the applicant detained for a period of two months on the grounds that she might abscond and obstruct the proceedings by interfering with witnesses.
The applicant objected to the investigator’s application, arguing, inter alia, that her detention was unjustified. She had always diligently appeared when summoned by the investigator and had never attempted to abscond or obstruct the proceedings.
On the same date the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan allowed the investigator’s application, taking into account the nature and gravity of the offence imputed to the applicant and the fact that she might obstruct the proceedings and exert unlawful influence on those involved in the proceedings. The District Court ordered the applicant’s detention for twenty days, as opposed to two months, taking into account that she was a woman, was known to be of good character, had no previous convictions and had a dependent child. The decision stated that it could be contested before the Criminal Court of Appeal within five days.
On 26 March 2008 the applicant lodged an appeal, raising similar arguments.
On 4 April 2008 the Criminal Court of Appeal upheld the decision of the District Court. It considered there to be a real risk of the applicant obstructing the proceedings by exerting unlawful influence on those involved in the proceedings, since three other cashiers who had also been charged were in hiding. The decision stated that it entered into force immediately upon adoption.
On 23 April 2008 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law with the Court of Cassation. In her appeal, she argued in substance that her detention was in violation of Article 5 § 1 (c) of the Convention and the Armenian Constitution because it was not based on a reasonable suspicion and there were no grounds justifying her detention, such as her being a flight risk. As grounds for admissibility of the appeal, the applicant relied on Article 414.2 § 1 (1) to (3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CCP), arguing that the examination of her appeal would allow the Court of Cassation to ensure uniform application of the law and that the alleged judicial error made by the Criminal Court of Appeal had resulted in serious consequences for her and her family.
On 19 May 2008 the Court of Cassation declared the appeal on points of law inadmissible, reasoning that the appeal on points of law indicated the applicant as the appellant but did not contain her signature and had only been signed by her lawyer.
On 31 March 2008 the investigator applied to the court for a two-month extension of the applicant’s detention, which was due to expire on 10 April 2008.
On 7 April 2008 the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan allowed the application in part and extended the applicant’s detention by a month, until 10 May 2008. The court took into account the nature and gravity of the offence imputed to the applicant, the fact that if she remained at large, she might abscond and obstruct the proceedings, and the fact that she was a woman, had a dependent child and mother, had no previous convictions and was known to be of good character. The decision stated that it could be contested before the Criminal Court of Appeal within five days.
On 8 April 2008 the applicant lodged an appeal.
On an unspecified date the hearing on the appeal was scheduled for 3 p.m. on 17 April 2008.
The Government alleged that the applicant’s representatives had been notified of the hearing and submitted several handwritten documents entitled “transcript of a telephone conversation” (հեռախոսագիր) in support of their allegation. According to one such transcript, at 4.10 p.m. on 16 April 2008 a judge’s assistant at the Criminal Court of Appeal called the offices of the applicant’s representatives and informed the secretary that the hearing was scheduled for 3 p.m. the next day. The secretary promised to pass on the message. At 4.30 p.m. the assistant called the offices again and was informed by the secretary that the applicant’s lawyer, Mr Zohrabyan, was aware of the hearing and that she would inform him again.
On 17 April 2008 the hearing at the Criminal Court of Appeal began as scheduled. The presiding judge stated at the outset that the applicant’s lawyers had been duly notified. In particular, the assistant had called and informed them, and had even tried to call them again in the morning. The presiding judge asked those appearing in court whether they had any information regarding the lawyers’ absence. The investigator stated that he was not aware of the reasons for their absence, but added that he himself had found out about the hearing from the lawyers the previous day, before he had even been contacted by the court. The Criminal Court of Appeal decided to proceed with the hearing and heard both the prosecutor and the investigator. It appears that the hearing lasted about half an hour and was then adjourned until 10 a.m. the next morning.
According to another “transcript of a telephone conversation” submitted by the Government, following the hearing, at 4.20 p.m., the judge’s assistant called Mr Zohrabyan on his mobile telephone in order to enquire about the reasons for his absence, but he did not answer. The assistant then called the lawyers’ offices and informed an employee, N., that the hearing had been adjourned until the next morning. According to the same transcript, the judge’s assistant called the offices again at 9.15 a.m. the next day and spoke to a trainee, A., who said that she would inform the lawyers of the hearing. Between 9.15 and 10 a.m. the judge’s assistant made calls to Mr Zohrabyan’s mobile telephone but he did not answer.
At 10 a.m. on 18 April 2008 the Criminal Court of Appeal resumed the hearing. The presiding judge stated that they had once again tried to contact the lawyers. Numerous calls had been made to the lawyer’s mobile telephone but he had never answered, while at the office it had always been a secretary or trainee who had answered and promised to try to inform the lawyers. The court decided to proceed with the hearing. It heard both the prosecutor and the investigator and upheld the decision of the District Court, finding that the applicant had been accused of a serious crime punishable by imprisonment alone, which increased the possibility of her absconding. The appellate court repeated that there was a risk that the applicant would obstruct the proceedings by unlawfully influencing those involved in the proceedings who were in hiding. The decision stated that it entered into force immediately upon adoption. It appears that a copy of the decision was served on the applicant on 28 April 2008.
The applicant contested the Government’s above allegations and claimed that her lawyers had not been present at the hearing of 17 to 18 April 2008 since they had not received any notification, either by telephone or in writing.
On 29 May 2008 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law against the Criminal Court of Appeal’s decision of 18 April 2008, raising similar arguments as in her appeal of 23 April 2008 (see paragraph 12 above). She further added that the court had failed to give reasons for its decision, and to duly notify her lawyers of the hearing and thereby to ensure equality of arms.
On 2 July 2008 the Court of Cassation decided to leave the appeal on points of law unexamined on the grounds that it had been lodged outside the one-month time-limit prescribed by the CCP.
On 30 April 2008 the investigator applied to the court to have the applicant’s detention, which was due to expire on 10 May 2008, extended by two more months.
On 7 May 2008 the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan allowed the application in part and extended the applicant’s detention by another month, until 10 June 2008, on the same grounds. The decision stated that it could be contested before the Criminal Court of Appeal within five days.
On 12 May 2008 the applicant lodged an appeal, raising similar arguments as previously.
On 26 May 2008 the Criminal Court of Appeal upheld the decision of the District Court on the same grounds. The decision stated that it entered into force immediately upon adoption.
On 26 June 2008 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law, raising similar arguments as previously.
On 24 July 2008 the Court of Cassation declared the appeal inadmissible for failure to indicate any of the admissibility grounds specified in the CCP.
On 5 June 2008 the investigator applied to the court to have the applicant’s detention, which was due to expire on 10 June 2008, extended by another month.
On 9 June 2008 the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan allowed the application in part and extended the applicant’s detention by twenty days, until 30 June 2008, on the same grounds. The decision stated that it could be contested before the Criminal Court of Appeal within five days.
On 13 June 2008 the applicant lodged an appeal with the Criminal Court of Appeal, raising similar arguments as previously.
In the meantime, the investigation was completed and on 19 June 2008 the applicant’s case was transferred to the Yerevan Criminal Court for examination on the merits.
On 1 July 2008 the Criminal Court of Appeal decided to leave the appeal of 13 June 2008 unexamined on the grounds that the scope of judicial control over pretrial proceedings was limited to the investigation stage. Since the investigation had been completed and the case had been transferred to a court for examination on the merits, it was now up to that court to examine questions of the lawfulness and validity of detention. The decision stated that it entered into force immediately upon adoption.
On 8 July 2008 the Yerevan Criminal Court set the applicant’s criminal case down for trial and dismissed an application lodged by her for release on bail by “leaving her detention unchanged”.
On 16 July 2008 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law against the Criminal Court of Appeal’s decision of 1 July 2008, arguing that it had failed to examine her appeal of 13 June 2008 speedily and that its eventual refusal to examine the merits of that appeal had violated her right of access to court.
On 16 August 2008 the Court of Cassation admitted the appeal on points of law for examination, finding that it complied with the requirements of Article 414.2 § 1 (1) of the CCP since the issues raised therein were important for the uniform application of the law.
On 6 November 2008 the Yerevan Criminal Court allowed the applicant’s application to be released on bail and the applicant was released from detention.
On 28 November 2008 the Court of Cassation quashed the decision of 1 July 2008 and remitted the case to the Court of Appeal for fresh examination. It found that the appellate court had refused to examine the applicant’s appeal of 13 June 2008 on grounds not provided for by law. It further stated that it was unacceptable to restrict a person’s right to appeal against a detention order or its extension based on the particular stage of the proceedings in which the appeal was lodged. The Court of Appeal had therefore violated the applicant’s right to have the lawfulness of her detention reviewed, as well as her right of access to court. The Court of Cassation concluded that the procedural violations in question had been sufficiently serious since they had influenced the proper outcome of the case, and called for the Court of Appeal’s decision to be quashed and the case to be re-examined.
On 16 December 2008 the Criminal Court of Appeal admitted the appeal of 13 June 2008 for examination and scheduled a hearing for 24 December 2008. It appears that prior to the hearing the applicant applied to the same court with a request to terminate the proceedings.
On 27 December 2008 the Criminal Court of Appeal allowed that request and terminated the proceedings.
Article 92 provides that the court of the highest instance in Armenia, except matters falling within the constitutional jurisdiction, is the Court of Cassation, which is called upon to ensure the uniform application of the law.
Article 50 § 1 provided that the role of the Court of Cassation was to ensure the uniform application of the law. In performing this mission, the Court of Cassation had to strive to facilitate the development of the law. Article 50 § 6 provided that the Court of Cassation reviewed judicial decisions not determining a case on the merits in exceptional cases stipulated by law.
For a summary of the relevant domestic provisions, see Ara Harutyunyan v. Armenia (no. 629/11, §§ 30-35, 20 October 2016).
Article 285 provides that, where it is necessary to order pre-trial detention or extend the detention period, the prosecutor or the investigator lodges an application with a court. The application must contain motives and grounds justifying the accused’s detention. The application for detention must be examined promptly by the court with territorial jurisdiction over the investigation in a single-judge formation in the presence of the official who lodged the application, the accused, his legal guardian and his defence lawyer, if any. The court is obliged to duly notify the official who lodged the application, the accused, his or her legal guardian and his or her defence lawyer, if any, of the time and place of the court hearing. Following the examination of the application, the court will order the accused’s detention, extend the detention period or dismiss the application.
Article 287 provides that appeals against a judge’s decision ordering detention or extending the detention period or refusing to do so are lodged with the Court of Appeal.
Article 288 provides that a judicial review of the lawfulness and well-foundedness of the detention order and any extension of the detention period is carried out by the Court of Appeal. The court reviews the lawfulness and well-foundedness of the detention or its extension within three days of receipt of the material justifying the lawfulness and well-foundedness of the detention. The judicial review takes place in camera in the presence of the prosecutor and the defence lawyer. If a party who has been notified beforehand of the date of examination of the appeal fails to appear, this will not obstruct the judicial review. Following the judicial review, the Court of Appeal will: (a) cancel the detention and release the person, (b) order detention or extend the detention period or (c) dismiss the appeal.
Articles 376 § 1, 376.1 (4) and 377 provide that the suspect, the accused, his or her defence lawyer and his or her legal guardian are entitled to lodge appeals with the Criminal Court of Appeal against the first-instance court’s decision ordering, replacing or cancelling detention.
Article 379 § 1 (3) provides that an appeal against a decision of the first-instance court ordering detention or extending the detention period may be lodged within five days of adoption of the decision, while appeals against all other decisions of the first-instance court not determining a case on the merits may be lodged within ten days of adoption of the decision.
Article 402 provides that the Court of Appeal’s decision enters into force immediately upon adoption.
Article 403 provides that the Court of Cassation reviews decisions of the Court of Appeal determining a case on the merits and those not determining a case on the merits, as well as decisions of the Court of Appeal taken following a review of decisions of the first-instance court not determining a case on the merits.
Articles 406 provides that an appeal on points of law may be lodged on grounds of a judicial error, namely a violation of procedural or substantive law which has, or may have, affected the outcome of the case.
Article 414.2 § 1 provides that an appeal on points of law is admissible for examination if: (i) the decision of the Court of Cassation on the issues raised in the appeal may be important for the uniform application of the law; (ii) the contested decision prima facie conflicts with an earlier decision of the Court of Cassation; or (iii) the Court of Appeal has made a prima facie judicial error which may have, or has had, serious consequences.
Article 499.15 provides that anyone who believes that his rights guaranteed by an international treaty to which Armenia is a party have been violated by a final decision taken in the criminal case in accordance with this Code is entitled to apply to an international court. For the purposes of this chapter, a decision of the Court of Cassation is considered to be the final decision.