The case originated in an application (no. 22343/08) against the Republic of Armenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Armenian national, Mr Kondranov Amirkhanyan (“the applicant”), on 12 May 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Grigoryan, a lawyer practising in Yerevan. The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, Representative of the Republic of Armenia at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the decision of the Court of Cassation of 12 December 2007 to quash the judgment of the Civil Court of Appeal of 9 March 2007 had infringed the principle of res judicata and his right to the peaceful enjoyment of possessions.
On 14 June 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1941 and lives in Yerevan.
A third person, G., owned a plot of land, a part of which, with her consent, was separated by a fence and used by another person, J.
On 21 April 1998 G. concluded an agreement with J., according to which she gave a part of her plot of land, measuring 285 sq. m., to him. It appears that the plot of land actually used by J., as separated by the fence, was 38.75 sq. m. bigger than the 285 sq. m. plot given by G. The 38.75 sq. m. also belonged to G. In this connection, another agreement was reached between G. and J., according to which G. gave her consent for J. to become the owner of the whole plot of land used by him. However, it appears that J.’s ownership rights were officially registered only in respect of the plot of land measuring 285 sq. m.
On 28 April 1998 the applicant bought the larger plot of land from J. and, since the fence was still in place, continued to use also the 38.75 sq. m. strip of land.
In 2004 G. instituted proceedings against the applicant, seeking to take the 38.75 sq. m. strip of land used by the applicant, claiming her ownership rights.
On 14 December 2006 the Erebuni and Nubarashen District Court of Yerevan granted the claim, ordering the applicant to release the strip of land to G.
On an unspecified date the applicant lodged an appeal.
On 9 March 2007 the Civil Court of Appeal granted the appeal and dismissed G.’s claim. In particular, the Court of Appeal found that since G. had agreed that J. become the owner of the plot of land used by him, as separated by the fence, she had relinquished her rights in respect of the strip of land in favour of J. and, consequently, in favour of the applicant.
This judgment was subject to appeal on points of law within six months from the date of its delivery.
On 26 March 2007 G. lodged an appeal on points of law against the judgment of 9 March 2007 with the Court of Cassation, claiming that it had been adopted in violation of substantive and procedural law. As a ground for admitting her appeal on points of law, G. submitted, pursuant to Article 231.2 § 1 (3) of the Code of Civil Procedure (the CCP), that the violations of the substantive and procedural law might have grave consequences, such as deprivation of her ownership rights in respect of the plot of land.
On 7 April 2007 amendments were introduced to the CCP which stipulated that there was no right to bring an appeal on points of law more than once, unless the Court of Cassation – when returning an appeal – fixed a time-limit to correct and re-submit it (see paragraph 26 below).
On 12 April 2007 the Court of Cassation decided to return G.’s appeal as inadmissible for lack of merit. The reasons provided were as follows:
“The Civil Chamber of the Court of Cassation ... having examined the question of admitting [G.’s appeal lodged against the judgment of the Civil Court of Appeal of 9 March 2007], found that it must be returned for the following reasons:
Pursuant to Article 230 § 1 (4.1) of [the CCP] an appeal on points of law must contain any of the grounds [required by] Article 231.2 § 1 of [the CCP].
The Court of Cassation finds that the admissibility grounds raised in the appeal on points of law[, as required by] Article 231.2 § 1 of [the CCP], are absent. In particular, the Court of Cassation considers the arguments raised in the appeal on points of law concerning a possible judicial error and its consequences, in the circumstances of the case, to be unfounded.
...
At the same time, the Court of Cassation does not find it appropriate to fix a timelimit for correcting the shortcomings and lodging the appeal anew.”
This decision entered into force from the moment of its delivery and was not subject to appeal.
On 7 September 2007 G. lodged another appeal on points of law with the Court of Cassation against the judgment of the Court of Appeal of 9 March 2007, alleging violations of substantive and procedural law. As a ground for admitting her appeal G. indicated, in addition to the ground mentioned in her appeal of 26 March 2007, that the judicial act to be adopted by the Court of Cassation on her case might have a significant impact on the uniform application of the law, and that the contested judgment of the Court of Appeal contradicted a judicial act previously adopted by the Court of Cassation.
On 1 October 2007 the Court of Cassation decided to admit the appeal for examination. The reasons provided were as follows:
“[The appeal] must be admitted for examination since it satisfies the requirements of Articles 230 and 231.2 § 1 of [the CCP].”
On 8 October 2007 the applicant lodged a reply to G.’s appeal with the Court of Cassation where, inter alia, he stated that the admission of G.’s second appeal by the Court of Cassation was in violation of the principle of res judicata and his property rights. When the Court of Cassation, by its decision of 12 April 2007, had returned G.’s appeal without fixing a timelimit to correct any shortcomings and to re-submit the appeal, the judgment of the Court of Appeal of 9 March 2007 became final and binding.
On 12 December 2007 the Court of Cassation examined G.’s appeal on the merits and decided to grant it partially by quashing the judgment of the Court of Appeal of 9 March 2007 in its part related to G.’s property claim in respect of the plot of land and remitting the case for a fresh examination. The Court of Cassation found that the Civil Court of Appeal, when reaching its conclusions, had failed to take into account an expert opinion which was among the materials of the case file, as well as to indicate the provisions of the domestic law on which its judgment had been based.
On 1 April 2008 the General Jurisdiction Court of Erebuni and Nubarashen Districts of Yerevan conducted a fresh examination of G.’s claim and granted it by recognising G.’s ownership rights in respect of the strip of land in question.
On an unspecified date the applicant lodged an appeal.
On 10 July 2008 the Civil Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the judgment of the District Court.
The relevant provisions of the CCP, as in force prior to the amendments of 7 April 2007, read as follows:
“3. Proceedings in civil cases are conducted in accordance with laws in force during the examination of the case.”
“Judgments of the Court of Appeal enter into force from the moment of their delivery.”
“1. Judgments of ... the Court of Appeal which have entered into force ... can be reviewed through cassation proceedings ... .”
“1. Appeals on points of law lodged against judgments of ... the Court of Appeal which have entered into force ... are examined by the Civil Chamber of the Court of Cassation (hereafter, Court of Cassation).
The objective of the Court of Cassation’s activity is to ensure the uniform application of the law and its correct interpretation of the law and to facilitate the development of the law.”
“An appeal on points of law can be lodged on the ground of ... a substantive or a procedural violation of the parties’ rights ...”
“1. An appeal on points of law can be lodged within six months from the date of entry into force of the judgment of the lower court deciding on the merits of the case.”
“1.  An appeal on points of law must contain ... (4) the appellant’s claim, with reference to the laws and other legal acts and specifying which provisions of substantive or procedural law have been violated or wrongly applied ...; (4.1) arguments required by any of the subparagraphs of the first paragraph of Article 231.2 of this Code ... .”
“1. An appeal on points of law shall be returned if it does not comply with the requirements of Article 230 and the first paragraph of Article 231.2 of this Code ...
The Court of Cassation shall adopt a decision to return an appeal on points of law within ten days after the receipt of the appeal.
In its decision to return an appeal on points of law the Court of Cassation may fix a time-limit for correcting the shortcoming and lodging the appeal anew.”
“1. The Court of Cassation shall admit an appeal on points of law, if (1) the judicial act to be adopted on the given case by the Court of Cassation may have a significant impact on the uniform application of the law, or (2) the contested judicial act contradicts a judicial act previously adopted by the Court of Cassation, or (3) a violation of the procedural or the substantive law by the lower court may cause grave consequences, or (4) there are newly discovered circumstances.”
“1. Having examined a case, the Court of Cassation has the right: (1) to uphold the court judgment and to dismiss the appeal...; (2) to quash the whole or part of the judgment and to remit the case for a new examination...”
“A decision of the Court of Cassation enters into force from the moment of its delivery and is not subject to appeal.”
The provisions of the CCP, which were modified by the amendments of 7 April 2007 (in italics), read as follows:
“1. An appeal on points of law can be lodged within six months from the date of entry into force of the judgment of the lower court deciding on the merits of the case. The same person may lodge an appeal on points of law only once, except cases envisaged by the third paragraph of Article 231.1.”
“1. An appeal on points of law shall be returned if it does not comply with the requirements of Article 230 and paragraph 1 of Article 231.2 of this Code ... or there are grounds envisaged by the fourth paragraph of this Article.
The Court of Cassation shall adopt a decision to return an appeal on points of law within ten days after the receipt of the appeal.
In its decision to return an appeal on points of law the Court of Cassation may fix a time-limit for correcting the shortcoming and lodging the appeal anew.
If a decision is taken to return the appeal without fixing a time-limit, the appellant may not bring another appeal.”
The amendments in question did not contain transitional provisions.
Article 42 provides, inter alia, that laws and other legal acts worsening a person’s legal situation shall not have a retroactive force.
Article 78 provides that legal acts restricting the rights and freedoms of legal entities or physical persons, as well as worsening their legal situation in some other way, may not have a retroactive force.