The case concerns the withdrawal of the applicant company’s licence to exploit a limestone, gravel and sand quarry. It raises issues under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
The applicant is a company incorporated in Moldova which was represented by Mr C. Lazari, a lawyer practising in Chișinău.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr O. Rotari.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant company operated a quarry extracting limestone, gravel and sand from 2000. At the time of the events it operated in accordance with a licence issued by the Licensing Chamber (Camera de Licențiere din Republica Moldova) on 27 December 2010 for a period of five years.
On 15 March 2012 the National Institute of Judicial Expertise was requested by the Prosecutor General’s Office to conduct an expert analysis and give answers to three questions concerning the applicant company’s mining activity: (a) What was the surface exploited by the applicant company for the extraction of gravel and sand outside the surface allocated to it in the mining licence? (b) What was the volume of the minerals extracted by the applicant company outside the allocated area? (c) What was the value of the gravel and sand extracted by the applicant company outside the allocated area? (d) What was the value of unpaid taxes from the above extractions? and (e) What was the value of the damage to the environment caused as a result of the above extractions?
In an expert report dated 1 June 2012 three experts in the field of immovable property, constructions and construction materials from the National Institute of Judicial Expertise issued an expert report in which they gave the following answers to the questions asked by the Prosecutor General’s Office: (a) the applicant company did not exploit any surface beyond the area allocated to it in the mining licence; (b) the volume of the unlawfully extracted minerals was 1,400 cubic metres; (c) the applicant company extracted limestone, gravel and sand; (d) the value of the gravel and sand extracted from the mine was 175,812 Moldovan lei (MDL). The report did not contain any details as to how the experts reached the conclusion that the 1,400 cubic metres of sand had been extracted unlawfully.
On 19 June 2012 the Prosecutor General’s Office wrote to the Licensing Chamber that following verification, it had discovered that the applicant company had unlawfully extracted some 1,400 cubic metres of sand. The Prosecutor General’s Office also submitted that the above quantity of sand had not been declared to the competent authority and the applicant company had not filled in the required official forms for the purpose of taxation, thus acting in breach of Article 39(b), (c) and (g) of the Mining Code (Codul Subsolului). It also stated that the State had sustained damage of some 175,560 Moldovan Lei (MDL) and that a criminal investigation had been initiated in that respect. A copy of the expert report of 1 June 2012 was attached to the letter.
On 2 July 2012 the Licensing Chamber sent the applicant company an official warning (prescripție) informing it about the alleged breaches of Article 39(b), (c) and (g) of the Mining Code found by the Prosecutor General’s Office and asking it to remedy all of them within one month. It does not appear from the materials of the case that the applicant company received any explanation concerning the accusations against it or that it had been given a copy of the Office of the Prosecutor General’s letter of 19 June 2012 to the Licensing Chamber.
On 2 August 2012 the Licensing Chamber repeated its warning, giving the applicant company another month to remedy all the shortcomings found by the Prosecutor General’s Office.
The applicant company informed the Licensing Chamber that it had not understood what exactly was being imputed to it and that the warnings received by it had not contained any details or annexes. It also challenged the official warnings in court, but the outcome of the proceedings is not known to the Court.
On 7 September 2012 the Licensing Chamber revoked the applicant company’s licence and on 11 September 2012 it applied to the Centru District Court for confirmation of that measure on the grounds invoked by the Prosecutor General’s Office in its letter of 19 June 2012 (see paragraph 7 above).
In its written submissions before the court, the applicant company submitted that it was not clear from the Licensing Chamber’s application to which breaches they referred. If the alleged breaches had taken place before 2009, then the provisions of the old Mining Code should have been relied upon and not those of the new one, which entered into force in 2009. The applicant company also argued that it had never been informed about the criminal investigation initiated by the Prosecutor’s Office and had not been made familiar with any documents which served as a basis for the Licensing Chamber’s official warnings. Moreover, it submitted that the experts who had produced the report had not had the necessary qualifications. As to the two official warnings sent by the Licensing Chamber in July and August 2012, the applicant company submitted that they had been too vague and that it had not understood from them what exactly had been imputed to it. The applicant company submitted that it had declared to the Mining Authority all the quantities of sand extracted and had filled in the official forms required in a timely manner. The applicant specified that initially the official forms did not require distinguishing between the minerals extracted; therefore no such distinction had been made. Later, however, new forms were issued in which it was required to distinguish between the different minerals extracted. The applicant company had also submitted all the required tax declarations to the tax authority. The applicant submitted documents in support of its submissions. The applicant also argued that according to the Mining Code, the only authority with competence in the field of mining and with a right to apply to the Licensing Chamber was the Mining Authority and not the Prosecutor’s Office.
In a judgment of 6 December 2012 the Centru District Court rejected the Licensing Chamber’s action as ill-founded. The court found that the only piece of evidence in support of its application was the expert report of 1 June 2012 by the National Institute of Judicial Expertise. The court found in the first place that, according to Article 52 of the Mining Code, the only State authority competent to conduct expertise in the field of mining was the Mining Authority. Moreover, the experts who had conducted the expert examination at the request of the Prosecutor General’s Office had not even visited the applicant company’s mine, nor had they obtained any documents from it. The conclusions reached by the experts were confusing because after finding that the applicant company had not exploited any surface beyond the area allocated to it in the mining licence, they have stated that the applicant company had extracted unlawfully 1,400 square metres of sand without explaining on what ground they considered that extraction unlawful. The court finally found that, according to information obtained from the Mining Authority, the applicant company had declared to it the entire quantity of sand extracted and had filled out and submitted all the necessary official forms to it. The Licensing Chamber appealed against this judgment.
On 28 February 2013 the Chişinău Court of Appeal upheld the appeal lodged by the Licensing Chamber and reversed the judgment of the first instance court. The Court of Appeal found that the applicant company had failed to comply with the official warnings of 2 July and 2 August 2012 by the Licensing Chamber. Moreover, for the first time the Court of Appeal relied on an expert report of 3 September 2012 according to which the applicant company had allegedly exploited a surface beyond the area allocated to it in the mining licence. The court found well-founded the grounds relied upon by the Licensing Chamber and found in its favour.
The applicant company lodged an appeal on points of law against the above judgment in which it reiterated its initial arguments concerning the action lodged by the Licensing Chamber and criticised the Court of Appeal for the fact that it did not even mention its arguments in its judgment.
On 26 June 2013 the Supreme Court of Justice dismissed the applicant company’s appeal on points of law.
On 17 July 2013 the head of the applicant company was invited to the Prosecutor General’s Office where he was handed a decision of 16 April 2013 by which the criminal investigation in its respect had been discontinued. The Prosecutor’s Office found, inter alia, that the applicant company had in fact declared to the competent authority all the extracted minerals, although without distinguishing between the different types of minerals, and it had filled in the required official forms for the purpose of taxation.
Shortly thereafter the applicant company lodged a revision request with the Supreme Court of Justice against its judgment of 26 June 2013 invoking the above decision of the Prosecutor General’s Office as a ground for review. However, on 4 December 2013, the Supreme Court dismissed it as ill-founded.
The relevant provisions of the Mining Code, in force at the material time, read as follows:
Article 39. The obligations of the beneficiaries of mining licences
“[...]
b)  to use the mining areas only for the purposes for which they have been attributed;
c)  to pay in a timely manner and in full taxes for the use of the mines;
[...]
g)  to provide the mining authority with information concerning the underground as well as true data concerning the reserves of mineral substances extracted or remaining in the mine, its compositions (the movement of the reserves) and about the use of the underground for non-mining related purposes;
[...]
Under Article 21 of Law No. 451 on Licensing, a licence can be withdrawn, inter alia, for failure to comply with two official warnings by the Licensing Chamber.