The case originated in an application (no. 32185/02) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mrs Marina Ilyinichna Kaykhanidi (“the applicant”), on 8 August 2002.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 9 May 2006 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant, Mrs Marina Ilyinichna Kaykhanidi, is a Russian national who was born in 1979 and now lives in Berlin.
Since 1996 the applicant studied at the Moscow State Linguistic University (the MSLU). In 2000 she obtained a traineeship with the Humboldt University in Berlin. She went to Germany for several months and, consequently, abandoned her courses at the MSLU. She claims that she returned to Moscow in September 2000 and resumed her studies in the MSLU. However, in May 2001 she was sent down from this university for repetitive non-attendance and failure to pass the exams.
On 17 July 2001 the applicant challenged her dismissal before the court. On 20 December 2001 the Cheremushkinskiy District of Moscow granted her claim. The court established that the applicant had been dismissed without having been heard about the reasons of her absences. On this ground the court found the dismissal unlawful and ordered the MSLU to reinstate her as a student.
The MSLU appealed, but on 20 February 2002 the Moscow City Court upheld the decision in favour of the applicant.
On 28 February 2002 the MSLU brought a supervisory review application. On 13 June 2002 the Presidium of the Moscow City Court quashed the lower courts’ decisions. As to the fact that the applicant had not been heard before having been dismissed, the Presidium found that the MSLU dean tried to contact the applicant, but to no avail, since she was outside Russia. The court obtained information from the border police about the applicant’s absences from the Russian territory. According to that information, the applicant was outside  for at least seven weeks during the study time. Further, the court obtained information from the  which confirmed that starting from April 2001 the applicant had been enrolled at that University as a full-time student. The Presidium also held that the lower courts applied the law incorrectly and decided to remit the case to the first instance court for a fresh examination.
After the transmittal of the case to the first instance court the applicant amended her initial complaint, claiming from the MSLU 600,000 Russian roubles (RUB) as non-pecuniary damages.
On 19 March 2003 the Cheremushkinskiy District Court of Moscow discontinued the proceedings. The court found that the complaint was introduced under the provisions of the law of 1993, which provided for the judicial review of administrative actions. However, after the enactment of the new Code of Civil Proceeding on 1 February 2003, such claims should have been examined under the rules of “contentious proceedings” (исковое производство). The court advised her to re-introduce her complaint within the contentious proceedings. On 16 May 2003 the  upheld the decision of 19 March 2003.
The applicant re-introduced her claim; however, she did not follow the instructions of the courts. The courts at two instances again refused to examine her action.
For relevant provisions of the Russian law on supervisory review see Ryabykh v.  (no. 52854/99, ECHR 2003IX).