The case originated in an application (no. 6991/07) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Nadezhda Nikolayevna Kostyuchenko (“the applicant”), on 18 January 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr O. Anishchik, a lawyer practising in St Petersburg. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that she had not been given a fair hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law. She also alleged that her telephone communications had been tapped and that she had been subjected to surveillance measures, and that she had had no effective remedies in those respects.
On 18 March 2011 the complaints under Articles 6, 8 and 13 of the Convention were communicated to the Government.
The Russian Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1962 and lives in Samara.
On 18 December 1997 the applicant was appointed, for an indefinite period, as a judge of the Commercial Court of the Samara Region. In February 2003 the regional Judiciary Qualifications Board (квалификационная коллегия судей – hereinafter “the JQB” or “the Board”) awarded her the second qualification class. She was subsequently assigned to preside over a panel of the commercial court.
It appears that a number of written and oral complaints were submitted to Mr N., the President of the Commercial Court of the Samara Region, in relation to the applicant’s work. An internal inquiry was then carried out. In January 2006 Mr N. made an application to the regional JQB to institute disciplinary proceedings against the applicant. The following examples, inter alia, were listed:
(i)  A biased adjudication in cases relating to Toliattiazot OJSC, that is to say the applicant examined an application to restore a procedural time-limit for challenging a decision taken by the bailiff service in the decision on the merits of the case, instead of dealing with it at the start of the proceedings. This allegedly disclosed a lack of knowledge of the requirements of Article 170 of the Code of Commercial Procedure. Moreover, the case should not have been examined at all, having been lodged outside the statutory prescription period. Thus, the manifestly unlawful decision delivered by the applicant was then quashed on appeal. Prior to that, the applicant had issued a decision setting aside the bailiffs’ freezing order in respect of a number of shares. The applicant’s manifestly unlawful decision in that case was also set aside following a cassation review. The above considerations indicated, in Mr N.’s view, that the applicant had lacked professional knowledge and impartiality. Similar considerations were also applicable to two cases concerning another private company.
(ii)  In another case, the applicant examined the matter of interim measures in an interlocutory decision concerning the start of the proceedings. Such decisions were not amenable to appeal, while matters relating to interim measures could be appealed against and thus should have been decided in a separate procedural decision.
(iii)  In another case, the applicant suspended the proceedings, requiring a party to submit an authority form, and then still proceeded with the case, despite not receiving any of the relevant documents. The judge made various mistakes in that case and examined the merits. Subsequently, the case was reassigned to another judge, who examined it.
(iv)  During a hearing in another case, the applicant expressed her opinion on the merits of the case. She was then challenged and the case was reassigned.
(v)  In certain cases, the applicant unlawfully indicated the contents of the operative part of the judgment in the verbatim record instead of issuing a separate procedural decision; there were inconsistencies between the content of those orders and the text indicated in the verbatim record.
(vi)  Over ten months, some 19.3% of court decisions (among those that were challenged on appeal) were set aside. Overall, some thirty court decisions were quashed during that period of time.
It does not appear that the application was accompanied by any supporting documents or other enclosures (see also paragraphs 9, 12 and 30 below).
The applicant was provided with a copy of the application and made written submissions in reply.
The Court has not been supplied with any written material adduced as evidence or added to the case file before the JQB.
On 1 February 2006 a hearing was held by a seventeen-member panel of the regional JQB. The applicant did not attend because she felt ill. The JQB heard the regional prosecutor, who, according to the hearing record, stated as follows:
“In relation to many of the cases that [the applicant] examined, there are now pending criminal investigations, for instance, as regards Toliattiazot OJSC ... We do have operational information that [the applicant] delivered judgments [motivated by] the consideration of personal interest or gain; many of those were taken in a restaurant. I do consider the application [for her disqualification] justified ... We do have records of telephone conversations involving persons suspected of criminal offences. The examination of those records led us to [the applicant], who delivered [in return for] payment unlawful decisions in their favour.”
Another official, a federal inspector, was also heard by the Board and stated as follows:
“I have heard myself the records of telephone conversations between [the applicant] and others. Those conversations concerned money.”
Another hearing was held on 1 March 2006. Nineteen members of the JQB were present at the hearing. The presiding judge read out the application for disciplinary proceedings and, according to the hearing record, referred to “other material”. The applicant presented her oral arguments. As is clear from the hearing record, she raised, among other matters, the interception of her telephone communications. She stated as follows:
“I would like to comment on certain [information that was] mentioned during the earlier hearing. The tapping of telephone conversations concerned all telephone numbers and not just those relating to the criminal cases. The President [of the Commercial Court of the Samara Region] gave me an opportunity to listen to my conversations with some of the judges of the Supreme Commercial Court of Russia. All this indicates that all my telephone conversations were tapped unlawfully. I am ready to provide further details relating to the tapping of my telephone communications ...”
The President of the Board replied as follows:
“The application, which we are examining, does not concern the institution of criminal proceedings. We are examining the application. At the same time, we would like to have information characterising [the applicant]. So let us go back to the matter relating to [the applicant’s] flat ...”
The discussion that followed concerned the circumstances in which the applicant had been provided with housing by the municipality.
The applicant was then asked to leave the hearing room and complied.
The Board then heard Mr N., the President of the Commercial Court of the Samara Region, who had instituted the proceedings. He stated as follows:
“[The applicant’s] actions in the cases relating to Tolialliazot OJSC caused significant damage to the interests of the State because the company’s shares were transferred abroad. She has been a participant in an elaborate criminal scheme aimed at blocking lawful decisions by way of suspending enforcement proceedings.”
The Board also heard the federal inspector, the acting President of the Samara Regional Court, the President of the Judicial Council and the deputy President of the Regional Judiciary Department.
The federal inspector stated as follows:
“I think that the President of the JQB has provided [the applicant] with an opportunity to leave judicial office voluntarily, at the start of this hearing when asking about any applications to be examined. However, [the applicant] considers her work to [have been] perfect. Her decision in the case of Toliattiazot OJSC in relation to a bailiff’s actions blocked the examination of another case. People fled justice and were then put on a wanted list in a criminal case relating to this company ... I consider that N.’s application is timely and I ask you to grant it because people such as [the applicant] have no place in the judicial community.”
Mr Sh., acting President of the Samara Regional Court, stated as follows:
“It is a difficult situation to sort out. However, if there are manifestly unlawful decisions, such situations are not acceptable. As we have heard today, [the applicant] delivered knowingly unlawful decisions in the case of Toliattiazot OJSC.”
The President of the Judicial Council stated as follows:
“It has been established that [the applicant] is a competent judge but issued manifestly unlawful judgments. Thus, the matter requires high scrutiny and, if there is evidence, the application should be granted.”
The deputy President of the Regional Judiciary Department stated as follows:
“The matter of the dismissal of judges has become acute recently. One must give principled consideration to that and get rid of judges who [have] manifestly violated the law.”
On the same date, 1 March 2006, the Board disqualified the applicant from her post as commercial court judge, endorsing the factual assertions and legal grounds presented by the President of the Regional Commercial Court in his application. The Board held as follows:
“Having examined the written materials and having heard ... [the applicant], the federal inspector ... the Board accepts as established the indication that [the applicant] committed a disciplinary offence that entails the early termination of her judicial office.”
The hearing record provided that the Board’s decision was “amenable to appeal before the Supreme Court of Russia” within ten days of receiving a copy. It also appears that the applicant was informed verbally that she could seek a review of the decision before the Supreme JQB.
Relying on Article 27 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the applicant asked for clarification as to the judicial procedure for lodging an application for review, which, in her opinion, was to be examined by the Supreme Court of Russia.
A regional Board official allegedly replied that she could seek a judicial review before the Samara Regional Court.
In order to comply with the ten-day time-limit for appeal and before receiving a copy of the disqualification decision, the applicant applied to the Samara Regional Court.
Thereafter, a judge of the Regional Court informed her that the Supreme Court of Russia had jurisdiction in the matter. However, she did not withdraw her application, considering that the Supreme Court would not process it because the time-limit had expired by that time. Besides, she expected that the Regional Court would, in any event, forward the application to the Supreme Court for examination, as required under Article 33 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
On an unspecified date, the applicant received a copy of the disqualification decision, which indicated that it was amenable to review by the Supreme Court of Russia.
The case was examined by the Regional Court by Judge R., sitting as a single judge.
The applicant argued, inter alia, as follows:
(i)  She had been convicted of the disciplinary offence (and dismissed from her post as judge) on account of, inter alia, a “grave violation of the law” in the cases relating to Toliattiazot OJSC. This grave violation consisted of examining the company’s applications. However, the company had been party to the enforcement proceedings: as clearly stated in the relevant earlier court decision and bailiffs’ orders, it was the debtor; it sought precisely to challenge this (allegedly wrongful) attribution of debt. The applicant requested that those documents be admitted to the case file and examined by the Regional Court.
(ii)  The mere fact that certain procedural decisions had been quashed on appeal or cassation review could not serve as a sufficient basis for concluding that the judge had committed a “grave violation of the law” or delivered “manifestly unlawful decisions”, and had thereby conducted herself in a biased manner.
(iii)  The JQB had been unduly influenced by the unethical, emotionally charged and unsubstantiated, albeit particularly serious, assertions against the applicant accusing her, in substance, of criminal conduct. As clearly indicated in the JQB’s decision, the opinions expressed by Mr N. and the federal inspector had been taken into account.
The regional JQB submitted comments on the applicant’s statement of appeal.
On 28 April 2006 Judge R. of the Samara Regional Court held a hearing. After hearing the applicant and two members of the regional JQB and examining the available material, the judge upheld the disqualification decision. In particular, he made the following findings:
“As transpires from the verbatim record of the hearing on 1 March 2006 before the JQB, the material laid before the JQB and the material relating to the cases before the Commercial Court of the Samara Region, [the applicant] committed a grave violation of the law when dealing with the cases relating to Toliattiazot OJSC ...
The Regulations of the Judiciary Qualifications Boards do not enable a judge under review to put questions to invited people or members of the board’s panel dealing with the case ... It was not against the Regulations and the Judicial Authorities Act to hear, after removing [the applicant] from the hearing room, the chief federal inspector for the Samara Region, the acting president of the Samara Regional Court, that of the Samara Commercial Court or the Regional Judicial Council ...
Article 27 of the [Code of Civil Procedure], which has been in force since 1 February 2003, provides for the right to challenge decisions taken by a Judiciary Qualifications Board before the Supreme Court of Russia. Thus, the regional JQB was right to indicate in its decision that it was amenable to review by the Supreme Court. At the same time, the previously enacted Law of 14 March 2002 “On the Bodies of the Judicial Community” provided, as amended, for the right to challenge a regional JQB’s decision before a regional court. That Act has not been amended. Thus, the court concludes that the applicant continued to have the right to challenge the JQB’s decision before the Samara Regional Court.”
On 19 July 2006 the Supreme Court of Russia upheld the above judgment, stating that the Regional Court had had jurisdiction “in view of the Law of 14 March 2002 and the established judicial practice”.
The applicant sought a supervisory review of the above court decisions. On 20 March 2007 a judge of the Supreme Court dismissed her application considering, inter alia, that she had been lawfully removed from the Board’s hearing room before its deliberations. The judge also noted that, despite the procedure explained in the disqualification decision and before the Constitutional Court’s decision of 2 February 2006 had become public, the applicant had voluntarily chosen to seek a judicial review before the Regional Court.
Pursuant to section 11 of the Judiciary Act of 1992 (Federal Law no. 3132-1 of 26 June 1992 “On the Status of Judges in the Russian Federation”), as in force at the time, judicial office of a federal judge was not limited in time (until attaining the age of 70), except for situations listed in that Act or other statutes.
Pursuant to section 3 of the Judiciary, a judge must strictly comply with the Constitution and any other statute, and avoid everything that could undermine the authority of the judiciary, a judge’s dignity or cast doubt on his or her impartiality, fairness or objectivity.
Pursuant to section 3 of the Code of Judicial Ethics, adopted on 2 December 2004 by the Sixth All-Russian Judicial Congress of Judges, a judge must always preserve his or her personal dignity, cherish his or her honour, and avoid anything that could damage his or her reputation or cast doubt on his or her objectivity and impartiality in the administration of justice.
Under section 12(1) of the Judiciary Act of 1992, as in force at the material time, a disciplinary offence was defined as violation of the rules of the Judiciary Act or the Code of Judicial Ethics adopted by the All-Russian Congress of Judges. A judge could be punished by a disciplinary penalty (a warning or early termination of judicial office). Judiciary Qualifications Boards had jurisdiction to examine such matters and impose penalties.
Article 305 of the Criminal Code punished the adoption of a knowingly wrongful (заведомо неправосудное) decision by a judge.
Under section 11 of the Judicial Authorities Act, a regional Judiciary Qualifications Board is composed of two judges of a regional court, five judges of a regional commercial court, one judge of a garrison military court, three judges of a district court, one judge of a regional constitutional court, one justice of the peace, seven members of civil society and one representative of the President of the Russian Federation.
Section 21(6) of the Judicial Authorities Act of 2002 (Federal Law no. 30-FZ of 14 March 2002 “On the Bodies of the Judicial Community”) provides that certain officials (such as presidents or deputy presidents of courts, chief officers of the Judicial Department of the Supreme Court of Russia or its constituent bodies; presidents or deputy presidents of Judicial Councils, members of other JQBs) could express an opinion on the questions being discussed during hearings before a JQB.
The JQB Regulations were adopted by the Supreme JQB on 15 July 2002 (in force until March 2007). Section 3 of the Regulations provided that following a report of a matter by a JQB member, other members could ask him or her questions; a judge and other people having information relating to the matter would then be heard. Following an examination of the material, the JQB would hear the final remarks of the people participating in the hearing, who would thereafter be removed from the hearing room. Presidents or deputy presidents of courts would “express their opinions on the issues being discussed, prior to the JQB’s deliberations”. The JQB would deliberate in the absence of invited people and issue its decision immediately following its deliberations. In addition, section 4 of the Regulations specifically concerned proceedings before a JQB relating to the dismissal of a judge. It read as follows:
“A judge has the right to have access to the material relating to an application for his dismissal, take notes in relation to that material and to make photocopies of it, submit to the JQB his or her observations or additional material, seek leave of the JQB for the participation of people having information in relation to the material.
The official who signed the application bears the burden of proving the disciplinary offence committed by a judge ...
All irremovable doubts related to proving the disciplinary offence should be interpreted in favour of the judge.”
Section 26 of the Judicial Authorities Act of 2002 read as follows at the material time:
“2.  The following decisions taken by the Supreme Judiciary Qualifications Board or regional Judiciary Qualifications Boards are amenable to review at the request of the person concerned within ten days of receiving a copy ...: a decision to suspend or terminate the judicial office of a judge, a decision to engage the disciplinary liability of a judge ...
If taken by the Supreme Judiciary Qualifications Board, such a decision may be challenged before the Supreme Court of Russia; if taken by a regional Judiciary Qualifications Board, it may be challenged before a regional court ...
Other decisions taken by Judiciary Qualifications Boards may be challenged following the same procedure, but only on procedural grounds.”
In 2014 section 26 of the Judicial Authorities Act of 2002 was amended to exclude from a regional court’s jurisdiction cases relating to the dismissal of a judge on account of a disciplinary offence. Such cases were reassigned to the Supreme Court of Russia acting as a first-instance court.
Article 27 of the Code of Civil Procedure provided at the material time that the Supreme Court of Russia had jurisdiction, as a first-instance court, in cases concerning decisions to terminate the judicial office of a judge. According to the Constitutional Court (ruling no. 3-P of 28 February 2008), the choice of Article 27 of the Code of Civil Procedure for giving the Supreme Court of Russia exclusive jurisdiction in dealing with challenges against disqualification decisions constitutes an additional safeguard against using the related disciplinary proceedings to unlawfully exert pressure on a judge, with the aim of putting him or her in a dependent and subordinate position vis-à-vis other persons, including the president of the relevant or higher court.