The case originated in an application (no. 26321/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksandr Yefimovich Bik (“the applicant”), on 5 August 2003.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Ms V. Milinchuk, former Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights, Mr A. Savenkov, First Deputy Mnister of Justice of the Russian Federation, and subsequently by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his committal to a psychiatric hospital against his will had been unlawful.
On 19 June 2008 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of the application. The Court examined and dismissed their objection.
The applicant was born in 1972 and lives in .
On 27 May 2002 the applicant's mother requested Psychiatric Outpatient Clinic No. 21 (Психоневрологический диспансер N 21) (the “Clinic”) to examine her son, expressing concern about a change in his behaviour. He was afraid to leave the flat where he lived, had cut out all social contacts and was frightened by noises or the sound of the telephone ringing.
The applicant refused to be examined by the doctors at the Clinic and on 29 May 2002 Dr N., a psychiatrist from the Clinic, applied for a court order authorising the applicant's psychiatric assessment without his consent. She noted, on the basis of the information submitted by the applicant's mother, that the applicant might be suffering from a severe mental disorder that impaired his ability to meet the ordinary demands of life, and that his condition might deteriorate should he be left without psychiatric treatment.
On 31 May 2002 the Cheremushkinskiy District Court of Moscow authorised the psychiatric assessment. According to the applicant, he was informed of that decision at a later date.
On 5 June 2002 Dr N. examined the applicant at his home. The applicant's mother was present. The applicant was agitated, he shouted at the doctor and his mother and threatened them. He refused to talk and made them both leave. Dr N. concluded that the applicant suffered from paranoid schizophrenia and that his condition warranted committal to a psychiatric hospital for further assessment and treatment. At 7.20 p.m. the applicant was admitted to Psychiatric Hospital No. 15 (Психиатрическая клиническая больница N 15) (the “Hospital”). According to the applicant, he was first taken to a police station and then to the hospital.
On 7 June 2002 the applicant consented to treatment in the Hospital until 14 June 2002.
On Friday 14 June 2002 the applicant refused to stay in hospital any longer. At noon he was examined by three psychiatrists who provisionally diagnosed him as suffering from depressive syndrome and schizophrenia. They noted that the applicant was solitary and antisocial; he was unaware of his condition and expressed delusional ideas about his mother trying to manipulate him. They concluded that his mental disorder was serious enough to require inpatient treatment.
On Monday 17 June 2002 the Hospital administration applied to the court seeking an extension of the applicant's stay there. According to the medical report submitted, the applicant was suffering from a severe mental disorder and might cause serious harm to himself or others. On the same day the Nagatinskiy District Court of Moscow provisionally authorised the applicant's further hospitalisation pending consideration of the case. The court stated no reasons in its decision.
On 21 June 2002 the Nagatinskiy District Court of Moscow authorised the extension of the applicant's stay in the Hospital. The hearing was held on the Hospital's premises. The applicant attended the hearing but was not represented. In particular, the court noted:
“After having heard [the applicant], the hospital's representative..., and the prosecutor who considered that the [hospital's] request should be granted, and after having studied the materials [in its possession], the court considers that the [hospital's] request to commit the applicant to the [hospital] against his will is well-substantiated and should be granted.”
On 27 June 2002 the applicant consented in writing to further treatment in hospital.
Once the applicant's condition improved, he was discharged from hospital on 4 July 2002.
On 23 January 2003 the applicant lodged an appeal against the decision of 21 June 2002. He submitted, in particular, that the court had failed to verify the lawfulness of his committal to hospital
On 20 March 2003 the Moscow City Court upheld the decision of 21 June 2002. Both the applicant and his lawyer attended the hearing. The court noted that the applicant's hospitalisation had been in accordance with the applicable laws. The court further indicated that the applicant's committal to hospital against his will had been necessary in view of his severe psychiatric disorder which made him dangerous to himself and others. Lastly, the court observed that it had been open to the applicant to ask for legal representation before the court at first level of jurisdiction. However, he had failed to do so and the decision of 21 June 2002 should not be quashed on that ground.
A person may be subject to an involuntary psychiatric assessment if his or her behaviour gives reasonable grounds to believe that he or she may be suffering from a serious mental disorder and, because of the mental disorder, he or she (a) is likely to cause serious harm to himself or herself or another person or (b) does not have the capacity to take basic care of himself or herself or (c) is likely to suffer serious physical impairment or mental deterioration in the absence of psychiatric treatment (Article 23 of the Act).
In the event of (b) or (c) above, a psychiatrist may decide to conduct psychiatric assessment without the person's consent, subject to prior judicial approval (Article 24 of the Act).
In the event of (a), (b), or (c) above, a person may be admitted to a hospital against his or her will if he or she is suffering from a severe mental disorder and requires psychiatric examination and treatment in a psychiatric hospital (Article 29 of the Act).
A person admitted against his or her will should be assessed within 48 hours by a psychiatric panel. Should the panel decide to keep the person in hospital, they should file a request to that effect with the judge within 24 hours, together with a supporting medical report (Article 32 of the Act).
The judge must then consider the request within 5 days (Article 34 § 1 of the Act). He or she must also authorise the person's continued hospitalisation pending the consideration of the matter by the court (Article 33 § 3 of the Act).
The old CCP did not set forth special rules governing committal to a psychiatric hospital.
A period of time expressed as a number of years shall expire on the relevant day and month of the last year of that period. A period of time expressed as a number of months shall expire on the relevant day of the last month of that period. If the last day of the period of time falls on a non-working day, the next closest working day shall be considered as the last day of that period (Article 101 of the old CCP and Article 108 §§ 1 and 2 of the new Code of Civil Procedure of 1 February 2003 as amended).