The case originated in an application (no. 9906/04) against the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro, lodged with the Court, under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”), by, at that time, a citizen of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro, Ms Natalija Čeh (“the applicant”), on 30 January 2004.
As of 3 June 2006, following the Montenegrin declaration of independence,  remained the sole respondent in the proceedings before the Court.
The Government of the State Union of Serbia and  and, subsequently, the Government of Serbia (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr S. Carić.
On 10 November 2006 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Applying Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it further decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time.
The applicant was born in 1949 and lives in .
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 16 October 1990 the owner of the flat in which the applicant lived filed a civil action with the First Municipal Court (Prvi opštinski sud) in , seeking her eviction.
In his claim, the plaintiff maintained that the applicant had lost “the status of a protected tenant” (nosilac stanarskog prava odnosno zakupac stana na neodređeno vreme), as provided for under the relevant domestic legislation.
On 4 April 1994 the First Municipal Court ruled in favour of the applicant.
On 20 October 1994 the District Court (Okružni sud) in  quashed this judgment in view of the unlawful composition of the trial chamber at first instance and sent the case back for a retrial.
From 16 May 1995 to 28 February 2002, the First Municipal Court ruled in favour of the applicant on two separate occasions but each time its judgments were quashed on appeal by either the District Court or the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud) and were remitted.
On 2 September 2002 the First Municipal Court ruled again in favour of the applicant.
On 29 April 2003 the District Court quashed this judgment on appeal. It noted, once more, the unlawful composition of the trial chamber at first instance and ordered a retrial before the Municipal Court.
On 29 January 2004 the applicant complained to the President of the First Municipal Court, stating that the presiding judge in her case, despite repeatedly ruling in her favour, kept committing procedural errors on the basis of which higher courts always had grounds to order a retrial.
On 16 March 2004 the President of the First Municipal Court accepted the applicant’s request and assigned another judge to deal with her case.
From 20 April 2004 to 6 July 2006, the First Municipal Court scheduled another twelve hearings. Only three of those, on 15 September 2005, 11 May 2006 and 6 July 2006, were held as scheduled, while the others appear to have been adjourned on various grounds. In particular the hearings scheduled for: (i) 20 April 2004 and 6 April 2005 were adjourned because of the presiding judge’s need for additional time in order to review the case file; (ii) 27 September 2004 because of the absence of the presiding judge; (iii) 24 November 2004, 28 November 2005 and 24 February 2006 because of several witnesses who had either not been served properly or had failed to appear in court; and (iv) 25 June 2004, 2 February 2005 and 26 May 2005 because of the need to obtain additional written evidence and/or hear additional witnesses.
The next hearing in the case was held on 5 September 2006.
On 11 September 2006 the First Municipal Court decided that the proceedings should not be joined with a related case filed by the applicant separately.
On 17 October 2006 the First Municipal Court ruled again in favour of the applicant. In so doing, it recognised the plaintiff as the owner of the flat in question, but, at the same time, held that the applicant, being a protected tenant, had a right to continue living therein.
On an unspecified date the applicant, as well as the plaintiff, appealed against this judgment. The applicant, in particular, maintained that she should have been recognised as the owner of the flat in question.
On 30 May 2007 the District Court rejected both appeals and upheld the judgment rendered at first instance.
On 9 July 2007 the plaintiff filed an appeal on points of law (revizija) with the Supreme Court.
On 16 August 2007 the applicant filed a request for the protection of legality (zahtev za zaštitu zakonitosti) with the same court.
The applicant has been living in the flat at issue throughout the proceedings.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution read as follows:
Article 32 § 1
“Everyone shall have the right to ... [a hearing before a] ... tribunal ... within a reasonable time ... [in the determination] ... of his [or her] rights and obligations ...”
Article 170
“A constitutional appeal may be lodged against individual decisions or actions of State bodies or organisations exercising delegated public powers which violate or deny human or minority rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution, if other legal remedies for their protection have already been exhausted or have not been prescribed.”
Article 172 §§ 1, 2 and 3
“The  shall have fifteen judges who shall be elected or appointed for a period of nine years.
Five judges of the  shall be elected by the National Assembly, another five shall be appointed by the President of the Republic, and another five shall be appointed at the general session of the Supreme Court of Cassation ...
The National Assembly shall elect five judges of the Constitutional Court from among ten candidates proposed by the President of the Republic, the President of the Republic shall appoint five judges of the Constitutional Court from among ten candidates proposed by the National Assembly, and the general session of the Supreme Court of Cassation shall appoint five judges from among ten candidates proposed at the general session by the High Judicial Council and the State Prosecutors’ Council.”
Article 175 § 1
“The  shall adjudicate by the majority of votes cast by all judges of the .”
In accordance with Article 9 § 3 of this Act, the Constitutional Court shall be deemed constituted when two thirds of the total number of judges have been elected or appointed, which had been attained by 24 November 2007.
The relevant provision of this Act read as follows:
Article 7 § 1
“The decisions of the  shall be final, enforceable and binding.”
Article 10 § 1
“The Constitutional Court shall have its Rules of Procedure ... which shall regulate, in greater detail, the organisation ... [and the functioning of the Constitutional Court] ... as well as the proceedings ... [before it] ...”
Article 27 §§ 1 and 2
“ ... [T]he  shall have a Registry.
The organisation, the tasks, and the functioning of the Registry shall be regulated, in greater detail, by ... the .”
Article 82 § 1 and 2
“A constitutional appeal may be lodged against an individual decision or an action of a State body or an organisation exercising delegated public powers which violates or denies human or minority rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution, if other legal remedies have already been exhausted or have not been prescribed or where the right to their judicial protection has been excluded by law.
A constitutional appeal may be lodged even if all available remedies have not been exhausted in the event of a breach of an applicant’s right to a trial within a reasonable time.”
Article 83 § 1
“A constitutional appeal may be lodged by any individual who believes that any of his or her human or minority rights or freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution has been violated or denied by an individual decision or an action of a State body or an organisation exercising delegated public powers.”
Article 84 § 1
“A constitutional appeal may be lodged within thirty days of receipt of the individual decision or the date of commission of the actions ... [in question] ...”
Article 89 § 2 and 3
“When the Constitutional Court finds that an ... individual decision or action has violated or denied a human or minority right or a freedom guaranteed by the Constitution, it shall annul the ... decision in question or ban the continuation of such action or order the implementation of other specific measures as well as the removal of all adverse consequences within a specified period of time.
The decision of the  accepting a constitutional appeal shall constitute a legal basis for requesting compensation or the removal of other adverse consequences before a competent body, in accordance with the law.”
Article 90
“... [An applicant who has obtained a  decision in his or her favour] .., may lodge a compensation claim with the Commission for Compensation in order to reach an agreement in respect of the amount ... [of compensation to be awarded] ...
If the Commission for Compensation does not rule favourably in respect of a compensation claim or fails to issue a decision within thirty days from the date of its submission, the applicant may file a civil claim for damages before the competent court. If only partial agreement has been achieved, a civil claim may be filed in respect of the remainder of the amount sought.
The composition and operation of the Commission for Compensation shall be regulated by the Minister of Justice.”
Article 116
“The  shall, within ninety days as of the date of entry into force of this Act, adopt its Rules of Procedure and ... [further regulate the organisation and functioning of its Registry] ...”
The Minister of Justice shall, within ninety days as of the date of entry into force of this Act ... [regulate the composition and the operation of the Commission for Compensation] ...”
Articles 72 and 73 provide additional details as regards the processing of the appeals lodged with the .
The new Constitution of the , as well as the Constitutional Act on its implementation, entered into force in November 2006.
The Constitutional Court Act entered into force in December 2007.
The Rules of Procedure of the  entered into force in March 2008.
Articles 181 and 182, taken together, provide, inter alia, that the court shall award compensation for the damage suffered by a party to an ongoing civil suit if such damage was caused by any procedural abuse (zloupotreba procesnih ovlašćenja) committed by other natural and/or legal persons involved in the proceedings.
At page 34 of the judgment in the Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions case (Greece v. UK, 1924, Series A – No. 2), the Permanent Court of International Justice, inter alia, held as follows:
“... [I]t must also be considered whether the validity of the institution of proceedings can be disputed on the ground that the application was filed before Protocol XII had become applicable. This is not the case. Even assuming that before that time the Court had no jurisdiction because the international obligation referred to in Article II was not yet effective, it would always have been possible for the applicant to re-submit his application in the same terms after the coming into force of the Treaty of Lausanne, and in that case, the argument in question could not have been advanced ... [In any event, even if] ... the application were premature because the Treaty of Lausanne had not yet been ratified, this circumstance would now be covered by the subsequent deposit of the necessary ratifications ...”