The case originated in an application (no. 58112/00) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by the company Multiplex (“the applicant”), registered in Banja Luka, Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, on 16 March 2000.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr Zoran Butorac, a lawyer practising in Banja Luka. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Lidija Lukina-Karajković.
The applicant company alleged, in particular, that it had no access to a court in so far as it was prevented from having its civil claim for damages decided due to the enactment in 1999 of legislation which ordered that all proceedings concerning claims for damages caused by the members of the Croatian army or police when acting in their official capacity during the Homeland War in Croatia from 7 August 1990 to 30 June 1996 were to be stayed. It also complained that the proceedings had exceeded the “reasonable time” requirement.
The application was allocated to the Fourth Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
On 1 November 2001 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). This case was assigned to the newly composed First Section (Rule 52 § 1).
By a decision of 26 September 2002, the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicant company is owned by Mr Smail Smailagić who lived in Banja Luka, which is situated on the territory of the present day Republika Srpska, a part of Bosnia and Herzegovina, until 15 May 1992 when he fled to Croatia and went to live in Porat-Červar.
On 13 August 1992 the Croatian Military Police requisitioned a vehicle belonging to the applicant company.
According to the Government the vehicle had been requisitioned by the military authorities from Bosnia and Herzegovina. Upon the request by the military authorities from Bosnia and Herzegovina for the return of vehicles which had been requisitioned in Bosnia and Herzegovina for military purposes, in case that they were located in Croatia, the Croatian Ministry of Defence conferred the applicant company's vehicle after having found it. The vehicle was conferred to the Bosnian authorities on 19 August 1993 and has ever since been in their possession.
According to the applicant the vehicle was requisitioned by the Croatian authorities and conferred to the Croatian para-military forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the so-called Croatian Defence Council (Hrvatsko vijeće obrane). The applicant company repeatedly requested the Croatian Defence Council to return the vehicle, but to no avail.
On 11 October 1993 the applicant company filed a civil claim for damages in the amount of 15,600 German Marks (DEM) against the Republic of Croatia, with the Zagreb County Commercial Court (Okružni privredni sud u Zagrebu). It appears that the case was subsequently transferred to the Zagreb Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Zagrebu).
On 15 May 1995 the Republic of Croatia filed its reply denying the plaintiff's claim. It requested the court to stay the proceedings until the end of war in Croatia. It stated further that the vehicle had been requisitioned only temporarily for needs of the army and would be returned to the applicant company after the war.
At the hearing on 14 September 1995 the applicant company specified the claim for damages seeking 58,000 Croatian Kunas (HRK).
On 12 March 1998 the applicant company requested the Ministry of Justice to speed up the proceedings.
On 13 July 1998 the court decided that an expertise be carried out in order to establish the value of the vehicle in question. The applicant company was invited to pay an advance for the costs of the expertise.
On 31 August 1998 the case-file was assigned to an expert who submitted his opinion on 5 October 1998.
It appears that the defendant asked the court to stay the proceedings claiming that it was uncertain whether the applicant company still existed because the excerpt from the Banja Luka Court registry on the applicant company's legal status was quite old.
On 4 May 1999 the court invited the company's representative to submit a new excerpt from the relevant registry.
The applicant company's legal representative informed the court that he no longer represented the applicant.
On 5 July 1999 the applicant company requested the court to schedule a hearing.
On 19 July 1999 the applicant company's representative submitted an uncertified excerpt from the Banja Luka Court's registry dating from 1990.
On 25 August 1999 the court invited the applicant to submit a new excerpt, not older than six months, showing that Mr Smailagić was entitled to represent the applicant company.
On 6 November 1999 Parliament introduced a change of the Civil Obligations Act which provided that all proceedings concerning actions for damages resulting from acts of members of the Croatian army or police when acting in their official capacity during the war in Croatia were to be stayed.
On 10 December 1999 the court stayed the proceedings pursuant to the above change in law.
On 29 December 1999 the applicant company appealed against the above decision claiming that the Zagreb Municipal Court erred in its application of the law as the vehicle in question was not taken by any member of the Croatian army or police acting in an official capacity but exclusively for the needs of the Croatian Defence Council, a military formation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, operating in that country.
It appears that on 15 November 2000 a party in some other proceedings concerning the same matter filed a constitutional claim challenging the above legislation. However, the Constitutional Court has not yet adopted any decision.
On 8 May 2001 the Zagreb County Court (Županijski sud u Zagrebu) upheld the Zagreb Municipal Court decision of 10 December 1999.
On 16 June 2001 the applicant company filed a request for revision with the Zagreb Municipal Court, repeating its arguments from the earlier appeal. On 28 June 2001 the Zagreb Municipal Court rejected the above request as inadmissible. It found that the Civil Procedure Act (Zakon o parničnom postupku) allows a party to file a request for revision only against a final decision of an appellate court while the decision of the Zagreb County Court did not represent a final decision in that case.
On 21 July 2001 the applicant company appealed against the Municipal Court's decision.
On 2 October the Zagreb County Court dismissed the appeal.
Section 184 (a) of the 1999 Act on Changes of the Civil Obligations Act (Zakon o dopunama Zakonu o obveznim odnosima, Official Gazette no. 112/1999) provides that all proceedings instituted against the Republic of Croatia for damages caused by the members of the Croatian army or police when acting in their official capacity during the Homeland War in Croatia from 7 August 1990 to 30 June 1996 are to be stayed.
The Act also imposed an obligation on the Government to submit to Parliament special legislation, regulating the responsibility for such damages, at the latest within six months from the entry into force of the present Act. So far no new legislation has been introduced.