The case originated in an application (no. 54574/07) against the Republic of Serbia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Serbian national, Mr Dragoslav Paunović (“the applicant”), on 3 December 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr I. Pavlović, a lawyer practising in Sokobanja. The Serbian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their former Agent, Ms N. Plavšić, who was recently substituted by their current Agent, Ms. Z. Jadrijević Mladar.
The applicant alleged that the Niš District Court had lacked impartiality, in breach of his right to a fair hearing.
The application was initially allocated to the Third Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). On 29 September 2015 notice of the application was given to the Government. On 20 September 2019 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1) and the present case was thus assigned to the newly composed Fourth Section (Rule 52 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1956 and lives in Soko Banja.
On 2 August 2006 I.S., a deputy prosecutor of the Aleksinac Municipal Public Prosecutor’s Office, indicted the applicant for causing bodily harm and death by dangerous driving (teško delo protiv bezbednosti javnog saobraćaja).
On 24 October 2006, at the first main hearing of the case against the applicant before the Aleksinac Municipal Court (Opštinski sud u Aleksincu), as well as at later hearings (tokom glavnog pretresa), the prosecutor’s office was represented by deputy prosecutors S.S. and I.S.
On 12 December 2006 the Aleksinac Municipal Court sentenced the applicant to six months’ imprisonment for the said offence. Both the applicant and the deputy prosecutor, I.S., appealed against this judgment.
On 17 April 2007 the Niš District Court (Okružni sud u Nišu) sitting on a bench of three judges, namely Judge N.S. as President, Judge B.K. as judge rapporteur and Judge S.M., upheld the first-instance judgment on appeal. Judge B.K. had been elected as a judge of the District Court on 15 August 2006.
The applicant appealed on points of law (zahtev za ispitivanje zakonitosti pravosnažne presude), complaining, inter alia, about the presence of Judge B.K. on the bench of the Niš District Court in the appeal proceedings. The applicant argued that as Judge B.K. had held the position of deputy municipal public prosecutor in Aleksinac during the first-instance criminal proceedings against him, the composition of the Niš District Court’s bench had breached the guarantee of impartiality. He complained as follows:
“Judge [B.K.], who took part as a member of the second-instance chamber and a judge rapporteur in the proceedings on appeal, held the position of the deputy municipal public prosecutor in Aleksinac at the time of the first-instance proceedings ...
... the public interest in the criminal proceedings against [the applicant] was championed by the Aleksinac Municipal Public Prosecutor’s Office, whose representative was B.K. ...
... that [B.K.] should have been withdrawn because of the incompatibility of the positions of judge and prosecutor.”
On 23 October 2007 the Supreme Court of Serbia dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law, finding that Judge B.K. had not participated in proceedings against the applicant as a prosecutor, and it upheld the decisions of the lower courts. As regards the complaint that the second-instance court had not been impartial, the Supreme Court stated:
“The Supreme Court finds the complaints in the appeal to be groundless as it appears from the case file that a member of the bench, Judge B.K., did not participate in these proceedings as a deputy municipal public prosecutor, nor did he take part in the investigation, and therefore he did not have to be removed from the bench purely because during the first-instance proceedings he held the said function in Aleksinac.”
The applicant was released from prison on 11 June 2008, after serving four months of his sentence.
The applicant worked as a tax inspector for the Tax Inspectorate of the Ministry of Finance.
In exercising his duties, the applicant reviewed the work of a particular company and in 2005 lodged an application for the institution of misdemeanour proceedings against that company and a person in charge, V.K., who is the brother of Judge B.K.
On 20 March 2008, pursuant to the State Administration Act, the Ministry of Finance dismissed the applicant ex lege from the civil service because he had been convicted of a crime and sentenced to six months’ imprisonment.
The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure 2001 (Zakonik o krivičnom postupku, Official Gazette of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia nos. 70/01 and 68/02; and Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia – “OG RS” – nos. 58/04, 85/05, 115/05 and 46/06), as in force at the material time, provided various grounds for the compulsory disqualification of judges from the bench, as follows:
“A judge or lay judge shall be excluded from sitting in a case:
1)  if he has suffered an injury or damage as a result of the offence;
...
4)  if in the same criminal case he took part in the investigation [vršio istražne radnje] or if he has taken part in the proceedings as a prosecutor, defence lawyer, legal guardian or legal counsel of the injured person or of the prosecutor, or if he has testified as a witness or as an expert witness;
...
6)   if there are other circumstances which may cast doubt on his impartiality.”
The grounds set out in paragraphs 1 to 5 of Article 40 are considered mandatory grounds for the recusal of a judge or lay judge from sitting in a case. Article 41 provided that, from the moment that a judge or lay judge became aware of any absolute ground disqualifying him or her from sitting in a case, that judge was required to take no further part or to bring the circumstances which would disqualify him or her from sitting to the immediate attention of the president of the court of which he or she was a member, whereupon the president would be required to appoint another judge in his or her stead. A judge or lay judge was also required to inform the president of the court of any other circumstances (under Article 40(6)) which would warrant his withdrawal.
Articles 7 and 14 of the Public Prosecutor Office Act (Zakon o javnom tužilastvu, OG RS nos. 63/01, 42/02, 39/03, 44/04, 61/05, 46/06 and 106/06 – the last-mentioned reference published a relevant decision of the Constitutional Court) prescribe that a public prosecutor is to perform his or her duties directly or through his or her deputies and that everyone in the prosecutor’s office is subordinate to him or her, including his or her deputies. Deputy public prosecutors are required to perform all actions entrusted to them by public prosecutors and may also, without any specific authorisation, undertake any action public prosecutors are authorised to perform.