The case originated in an application (no. 20435/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Cypriot national, Mr Sozos Paroutis (“the applicant”), on 16 May 2002.
The applicant was represented by Mr D. Papadopoulos, a lawyer practising in . The Cypriot Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent at the time, Mr S. Nikitas, Attorney-General of the .
On 7 January 2003 the Court decided to communicate the application. Applying Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time.
The applicant was born in 1961 and lives in Limassol.
On 12 November 1993 he filed a civil action before the District Court of Limassol claiming compensation for pecuniary and non-pecuniary damages in respect of personal injuries suffered when he was hit by a car driven by the defendant on 7 December 1991.
The parties’ pleadings were completed by 10 February 1995 and the applicant applied to the registrar to have the action fixed on 14 April 1995.
Until the commencement of the trial on 9 May 1997, the case was adjourned four times, once by the court, once by the defendant and twice at the request of both parties.
From 9 May 1997 until the trial’s conclusion on 8 October 1998 nine hearing sessions were held and the case was adjourned three times by the court.
On 8 October 1998 judgment was reserved.
Approximately nine months following the conclusion of the proceedings the Supreme Court took steps, ex proprio motu, under the Rules of Procedure concerning the prompt delivery of court judgments (1986) with regard to the delay in the delivery of the first instant judgment. The case was set before the Supreme Court several times for this purpose, some letters were sent by that court to the presiding district judge and an order was issued requiring the latter to deliver judgment.
The district court delivered its decision on 29 June  in favour of the applicant awarding damages thereto (amounting to CYP 110,000 plus interest).
On 8 August 2000 the defendant filed an appeal with the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court was provided with the records of the first instance proceedings on 2 April 2001.
The proceedings were concluded on 21 November 2001 by means of a settlement. Through the settlement the applicant was paid damages amounting to CYP 130,000 along with CYP 6,000 as expenses and interest on both amounts.
Article 30 (2) of the Cypriot Constitution in so far as relevant provides as follows:
(2) “In the determination of his civil rights and obligations ..., every person is entitled to a ... hearing within a reasonable time by [a] ... court ...”.
“...
3 (a) Every judgment must be delivered as soon as possible following the conclusion of the proceedings and must not be reserved for any period exceeding 6 months.
(b) When a court fails to comply with the provisions of the abovementioned subparagraph (a) any affected party may by way of application to the Supreme Court request any remedy referred to in paragraph 5 of the present Rule.
If a judgment that was reserved following the publication of the present Rule remains reserved for a period of time exceeding 9 months, the case will be set ex proprio motu before the Supreme Court for the purposes of issuing an order deemed necessary in the circumstances, in accordance with paragraph 5 of the present Rule.
During the hearing of an application filed on the basis of paragraph 3(b) or when the Supreme Court addresses the case in accordance with paragraph 4, the Supreme Court may:
(a) order a retrial of the case before another competent court;
(b) order the delivery of the judgment within a specific time-limit and, in the event of failure to comply, a retrial of the case before another competent court;
(c) issue any other order deemed necessary for the proper administration of justice”.