The case originated in an application (no. 2507/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Albanian national, Mr Astrit Kurti (“the applicant”), on 2 January 2002.
The applicant was represented by Mr Y. Yannacou, a lawyer practising in . The Greek Government (“the Government”) were represented by the delegates of their Agent, Mr M. Apessos, Senior Adviser at the State Legal Council and Mr K. Georghiadis, Legal Assistant at the State Legal Council.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he did not have a fair hearing in the matter of compensation for his allegedly unlawful detention.
The application was allocated to the First Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
By a decision of 6 May 2004 the Court declared the application partly admissible.
On 1 November 2004 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). This case was assigned to the newly composed First Section (Rule 52 § 1).
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
The Albanian Government, having been informed of their right to intervene (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 (a) of the Rules of Court), also submitted written comments on the case.
The applicant was born in 1976 and lives in .
On 29 April 2000 the applicant was driving his motorbike in . He was stopped by another Albanian, V.G., who asked him to drive him to the railway station. After a while they were stopped by the police who searched them and found 261 grams of heroine under V.G.’s belt. They were both arrested and placed in detention on remand. V.G. testified against the applicant and claimed that he had delivered drugs to him in the past. The applicant repeatedly claimed to be innocent and applied for release but his applications were dismissed.
On 10 July 2001 the  first-instance criminal court heard the case. V.G. stated that the first time he ever met the applicant was the day of arrest. The court acquitted the applicant by a majority. One judge expressed the opinion that he was guilty. The Court further held that the State was under no obligation to compensate the applicant for his detention, because his detention was due to his own gross negligence (judgment no. 694/2001).
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure read as follows:
Article 533 § 1
 “Persons who have been detained on remand and subsequently acquitted...shall be entitled to request compensation...if it has been established in the proceedings that they did not commit the criminal offence for which they were detained...”
Article 535 § 1
 “The State shall have no obligation to compensate a person who...has been detained on remand if, whether intentionally or by gross negligence, he was responsible for his own detention.”
Article 536
“1. Upon an oral application by a person who has been acquitted, the court which heard the case shall rule on the State’s obligation to pay compensation in a separate decision delivered at the same time as the verdict. However, the court may also make such a ruling proprio motu...
The ruling on the State’s obligation to pay compensation cannot be challenged separately...”