The case originated in an application (no. 33469/06) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Eduard Shamilevich Khismatullin (“the applicant”), on 19 June 2006.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been subjected to illtreatment in police custody and that the domestic authorities had failed to carry out an effective investigation, and that he had neither attended nor been represented at the appeal hearing in his criminal case.
On 10 November 2010 the above complaints were communicated to the Government under Articles 3 and 6 §§ 1 and 3 (c) of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1974 and is currently serving a prison sentence in medical penal institution LIU-58, Sverdlovsk Region.
On 23 April 2005 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of murder. He was taken to the police station, where he was allegedly ill-treated by police officers and confessed to murder.
On 24 April 2005 the applicant was subjected to a forensic medical examination, which recorded two bruises under his left and right eyes measuring 1 x 2 cm, an abrasion on the middle finger of the left hand measuring 0.5 x 0.8 cm, and an abrasion on the back of the right forearm measuring 0.2 x 2 cm. The expert concluded that the bruises under the eyes could have been inflicted three to five days prior to the examination, and the abrasions of the upper limbs could have appeared one to two days prior to the examination.
On the same day the record of the applicant’s arrest was drawn up. The applicant was questioned as a suspect and, allegedly for fear of further beatings, confirmed his previous confession. He was placed in a temporary detention unit. The unit’s medical records show that the applicant had a bruise under his left eye when admitted. They further indicate that the applicant was otherwise in good health.
On 26 April 2005 the applicant complained of chest pain. An ambulance was called, and he was found to have a bruised breastbone.
On 29 April 2005 the applicant was allegedly beaten again by the police officers in an attempt to make him confirm his previous statements to the investigator.
On 5 May 2005 the applicant again complained of chest pain. He was taken to Ozersk Town Hospital. An X-ray examination showed a breastbone fracture.
On 6 May 2005 the applicant was transferred to remand prison IZ74/3, Chelyabinsk. The facility doctor who examined the applicant on admission entered the breastbone fracture diagnosis of 5 May 2005 in the applicant’s medical records.
On 10 November 2005 Ozersk Town Court, Chelyabinsk Region, convicted the applicant, under Article 111 § 4 of the Criminal Code, of intentional infliction of grievous bodily harm on V., causing his death by reckless conduct. The applicant was sentenced to eleven years’ imprisonment. The applicant was represented by a legal-aid lawyer at the trial.
The applicant appealed. He asked the appeal court to allow him to attend the appeal hearing in his case, and also expressed the wish to be represented by a lawyer.
On 27 April 2006 Chelyabinsk Regional Court upheld the judgment on appeal. The applicant was present at the appeal hearing. He was, however, unrepresented.
On 16 March 2011 the Presidium of Chelyabinsk Regional Court granted an application for supervisory review by the Chelyabinsk Region Prosecutor and quashed the appeal decision of 27 April 2006. The Presidium found that the applicant’s right to legal representation had been violated in the appeal hearing and remitted the case for a fresh examination before the appellate court.
On 21 April 2011 Chelyabinsk Regional Court held a new appeal hearing in the applicant’s criminal case, with the applicant taking part (by video link) and in the presence of his legal-aid lawyer. The Regional Court upheld the applicant’s conviction on appeal and reduced his sentence to ten years and six months’ imprisonment.
Meanwhile, in December 2005 the applicant complained of illtreatment to the Ozersk Town Prosecutor’s Office.
On 26 January 2006 investigator Ch. of the Prosecutor’s Office, relying on Article 24 § 1 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, refused to institute criminal proceedings against the police officers complained against, for lack of evidence that a crime had been committed. The investigator relied on statements by police officer P. denying that the applicant had been assaulted, extracts from the medical records of the temporary detention unit showing the entries of 24 April, 26 April and 5 May 2005, the applicant’s statements of 2 May 2005 in which he alleged that the bruises had been inflicted during a fight with some teenagers in April 2005, and references to the applicant’s failure to mention the alleged ill-treatment during the examination of the issue of his detention, when he was questioned as a suspect, or when charges were brought against him.
On 24 March 2006 the Ozersk Town Prosecutor quashed that decision and ordered an additional pre-investigation inquiry.
On 27 March, 17 April and 29 June 2006 and 21 June 2007 the investigator again refused to open a criminal case in connection with the applicant’s allegations of ill-treatment. However, on 13 April and 26 June 2006 and 9 June and 2 July 2007 respectively the supervising prosecutor quashed those decisions as unfounded and ordered additional preinvestigation inquiries.
On 6 July 2007 chief investigator P. of the Ozersk Town Prosecutor’s Office refused for the sixth time to order the institution of criminal proceedings, and concluded that the applicant had sustained his injuries prior to his arrest. This decision was based on the following evidence:
-  the applicant’s explanations of June 2006 (see paragraph 23 below);
-  explanations by the chief of police Mo., police officers P. and Sh., and the deputy chief of police Yar., who denied having subjected the applicant to any violence;
-  explanations by prosecutor’s assistant B. and investigator Ma.;
-  explanations by officers of the temporary detention unit Kh., G. and Akh.;
-  extracts from the temporary detention unit’s logbooks, including its medical logbook;
-  the X-ray examinations logbook of Ozersk Town Hospital;
-  the report of the applicant’s forensic medical examination;
-  explanations by ambulance doctor S., who examined the applicant at the temporary detention unit on 26 April 2005, and by hospital doctor B., who examined the applicant at the hospital on 5 May 2005;
-  the applicant’s statements of 24 April-2 May 2005 taken from his criminal file, to the effect that he had received the injuries prior to the arrest during a fight with some teenagers and that he had no complaints against the police officers or the officers of the temporary detention unit in connection with those injuries;
-  explanations by forensic medical expert Mos.;
-  documents from the applicant’s criminal file, including the records of his questioning of 24 April, 29 April and 19 July 2005, in which the applicant submitted that he had attacked V. (the victim of the crime of which the applicant had been convicted) in self-defence;
-  the applicant’s statements made during the trial and his complaints to the prosecutor and the investigator to the effect that he had sustained his breastbone fracture as a result of acts of violence by V.
It followed from the applicant’s explanations, in particular, that in early April 2005 he had had a fight with some unidentified teenagers, as a result of which he had received a bruise under his left eye. On 21 April 2005 V. had kicked the applicant twice in the chest area and twice in the face, as a result of which he had had a bruise under his right eye and felt pain in his chest. On 23 April 2005 the applicant was arrested and taken to the police station, where one police officer hit him with something heavy on the nape of the neck and another kicked him in the chest area, as a result of which the applicant felt pain in his chest. On 24 April 2005 one of the police officers hit him on the head at least twice with a 1.5-litre plastic bottle filled with water, which did not result in any injuries. On 29 April 2005 in the investigations office of the temporary detention unit one of the police officers had knocked the applicant to the floor and kicked him at least three or four times on the left side and twice in the stomach and chest. These actions did not lead to any injuries. The applicant could not clarify whether his breastbone fracture had been the result of the actions of V. or of the police officers.
On 8 November 2007 the Ozersk Town Prosecutor found the decision of 6 July 2007 lawful and justified.
On 19 March 2008 Ozersk Town Court, Chelyabinsk Region, found the pre-investigation inquiry into the applicant’s allegations to be complete and unbiased, and the decisions of 6 July and 8 November 2007 lawful and justified.
On 24 June 2008 Chelyabinsk Regional Court upheld the decision of 19 March 2008 on appeal.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of the Russian Federation read as follows:
“Human and civil rights and freedoms shall be directly enforced. They shall determine the meaning, content and application of laws and the activities of the legislative and executive authorities, and of local self-government, and shall be ensured by the administration of justice.”
“1.  Human dignity shall be protected by the State. Nothing may serve as a basis for derogation therefrom.
No one shall be subjected to torture, violence or other severe or degrading treatment or punishment ...”
Article 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation (Law no. 174-FZ of 18 December 2001, “the CCrP”) prohibits violence, torture or any other cruel or degrading treatment of participants in criminal proceedings.
Article 286 § 3 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation provides that actions by a public official which clearly exceed his authority and entail a substantial violation of an individual’s rights and lawful interests, committed with violence or the threat of violence, are punishable by three to ten years’ imprisonment, with a prohibition on occupying certain posts or engaging in certain activities for a period of three years.
The CCrP, as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
“1.  A criminal case may be opened in the event of:
a)  a complaint of a crime ...
Sufficient data disclosing elements of a crime shall serve as grounds for opening a criminal case.”
“1.  An inquiry officer, inquiry agency, investigator, or head of an investigation unit shall accept and examine every report of a crime ... and shall take a decision on that report ... no later than three days after the filing of the report ... [having] the right to order that the examination of documents or inspection be performed with the participation of experts ...
A head of an investigation unit or head of an inquiry agency ... may extend the time period specified in paragraph (1) of this Article to up to ten days or, where the examination of documents or inspections are to be performed, up to thirty days ...”
“1.  An inquiry officer, inquiry agency, investigator or head of an investigation unit shall issue one of the following decisions as a result of the examination of a report of a crime:
1)  to open a criminal case, in accordance with the procedure established by Article 146 of the present Code;
2)  to refuse to open a criminal case;
3)  to transfer the report of a crime [to a competent investigating authority] with the relevant jurisdiction ...”
“1.  In the event of the absence of grounds for opening a criminal case, a head of an investigation unit, an investigator, inquiry agency or inquiry officer shall issue a decision refusing to open a criminal case ...
A refusal to open a criminal case may be appealed against to a prosecutor, head of an investigation unit or court in accordance with the procedures established by Articles 124 and 125 of the present Code.
... Having declared a refusal by an investigator ... to open a criminal case unlawful or unfounded, a head of a relevant investigation unit shall set aside the decision and open a criminal case, or remit the materials for additional examination together with his or her instructions fixing a deadline for their execution.
Having declared a refusal to open a criminal case unlawful or unfounded, a judge shall issue a decision to that effect and transmit it for execution to a head of an investigation unit ... and duly notify the applicant.”
“After taking a decision to open a criminal case ...”
2)  an investigator shall start a preliminary investigation ...”
“1.  Decisions of an inquiry officer, investigator, or head of an investigation unit refusing to open a criminal case ... or any other decisions and acts (failure to act) which are liable to infringe the constitutional rights and freedoms of the parties to criminal proceedings or to impede citizens’ access to justice, may be appealed against to a district court ...
A judge shall examine the legality and the grounds of the impugned decisions or acts ... within five days of receipt of the complaint ...
Following examination of the complaint, the judge shall issue one of the following decisions:
1)  to declare the decisions or acts (failure to act) of the official unlawful or unfounded and order the official to rectify the breach committed;
2)  to dismiss the applicant’s complaint ...”
A criminal case should not be opened or should be discontinued if the alleged offence has not been committed (Article 24 § 1 (1) of the CCrP) or if the constituent elements of a criminal offence are missing (Article 24 § 1 (2) of the CCrP).
Preliminary investigations are regulated by Section VIII (Articles 150-226) of the CCrP. Investigative measures to establish the facts of a criminal case and collect evidence, which can be undertaken in the course of a preliminary investigation, include, inter alia, the questioning of a suspect, an accused, a victim or a witness; confrontation between persons whose statements are contradictory; on-site verification of statements; identification of a person or object; search of persons and premises; seizure of items and documents; phonetapping; and reconstruction of acts or circumstances. If, on completion of a preliminary investigation, there is sufficient evidence to support charges against an accused, the investigating authority must prepare an indictment which, subject to prior approval by a prosecutor, is then forwarded to a court for trial.
Investigative measures such as the examination of a crime scene, examination of a dead body and physical examination of a suspect, an accused, a victim or a witness may be carried out, if necessary, before a criminal case is opened (Articles 176 § 2, 178 § 4 and 179 § 1 of the CCrP).
The CCrP, as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
“1.  Participation of legal counsel in criminal proceedings is mandatory if:
1)  the suspect or the accused has not waived the right to legal representation in accordance with Article 52 of this Code ...
In the circumstances provided for by paragraph 1 above, unless counsel is appointed by the suspect or the accused or his lawful representative, or other persons at the request or with the consent of the suspect or the accused, it is incumbent on the investigator, the prosecutor or the court to ensure the participation of legal counsel in the proceedings.”
“1.  A suspect or an accused may refuse legal representation at any stage of criminal proceedings. Such a waiver may be accepted only if initiated by the suspect or the accused. The waiver must be declared in writing, and must be recorded in the official record of the corresponding procedural step ...“
The appellate court examines appeals with a view to verifying the lawfulness, validity and fairness of the judgments. It may directly examine evidence, including additional material submitted by the parties (Articles 373 and 377 §§ 4 and 5 of the CCrP).
The judge is to set the date, time and place of the hearing after receiving the criminal case file and the statements of appeal. The parties must be given this information no later than fourteen days before the hearing is scheduled to take place. The court determines whether the prisoner should be summoned to attend the hearing. If the prisoner has expressed the wish to be present at the examination of his appeal, he has the right to attend in person or to state his case via video link. It is the court which decides how he is to take part in the hearing (Article 376 of the CCrP).
Examining the compatibility of Article 51 of the CCrP with the Russian Constitution, the Constitutional Court ruled as follows (decision no. 497-O of 18 December 2003):
“Article 51 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which describes the circumstances in which the participation of defence counsel is mandatory, does not contain any indication that its requirements are not applicable in appeal proceedings or that the prisoner’s right to legal representation in such proceedings may be restricted.”