The case originated in an application (no. 9951/06) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Croatian nationals, Mr Ivan Oreb and Mr Željko Oreb (“the applicants”), on 8 February 2006.
The applicants were represented by Mr M. Budimir, a lawyer practising in . The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs Š. Stažnik.
On 18 September 2007 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicants were born in 1953 and 1962 respectively and live in .
On 10 April 1980 the applicants sought the recognition of their co-ownership of certain real estate in a civil action they brought in the Split Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Splitu) against two persons, also living in .
On 16 April 2003 the applicants petitioned the  about the length of proceedings. On 14 February 2005 the  found a violation of the applicants’ right to a trial within a reasonable time and awarded each applicant the sum of 8,600 Croatian kunas (HRK) in compensation. It also ordered the Split Municipal Court to adopt its decision in the shortest time possible but no later than ten months from the publication of the decision in the Official Gazette. The decision was published in the Official Gazette no. 32 of 9 March 2005.
The Government submitted that after the ’s decision the Split Municipal Court had scheduled four hearings, all of which were adjourned. In that connection they submitted that the defendants lived in Sweden and that it had been necessary to send them the court summonses via the Croatian Embassy in . The summonses for the hearings scheduled for 29 August 2005 and 13 January 2006 were not served on the defendants and the Embassy had provided no information as to why this was so. As regards the summons in relation to the hearing scheduled for 18 September 2006 the Embassy informed the Municipal Court that the documents had been returned in the post without having been served on the defendants. Lastly, the Embassy informed the Municipal Court that the defendants had refused to take delivery of the summons which related to the hearing scheduled for 28 May 2007.
The proceedings are still pending before the Split Municipal Court.
Article 29 § 1 of the Constitution (Ustav Republike Hrvatske), Official Gazette no. 41/2001 of 7 May 2001) reads as follows:
“In the determination of his rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law.”
The relevant part of the Constitutional Act on the  (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 49/2002 of 3 May 2002 – “the Constitutional Court Act”) reads as follows:
Section 63
“(1) The Constitutional Court shall examine a constitutional complaint whether or not all legal remedies have been exhausted if the competent court fails to decide a claim concerning the applicant’s rights and obligations or a criminal charge against him or her within a reasonable time ...
(2) If a constitutional complaint ... under paragraph 1 of this section is upheld, the  shall set a time-limit within which the competent court must decide the case on the merits...
(3) In a decision issued under paragraph 2 of this section, the  shall assess appropriate compensation for the applicant for the violation of his or her constitutional rights ... The compensation shall be paid out of the State budget within three months from the date a request for payment is lodged.”