.  The case originated in an application (no. 7334/13) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Kristijan Muršić (“the applicant”), on 17 December 2012.
.  The applicant was represented by Mr Z. Vidović, a lawyer practising in Varaždin. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
.  The applicant complained of inadequate conditions of detention in prison, in particular a lack of personal space and work opportunities, and the absence of any effective remedy in that regard, contrary to Articles 3 and 13 of the Convention.
.  On 8 October 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
.  The applicant was born in 1987 and lives in Kuršanec.
.  By a judgment of the Čakovec County Court (Županijski sud u Čakovcu) of 19 June 2008, upheld by the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske) on 3 February 2009, the applicant was sentenced to two years’ imprisonment for robbery.
.  On 2 July 2010 the Čakovec Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Čakovcu) sentenced him to one year’s imprisonment for theft, which was confirmed by the Čakovec County Court on 3 November 2010.
.  Following a request by the applicant, on 26 August 2011 a three-judge panel of the Čakovec County Court took into account the above two convictions and sentenced him to a single sentence of two years and eleven months’ imprisonment.
On 16 October 2009 the applicant was transferred from Turopolje State Prison (Kaznionica u Turopolju) to Bjelovar Prison (Zatvor u Bjelovaru) to serve the prison sentence originally imposed by the Čakovec County Court on 19 June 2008 (see paragraph 6 above).
He remained in Bjelovar Prison until 16 March 2011, when he was transferred to Varaždin Prison (Zatvor u Varaždinu) following a decision by the Ministry of Justice Prisons Administration (Ministarstvo pravosuđa, Uprava za zatvorski sustav) on 11 March 2011.
According to the applicant, he spent eleven months with seven other inmates in a cell measuring 18 square metres including the sanitary facilities. The cell was badly maintained, dirty and insufficiently equipped with enough lockers and chairs for all inmates. Moreover, he was not given any opportunity to engage in prison work, and in general was not provided sufficient access to recreational and educational activities.
According to the Government, while in Bjelovar Prison the applicant had at his disposal an average of 3.59 square metres of personal space. He was detained in four different cells, the conditions of which are detailed in the table below:
The Government also submitted that each cell had a toilet fully separate from the living area, each with its own air ventilation system. All cells had access to drinking water, and had windows allowing in natural light and fresh air. During the winter, cells were heated by a central heating system. They were constantly maintained and some necessary reconstruction work and improvements to the facilities had been carried out in 2007, 2009 and 2010, which the Government substantiated with photographs, floor plans and other relevant documentation. Furthermore, the inmates were provided with all the necessary hygiene and sanitary facilities. The nutrition was based on the assessment of experts and the quality of the food was constantly monitored by the competent state authorities, which the Government substantiated with the relevant documentation.
The Government also explained that for three hours per day, between 4 and 7 p.m., the applicant had been allowed to move freely outside his cell. In addition, he had been able to use the gym, which had been open between 8 a.m. and 12.30 p.m. and 2 and 6 p.m., and the basketball court, which had been open on working days between 3 and 6 p.m. and at the weekends both in the morning and afternoon. The prison had also been equipped with a badminton court, ping-pong tables and chessboards, all of which had been available to the applicant. He could have also borrowed books from the Bjelovar library, which provided its services to the prison, and he had been allowed to watch TV and borrow films.
On 24 March 2010 the applicant lodged a request with the Bjelovar Prison administration through a lawyer, asking to be transferred to Varaždin Prison for personal and family reasons.
On 26 April 2010 he complained to the Ministry of Justice Prisons Administration in general terms about the conduct of the Bjelovar Prison administration, alleging that they had never offered him the opportunity to have a meeting with the relevant officials, that his request for a transfer had been ignored, and that the prison food had been inadequate.
The applicant again reiterated his request for a transfer to Varaždin Prison on 6 May 2010, citing personal and family reasons.
On 14 July 2010 the Ministry of Justice Prison Administration replied to the applicant’s complaints, finding them ill-founded in all respects. It pointed out that he had been given sufficient opportunity to have contact with his family, that he had not been engaged in any work because there had been an insufficient number of working positions in Bjelovar Prison, that he had had seven meetings with the prison governor and twenty-five meetings with various other Bjelovar Prison officials, and that food had been prepared in consultation with experts, the prison diet having been continuously supervised by the prison doctor.
On 24 August 2010 the applicant complained about the conditions of his detention to a sentence-execution judge of the Bjelovar County Court. He pointed out that central to his complaints was his wish to be transferred to another prison closer to his family. He also complained, inter alia, that his request to engage in prison work had not been answered, and that he was being detained with seven other inmates in cell no. 8, which measured 18 square metres in total and was inadequately equipped and maintained.
Following the applicant’s complaint, the sentence-execution judge requested a detailed report from Bjelovar Prison concerning the conditions of his detention.
After obtaining the relevant report and hearing the applicant in person, on 7 October 2010 the sentence-execution judge dismissed his complaints as ill-founded. She found, in particular, that the applicant was not detained in inadequate conditions of detention, that he was provided with sufficient hygiene and sanitary facilities, and that was not engaged in prison work since such opportunities did not exist for all prisoners in Bjelovar Prison.
On 15 October 2010 the applicant lodged an appeal against the sentence-execution judge’s decision with a three-judge panel of the Bjelovar County Court, alleging that she had erred in her factual findings, as cell no. 8 actually accommodated eight inmates.
On 21 October 2010 a three-judge panel of the Bjelovar County Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal as ill-founded, endorsing the reasoning of the sentence-execution judge. It also explained that the required standards for personal space under the Enforcement of Prison Sentence Act, namely 4 square metres, should in principle be respected, but that there could be no automatic violation of a prisoner’s rights if such a standard was temporarily not complied with.
On 8 November 2010 the applicant complained to the Bjelovar County Court about the decision of its three-judge panel. He argued that for the first six months since arriving at Bjelovar Prison, he had been detained in cell no. 1, measuring 17.13 square metres, where six inmates in total had been detained. He had then spent one month in cell no. 8 on the first floor with six inmates, which had measured 17.13 square metres. He had then been placed in another cell, also marked “cell no. 8”, which again measured 17.13 square metres, where he had spent six months with eight inmates. At the time of his complaint he was being held in cell no. 4 with six inmates.
On 20 November 2010 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske), relying on Article 14 § 2 (equality before the law), Article 26 (equality before the State authorities) and Article 29 (right to a fair trial) of the Constitution, complaining in general terms of a lack of personal space and work opportunities in Bjelovar Prison.
On 26 November 2010 the applicant complained to the Ombudsman (Pučki pravobranitelj) that he had not been granted a transfer to the prison closer to his family, and alleged in general terms that the conditions of his detention had been inadequate.
By a letter of 7 December 2010 the Ombudsman invited the applicant to further substantiate his complaints.
The applicant replied to that request on 21 December 2010, indicating that the sentence-execution judge and three-judge panel of the Bjelovar County Court had never examined his complaints properly, and that he had not been granted the 4 square metres of personal space in detention required under the Enforcement of Prison Sentences Act.
On 12 April 2011 the Ombudsman replied to the applicant’s letter that, according to the information available, his accommodation in Bjelovar Prison had fallen short of the requirements of adequate personal space under the Enforcement of Prison Sentences Act. The Ombudsman also pointed out that the cell where the applicant was being detained had been renovated in 2010, and complied with all hygiene and health standards. The Ombudsman also noted that just like ninety-two other inmates the applicant had not been engaged in prison work, as there had been an insufficient number of working positions for all prisoners.
On 5 June 2012 the Constitutional Court declared the applicant’s constitutional complaint (see paragraph 25 above) inadmissible as manifestly ill-founded. The relevant part of the decision reads:
“In his constitutional complaint, the appellant was unable to show that the Bjelovar County Court had acted contrary to the constitutional provisions concerning human rights and fundamental freedoms or had arbitrarily interpreted the relevant statutory provisions. The Constitutional Court therefore finds that the present case does not raise an issue of the complainant’s constitutional rights. Thus, there is no constitutional law issue in the case for the Constitutional Court to decide on ... “
The Constitutional Court’s decision was served on the applicant’s representative on 18 June 2012.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 56/1990, 135/1997, 8/1998, 113/2000, 124/2000, 28/2001, 41/2001, 55/2001, 76/2010 and 85/2010) read as follows:
“Everyone in the Republic of Croatia shall enjoy rights and freedoms regardless of their race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other beliefs, national or social origin, property, birth, education, social status or other characteristics.
All shall be equal before the law.”
...”
“No one shall be subjected to any form of ill-treatment ...”
“All detainees and convicted persons shall be treated in a humane manner and with respect for their dignity.”
“All citizens of the Republic of Croatia and foreigners shall be equal before the courts and other State or public authorities.”
“In the determination of his rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law.”
The relevant part of section 62 of the Constitutional Court Act (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 99/1999, 29/2002, 49/2002) reads:
“1.  Anyone may lodge a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court if he or she deems that a decision (pojedinačni akt) of a State body, a body of local and regional self-government, or a legal person with public authority, which has decided about his or her rights and obligations, or about a suspicion or accusation of a criminal act, has violated his or her human rights or fundamental freedoms, or his or her right to local and regional self-government guaranteed by the Constitution (hereinafter “constitutional right”) ...”
The relevant provisions of the Enforcement of Prison Sentences Act (Zakon o izvršavanju kazne zatvora, Official Gazette nos. 128/1999, 190/2003, 76/2007, 27/2008, 83/2009) read as follows:
“(1)  A prisoner shall have the right to complain about an act or decision of a prison employee.
(2)  Complaints shall be lodged orally or in writing with a prison governor, or the head office of the Prisons Administration [of the Ministry of Justice]. Written complaints addressed to the head office of the Prisons Administration [of the Ministry of Justice] shall be submitted in an envelope, which the prison authorities may not open ...
(5)  If a prisoner lodges a complaint with the sentence-execution judge, it shall be considered a request for judicial protection under section 17 of this Act.”
“(1)  A prisoner may lodge a request for judicial protection against any acts or decisions unlawfully denying him, or limiting him in, any of the rights guaranteed by this Act.
(2)  The sentence-execution judge shall dismiss the request for judicial protection if he or she finds that it is unfounded. If the request is founded, the sentence-execution judge shall order that the unlawful deprivations or restrictions of rights be remedied. If that is not possible, the sentence-execution judge shall find a violation and prohibit its repetition.
(3)  The prisoner and the prison facility may lodge an appeal against the sentence-execution judge’s decision ... ”
“...
(3)  Premises in which prisoners are detained shall be clean, dry and sufficiently spacious. There shall be a minimum space of 4 square metres and 10 cubic metres per prisoner in each dormitory.”
“(1)  A prisoner shall be entitled to work, subject to his state of health, []evel of] knowledge and the opportunities [available] in the State prison or prison.
...”
.  The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“the CPT”) visited Croatia from 19 to 27 September 2012. In its report CPT/Inf (2014) 9 of 18 March 2014, it noted the problem of prison overcrowding in Croatia. The relevant recommendations in that regard (Appendix I) read:
“Conditions of detention of the general prison population
recommendations
...
-  the Croatian authorities to take steps to reduce cell occupancy levels in all the prisons visited (as well as in other prisons in Croatia), so as to provide for at least 4 m² of living space per prisoner in multi-occupancy cells; for this purpose, the area taken up by any in-cell sanitary facilities should not be counted (paragraph 36);
...
-  the Croatian authorities to improve the programme of activities, including work and vocational training opportunities, for prisoners at Glina State Prison, Zagreb and Sisak County Prisons and, where appropriate, at other prisons in Croatia (paragraph 40);
...”