The case originated in an application (no. 28736/05) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by ten Azerbaijani nationals, Messrs Intiqam Aliyev, Rashid Hajili, Annagi Hajibeyli, Shahbaz Aliyev, Farman Huseynov, Alovsat Aliyev, Ayyub Kerimov, Vidadi Mirkamal, Akif Alizade and Namizad Safarov (“the applicants”), on 30 July 2005. Mr I. Aliyev, the first applicant, who was a lawyer practicing in , represented the other nine applicants.
The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr C. Asgarov.
The applicants alleged that the significant delay in the state registration of the association of which they were founders had amounted to a violation of their right to freedom of association, that the domestic proceedings had been unreasonably lengthy, and that the domestic courts were not independent and impartial in lawsuits against the Ministry of Justice of .
On 9 November 2006 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
On 24 May 2003 the applicants founded an association named “Azerbaijani Lawyers Forum” (“Azərbaycan Hüquqşünaslarının Forumu” İctimai Birliyi). This was a non-profit organisation established with the purpose of carrying out various activities aimed at further democratisation of society, the formation of a state governed by the rule of law, liaison between lawyers, and the protection of their professional interests.
On 23 June 2003 the applicants lodged a request for the association’s state registration with the Ministry of Justice (hereafter also referred to as “the Ministry”), the government authority responsible for the state registration of legal entities. In accordance with the domestic law, a nongovernmental organisation acquired the status of legal entity only upon its state registration by the Ministry of Justice.
Under the Law on State Registration of Legal Entities of 6 February 1996 (“the Old State Registration Act”), applicable at that time, the Ministry was obliged to respond to the applicants’ registration request within ten days after receipt of the request. However, the applicants did not receive any response for several months.
In March 2004 the applicants lodged an action with the Yasamal District Court, complaining that the Ministry had “evaded” registering their organisation and asking the court to compel the Ministry to register it. They claimed that the delay in state registration constituted a violation of their right to freedom of association under Article 58 of the Constitution and Article 11 of the Convention, and demanded compensation for nonpecuniary damage.
In its pleadings submitted to the court in reply to the applicants’ claim, the Ministry of Justice argued that on 18 February 2004 it had sent an official response to the association’s legal address. However, the postal service had not been able to deliver it because there had been a mistake in the recipient’s address printed on the envelope. The Ministry re-sent the official response to the correct address on 28 June 2004. In that response, the Ministry noted that it was returning the registration documents to the applicants “without taking any action”, that is to say without issuing a state registration certificate or an official refusal to register the association. The reason was the applicants’ failure to include the description of the association’s activity in its name, as required by Article 3.1 of the Law on Non-Governmental Organisations (Associations and Funds), and to approve the association’s charter, by signing it, as required by Article 47.1 of the Civil Code.
On 24 January 2005 the Yasamal District Court dismissed the applicants’ claim. The court found that the Ministry had issued a formal response to the applicants’ registration request on 18 February 2004, although the applicants did not receive it at that time owing to an unintentional mistake in the recipient’s address. The court further dismissed the applicants’ claim that the Ministry had failed to comply with the ten-day time-limit laid down by the Old State Registration Act. The court noted that, in the meantime, on 9 January 2004 a new Law on State Registration and the State Register of Legal Entities (“the New State Registration Act”) had entered into force and superseded the Old State Registration Act. In accordance with the New State Registration Act, the time-limit for the Ministry’s formal response to a registration request was extended to 40 working days after the receipt of the request. The court reasoned that, since the Old State Registration Act was no longer in force, the time-limits set by it no longer applied, and that a new time-limit of 40 days had been applicable since 9 January 2004, the date of entry into force of the New State Registration Act. Accordingly, the court ruled that the Ministry had responded within the statutory time-limit and that the applicants could reapply for state registration after rectifying the deficiencies found by the Ministry in their registration documents.
On 19 April 2005 the Court of Appeal upheld the first-instance court’s judgment.
On 29 June 2005 the Supreme Court upheld the Court of Appeal’s judgment.
Article 58 of the Constitution of the  of 12 November 1995 provided as follows:
“I.  Everyone has a right to freedom of association with others.
Everyone has the right to form any association, including political parties, trade unions or other public associations, or join existing associations. Free functioning of all associations shall be guaranteed. ...”
Article 47.1 of the Civil Code of 2000 provided as follows:
“The charter of a legal entity approved by its founders is the legal entity’s foundation document. ...”
Article 9 of the Law on State Registration of Legal Entities of 6 February 1996, in force until 9 January 2004, provided as follows:
“Upon receipt of an application for state registration from a legal entity or a branch or representative office of a foreign legal entity, the authority responsible for state registration [i.e. the Ministry of Justice] shall:
–  accept the documents for review;
–  within ten days, issue the applicant with a state registration certificate or a written notification of refusal to register; or
–  review the documents re-submitted after rectification of the deficiencies previously existing therein and, within five days, take a decision on state registration.”
Article 8.1 of the Law on State Registration and the State Register of Legal Entities of 12 December 2003, effective from 9 January 2004, provided as follows:
“State registration of a non-commercial organisation wishing to obtain legal-entity status, or of a branch or representative office of a foreign legal entity, shall, as a rule, be carried out within 40 days. ...”
Article 3.1 of the Law on Non-Governmental Organisations (Public Associations and Funds) of 13 June 2000 provided as follows:
“The non-governmental organisation shall have a name indicating its organisationallegal form and the nature of its activities. ...”
The general presumption under Azerbaijani law is that new legal acts apply prospectively and not retrospectively, subject to specified exceptions. In particular, Article 149 (VII) of the Constitution provides that only legal acts improving the legal situation of individuals and legal entities or eliminating or mitigating their legal responsibility can have retrospective effect; other legal acts have no retrospective effect.
Article 42 of the Law on Normative Legal Acts of 26 November 1999 provides that the retrospective application of legal acts is regulated by Article 149 (VII) of the Constitution. Article 7.1 of the Civil Code provides that, except in the situations provided for by Article 149 (VII) of the Constitution, provisions of civil legislation have no retrospective effect and apply prospectively to events taking place after their entry into force.