The case originated in an application (no. 34736/06) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Kazimierz Żebrowski (“the applicant”), on 11 August 2006.
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged that he had been deprived of access to a court competent to examine the merits of his compensation claim and of access to the Supreme Court.
On 18 October 2010 the President of the Fourth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1928 and lives in Szczytno.
On 15 December 1946 the applicant’s parents’ house and farm were destroyed and burned down by the Security Office (Urząd Bezpieczeństwa) in the framework of a campaign against anti-communist resistance to which the applicant, his father and his brother belonged. Subsequently, his father and brother were convicted and prison sentences were imposed on them.
In 1993 the applicant’s brother requested that the decisions given in his criminal case be declared null and void on the strength of the Law of 23 February 1991 on annulment of convictions of persons persecuted for activities aimed at achieving independence for Poland (Ustawa o uznaniu za nieważne orzeczeń wydanych wobec osób represjonowanych za działalność na rzecz niepodległego bytu Państwa Polskiego – “the 1991 Act”, see paragraphs 32 and 33 below). After six years of proceedings, a decision in the applicant’s brother’s favour was ultimately given in 1999.
On 31 January 2003 the applicant and his siblings filed a civil claim against the State Treasury with the . They claimed compensation for the destruction of their parents’ farm.
During the proceedings the State Treasury raised an objection of prescription against the compensation claim.
On 11 February 2004 the first-instance court held that the claim against the State Treasury was time-barred and dismissed the claim. The court observed that it was not in dispute that the farm had been burned to the ground by agents of the Security Office in the circumstances described by the plaintiffs. It further accepted that it had been a Stalinist crime. It was also an event which could give rise to the State’s liability in tort. The court confirmed that the applicant’s brother and father had subsequently been imprisoned.
The court went on to state that the State Liability Act (ustawa o odpowiedzialności Państwa za szkody wyrządzone przez funkcjonariuszów państwowych) adopted on 15 November 1956 (“the 1956 Act”) had had the specific purpose of creating a special legal framework making it possible for victims of Stalinist crimes to seek redress for damage they had suffered. It provided for a one-year time-limit for submitting relevant compensation claims (see paragraph 26 below). That time-limit had started to run on 28 November 1956, the date of publication of the 1956 Act.
The court further referred to a resolution given by the Supreme Court (III CZP 76/96, 11 October 1997; see paragraph 35 below). The Supreme Court had acknowledged that for general political reasons it might have been impossible for the victims to vindicate compensation claims in respect of Stalinist crimes having been committed before 4 June 1989, the date on which the first partially-free elections to parliament had been held and in respect of which it has been widely accepted that it had marked the collapse of the communist regime. Before that date victims of Stalinist persecution and also victims of later persecution against the State’s political opponents could legitimately fear that bringing such cases before the courts would provoke the State’s ire. Hence, it could be accepted that the oneyear timelimit fixed by the provisions of the 1956 Act could be said to have started to run only on 4 June 1989. However, as the applicant had brought his case to the courts in 2003, his claim was timebarred.
The court further held that the provisions of the Civil Code adopted in 1964 governing the State Treasury’s liability in tort provided for a threeyear time-limit. However, they were not applicable in the applicant’s case because compensation claims for Stalinist crimes were governed by the special liability regime created by the 1956 Act.
The court further observed that it was also possible to accept that the one-year time-limit, fixed by the provisions of the 1956 Act, should be understood as having started to run only from the date on which the plaintiffs had obtained the 1999 judicial decision confirming that the applicant’s family had been the victims of political repression. It could not be excluded that it had been only after that judgment that they had realised that their attempts to seek compensation for the damage suffered in 1946 and later years were not doomed to fail. However, their civil claim had been lodged with the court more than three years later.
The court further held that the State Treasury’s objection that the claim was time-barred did not amount to an abuse of rights within the meaning of Article 5 of the Civil Code (see paragraph 38 below).
The applicant, represented by a legal-aid lawyer, appealed. He submitted, inter alia, that given the particular factual and historical context of the case, the court had erred in holding that the State Treasury’s objection of prescription should not be seen as an abuse of rights within the meaning of Article 5 of the Civil Code. He stressed that it was not in dispute that the applicant and his family had been victims of political repression by the totalitarian regime. The destruction of the farm by the communist secret police had not been disputed. Hence, the objection made by the State, which had resulted in the applicant’s claim failing, had to be seen as an abuse of rights incompatible with the “principles of social co-existence”. It was precisely that objection, dictated by the fiscal interests of the State, which had made it possible for the State to leave people seriously wronged in the past by its own agents without any compensation for its use of violence and for manifest and undisputed damage wrought for political reasons.
The judgment was upheld on 25 November 2005 by the Warsaw Court of Appeal. That court approved the findings of fact made by the lower court as to the destruction of the applicant’s parents’ farm and the imprisonment of the applicant’s family members. However, it also accepted the lower court’s conclusion that the compensation claim was time-barred. It concurred that the events giving rise to the damage, which were not in dispute, were governed as to the issue of liability by the special regime created in respect of Stalinist crimes by the 1956 Act. It further agreed that in the conditions of a non-democratic regime the running of the time-limit could be considered to have been stayed until the collapse of communism in 1989.
The court further noted that the 1991 Act had not been applicable to the applicant’s civil case because it only concerned matters arising in connection with wrongful and politically-motivated criminal convictions handed down by the Stalinist authorities. It could only be resorted to in order to have criminal convictions declared null and void, but was not applicable in the context of civil cases and compensation claims.
The court endorsed the conclusions of the lower court, relying on the same resolution of the Supreme Court. It observed that even if the timelimit was considered as having started to run in 1989, the claim also had to be declared time-barred.
The court further shared the conclusions of the lower court that the State Treasury had had the right to submit the objection of prescription and that such an objection in the applicant’s case had not amounted to a breach of Article 5 of the Civil Code, in so far as that provision prohibited abuse of one’s civil rights to the detriment of other persons.
On 26 November 2005 the applicant requested the Warsaw Court of Appeal to prepare written grounds for its judgment and announced his intention to lodge a cassation appeal against it.
On 29 December 2005 the applicant requested the Warsaw Court of Appeal to grant him legal aid for the purposes of lodging a cassation appeal with the Supreme Court.
On 14 February 2006 the Court of Appeal served the judgment, with its written grounds on the applicant’s privately hired lawyer, who had apparently replaced the legal-aid lawyer representing the applicant earlier. On 16 February 2006 that lawyer informed the applicant that he had thirty days to lodge a cassation appeal. At that time, the relevant timelimit was in fact sixty days (see paragraph 41 below). It was therefore due to expire on 14 April 2006.
On 27 February 2006 the court allowed the applicant’s request to be granted legal aid for the purposes of the proceedings before the Supreme Court (see paragraph 21 above).
On 3 March 2006 O.Z., the lawyer assigned to the applicant’s case under the legal-aid scheme, was informed that she had been assigned to the case.
In her written opinion of 7 April 2006 O.Z. explained to the applicant why she considered that there were no grounds on which a cassation appeal could be based and refused to prepare such an appeal on the applicant’s behalf.
Domestic law provides for a specific individual entitlement for victims of persecution during Stalinist times (ustawa o odpowiedzialności Państwa za szkody wyrządzone przez funkcjonariuszów państwowych) to bring a civil claim under the State Liability Act passed on 15 November 1956. It provided for a one-year time-limit, running from the date of that law’s entry into force on 28 November 1956, for submitting compensation claims to the civil courts for damage caused by wrongful arrest, detention, conviction and torture.
Articles 415 et seq. of the Polish Civil Code, which entered into force in 1964, provide for liability in tort. Under this provision, anyone who through his or her fault causes damage to another is required to redress such damage.
Article 77 § 1 of the 1997 Polish Constitution, which entered into force on 17 October 1997, states, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“Everyone shall have the right to compensation for any harm done to him or her by any act of a public authority in breach of the law.”
Articles 417 et seq. of the Civil Code (Kodeks cywilny) provide for the State’s liability in tort. In the version applicable until 1 September 2004, Article 417 § 1, which lays down a general rule, read as follows:
“1.  The State Treasury shall be liable for any damage caused by a State official in the performance of his or her duties.”
On 1 September 2004 the Civil Code (Amendment) Act, passed on 17 June 2004 (“the 2004 Amendment”), entered into force. The relevant amendments were in essence aimed at enlarging the scope of the State Treasury’s liability for tort under Article 417 of the Civil Code – including the addition of a new Article 4171 – and provision for the State’s tortious liability for failure to enact legislation, a concept known as “legislative omission” (zaniechanie legislacyjne).
Under the transitional provisions of section 5 of the 2004 Amendment, Article 417 as applicable before 1 September 2004 applies to all events and legal situations that subsisted before that date.
The Act of 23 February 1991 on the annulment of convictions of persons persecuted for activities aimed at achieving independence for Poland (Ustawa o uznaniu za nieważne orzeczeń wydanych wobec osób represjonowanych za działalność na rzecz niepodległego bytu Państwa Polskiego – “the 1991 Act”) sets out rules concerning the conditions under which certain politically-motivated convictions rendered from 1 January 1944 to 31 December 1956 can be declared null and void, and also provides for the State’s civil liability for such convictions. Section 1 paragraph 1 of the 1991 Act provides, insofar as relevant:
“Convictions or other decisions rendered by the Polish judicial, prosecuting or extra-judicial authorities during the period ... lasting from 1 January 1944 to 31 December 1956 shall be declared null and void if the offence with... which the person concerned was charged or convicted related to activities undertaken by him or her with the aim of achieving independence for Poland, or if the decision in question was taken on the grounds that he had undertaken such activity. The same applies to persons convicted of resisting the collectivisation of farm land and compulsory contributions of foodstuffs.”
Under section 2 of the 1991 Act, regional courts or, in cases concerning military offences, regional military courts, are competent to deal with requests lodged under section 3 of the 1991 Act. Section 3 states, insofar as relevant:
“3.  A party entitled to file an application under section 1 paragraph 1 shall be entitled to appeal against a decision on whether or not the original decision should be declared null and void.
According to section 2 paragraph 1 in fine of this Law, a decision declaring the original conviction null and void shall be tantamount to a verdict of acquittal. If such a conviction is declared null and void, a victim of repression is entitled, under section 8 paragraph 1 of this Law, to compensation from the State Treasury for his wrongful conviction.”
Against the background of the 1956 Act, a body of case-law evolved after 1989 concerning the compensatory entitlements of victims of Stalinist persecution. This case-law also dealt with the manner in which the beginning of the time-limit was determined (e.g. the Supreme Court decisions in the cases of: V CKN 1725/00, delivered on 29 November 2001; I CKN 1049/000, delivered on 2 February 2001; I CKN 988/00, delivered on 1 October 2001; and I CKN 1151/00, delivered on 29 May 2001).
In its Resolution III CZP 76/96 given on 10 October 1996, the Supreme Court examined a legal question put to it by the Warsaw Court of Appeal as to the date on which the prescription time-limit in respect of Stalinist crimes had started to run. It held that the general political situation prior to 1989 could be equated to a denial of access to justice regarding claims originating in Stalinist crimes. The Supreme Court stated that the time-limit for seeking compensation for damage caused by such crimes should be examined in the light of the provisions of civil law. In particular, in each individual case the court was obliged to examine whether the time-limit should be seen as not having started to run until 4 June 1989 or whether its running should be seen as having been stayed until that date. It stated, inter alia:
“Hence, taking into account the historical truth about the communist regime in , it is necessary to examine whether the State’s responsibility has not been sought only because of circumstances which could be controlled by the interested persons, or because of reasons of an objective character, amounting to a denial of justice. The latter would consist in an impossibility to provide evidence in respect of facts covered up and censored by the communist authorities. ... When such impossibility is shown, the court can, by analogy, apply the provisions which provide for the running of the prescription time-limit being stayed in situations where the judicial system does not function [and the citizens’ right of access to court is denied.]”
In its judgment of 14 July 2004 (SK 8/03) the Constitutional Court examined a constitutional complaint of a claimant who had challenged the compatibility with the Constitution of Article 6 of the 1956 Act, instituting a time-limit of one year after 28 November 1956 for the submission of compensation claims in respect of civil wrongs caused by State agents prior to the entry into force of that Act. The complainant argued that that period had been unreasonably short, to the detriment of victims, and that in the political realities of the system its short duration had made it impossible for them to effectively vindicate their well-founded compensation claims originating in Stalinist oppression. As a result, the system created by that Act had been nothing more than a sham.
The  noted, inter alia, that there existed various time-limits for the lodging of claims in respect of various kinds of damage resulting from the State’s acts. The mere fact that there were differences in the length of those time-limits was insufficient for a finding that the timelimit concerned in the claimant’s case had been discriminatory. It further held that, in the examination of the constitutionality of the provision in issue in the complaint, it was necessary to have regard to the manner in which it was interpreted in judicial practice. It referred to the practice of the Supreme Court – in particular, to its resolution of 11 October 1996. It noted, firstly, that the Supreme Court had been of the view that the political situation during the communist times could legitimately be seen as creating a “denial of justice”, justifying the staying of the prescription time-limit. Secondly, the Supreme Court had not excluded that grounds for such a stay could, in individual cases, persist even after June 1989. Thirdly, the Supreme Court had often emphasised that the courts were obliged to examine whether the State Treasury’s reliance on prescription of a compensation claim was compatible with the prohibition of abuse of one’s rights, stipulated by Article 5 of the Civil Code. This approach by the Supreme Court had tremendous importance for the effective litigation of compensation claims by persons wronged by the communist regime.
Article 5 of the Civil Code reads:
“No one shall exercise any right of his in a manner contrary to its socio-economic purpose or to the principles of co-existence with others (zasady współżycia społecznego). An act or omission [fulfilling this description] on the part of the holder of the right shall not be deemed to be the exercise of the right and shall not be protected [by law].”
Article 117 of the Civil Code, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
(...) [P]ecuniary claims are subject to prescription.
After the prescriptive period has elapsed, the defendant can avoid meeting [such a claim], unless the defendant waives the plea of prescription.
Under paragraph 3 of that provision, which lost its binding force in 2000, the courts were obliged to examine on their own motion whether a claim had become prescribed. After that provision was repealed, the courts have to examine the issue of prescription upon an objection submitted by a party.
Provisions of civil law and the case-law of the domestic courts concerning cassation appeals have been extensively summarised in the judgments in the cases of Siałkowska v. Poland, no. 8932/05, 22 March 2007; Staroszczyk v. , no. 59519/00, 22 March 2007; and Bąkowska v. Poland, no. 33539/02, 12 January 2010.