The case originated in an application (no. 14791/04) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Lyubov Aleksandrovna Styazhkova (“the applicant”), on 8 April 2004.
The applicant was represented before the Court by lawyers of the Memorial Human Rights Centre, based in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were initially represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the former Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 5 July 2011 the Government were given notice of the application.
The applicant was born in 1952 and lives in Ryazan, the Ryazan Region.
On 29 December 2001 the applicant’s son was drafted for military service. From 10 July 2002 he served in military unit no. 44822, based in the village of Borzoy, the Chechen Republic.
On 8 August 2002 the military unit informed the competent military prosecutor’s office that the applicant’s son had been found dead on its premises. On the same day a military prosecutor, Major F., and an investigator, Senior Lieutenant T., both from military unit no. 20119, examined the scene of the incident. Senior Lt T. also inspected the applicant’s son’s body and took photographs. The examinations were carried out in the presence of witnesses, who were soldiers of military unit no. 44822. The investigator was assisted by Captain K., a doctor from the same unit.
The record of the inspection of the scene indicated, in particular, that the body of a young man with an automatic rifle in his hands had been inside the entrenchment. The record of the body examination noted traces of two gunshots in the right temple. It further mentioned numerous bruises dating from one to five days on different parts of the body, including the face, nose, shoulders, abdomen, and various places on the legs.
On the same day the applicant’s son’s body was sent for a forensic medical examination.
Senior Lieutenant G., commander of Private Styazhkov’s troop, explained to the military prosecutor that on 8 August 2002 his troop was carrying out sentry duty. At around 5.48 a.m. Senior Lieutenant B., commander of the Pte Styazhkov’s platoon, made an inspection round of his soldiers and found Ptes Styazhkov and D. sleeping. Senior Lt B. gave them a discipline talk and left. Senior Lt G. heard an automatic rifle burst at around 6.30 a.m. and learnt from Senior Lt B. that Pte Styazhkov had shot himself. According to Pte D., just before the shots, Pte Styazhkov had stepped further along the entrenchment to relieve himself. During the shots there was nobody near Styazhkov and nobody had seen him. Pte Styazhkov had fired into his right temple, by pressing his AK-47 rifle against the ground. Senior Lt G. noted that Pte Styazhkov had not submitted any complaints to him and that he did not know the reasons for his actions.
Later on 8 August 2002 the military prosecutor initiated a criminal investigation in respect of unidentified soldiers whose actions had led the applicant’s son to commit suicide. He held that around 6.30 a.m. Pte Styazhkov had fired two shots at himself by putting the muzzle of his rifle against his right temple, causing by those actions his death.
During the next few days investigators interviewed several officers and soldiers from the applicant’s son’s military unit.
Senior Lieutenant B. submitted that he was the commander of platoon no. 3. At around 5.30 a.m. Sergeant K. and Pte S. came to see him after an inspection round and informed him that Ptes Styazhkov and D. had been sleeping while on guard. Sgt K. handed him an automatic rifle which he had taken from S. and asked him to resolve the matter. B. took the rifle and went to see Pte Styazhkov and D. They were sleeping again. He returned the rifle back to Pte Styazhkov and explained to him that he had been putting his own life and the lives of his fellow soldiers in danger by sleeping on duty. Afterwards he went to inspect another post and at around 6.30 a.m. he heard a long automatic rifle burst. He ran towards the scene of the shooting together with other soldiers. At the scene he was told by others that Styazhkov had part of his head destroyed. B. immediately contacted the commanding officer of the troop and informed him that Styazhkov had been killed in a fight. B. also submitted that during his talk with Styazhkov he had not used any physical force against him.
Pte D. submitted that he had been on friendly terms with Pte Styazhkov. The latter had never complained to him about any problems in his life and had never talked about suicidal ideas. Pte Styazhkov seemed to be a person who was full of zest and cheerful. D. confirmed that at around 3 a.m. on the night of the events they had fallen asleep holding their rifles. Sgt K. and Pte Se. had woken them up. Sgt K. was very rude with them. He took away Styazhkov’s rifle and told them to do fifty press-ups and then to crawl along the ground for about twenty-five metres. It was not an easy task while wearing helmets and bulletproof vests. Afterwards Pte Se. hit Styazhkov in the chest at least five times with the rifle. After each hit Styazhkov staggered back. Then, Pte Se. undressed them, threw Styazhkov to the ground, kicked him in the chest at least three times and hit his legs with a rifle. Styazhkov was angry that his rifle was taken away from him. Some time later, Senior Lt B. came over to see them and returned the rifle to Styazhkov. He said that if they fell asleep again he would punish them. At around 6 a.m. Pte Styazhkov said that he had to relieve himself and went down to the entrenchment. Five minutes later, D. heard a rifle burst. At first he did not understand what was going on. Then, Sgt K., Senior Lt B. and Pte Se. came over and together they went to the entrenchment. There they saw Styazhkov with a rifle and with traces of gunshots in his head.
At 6.30 p.m. Sgt K. made an official confession. He submitted, in particular, that when he had seen Styazhkov on the night of the event he had hit him twice in the chest and had then told him and Pte D. to do fifteen press-ups and to crawl along the ground for about ten metres. He had also taken away his rifle.
Later that evening, Sgt K. was questioned as a witness. He submitted that during the night of the events he and Pte S. had caught Ptes Styazhkov and D. sleeping on duty three times. On the third occasion he had hit Styazhkov in the chest, first with his left leg and then with his right arm. He had never hit him with a rifle. Afterwards he had ordered them to do about ten press-ups and to crawl along the ground for about ten metres. He had also seen Pte S. hitting Styazhkov with a rifle five to seven times. Then he had seen Styazhkov lying on the ground and Pte S. beating him with a rifle. During the beating Styazhkov exclaimed that he would never again fall asleep while on duty.
On 9 August 2002 Pte S. made an official confession. He submitted that when he and Sgt K. had caught Ptes Styazhkov and D. sleeping, Styazhkov had refused to admit it and that that had made him very angry. That was why he had started beating Styazhkov with a rifle in the chest and legs about fifteen to twenty times. The beatings had taken place at around 3.45 a.m.
On 11 August 2002 investigator S. refused to institute criminal proceedings in respect of Sgt K. and Pte S. in relation to the beatings of Pte Styazhkov. He held as follows:
“It follows from the evidence gathered during the investigation that on 8 August 2002 at around 3.30 a.m. ... Sgt K. kicked Pte Styazhkov once in the chest, then punched him once (through a bulletproof vest). Also, Sgt K. punched Pte D. (through a bulletproof vest). Later, Sgt K. ordered Ptes Styazhkov and D. to do at least fifty press-ups and to crawl along the ground for about twenty-five metres.
Formally, in the actions of Sgt K. there are indications of the corpus delicti under Article 286 § 3 (a) of the CC of the RF [Criminal Code of the Russian Federation] [abuse of power]. However, taking into account that Sgt K. used violence against the above persons in order to stop them from falling asleep on duty, that he committed that offence for the first time, that his actions did not entail any serious consequences, ... and that the above-mentioned actions do not represent any danger to society, ... no criminal proceedings should be initiated in respect of him ...
It follows from the evidence gathered during the investigation that on 8 August 2002 at around 3.30 a.m. ... Pte S. hit Styazhkov in the chest at least three times.
Formally, in the actions of Se. there are indications of the corpus delicti under Article 335 § 1 of the CC of the RF [Criminal Code of the Russian Federation] [breach of rules of relationship between servicemen of equal rank]. However, taking into account that during the investigation those facts have not been objectively confirmed, and that Sgt K. and Pte Se. have likewise not confirmed them, no criminal proceedings should be initiated on that account ...”
On 13 August 2002 investigator S. ordered a ballistic test of the rifle belonging to Pte Styazhkov. The expert report of 30 August 2002 established firstly that the rifle had been in good technical condition and had been fit to fire shots; secondly, it had been impossible to fire any shots without pressing the trigger of the rifle; and thirdly, shots had been fired from the rifle after the last time it had been cleaned. Finally, the experts could not answer whether the spent cartridges found near the applicant’s son’s body had been fired from the rifle in question because those cartridges (twenty-one in total) had not been submitted for the test.
On 3 September 2002 investigator S. ordered that twenty-one spent cartridges discovered near the place where the applicant’s son’s body had been found be added to the evidence in the criminal case file.
The autopsy report of 11 September 2002 found that the applicant’s son had died as a result of two gun shots, which could had been fired by a single rifle burst and could have been inflicted by his own hand. The report further indicated that the body had numerous bruises on the face and on the lower limbs (legs) which could have been caused by at least nine hits with a hard blunt object(s) and which had been inflicted one or two days before the death.
The psychological expert report prepared after Pte Styazhkov’s death stated that when alive he had not suffered from any mental disorder which could have predisposed him to commit suicide. At the time of the events Styazhkov had been aware of his actions and able to control them. Just before his suicide Styazhkov had been in a state of severe stress caused by the actions of Pte S. That stressful state of mind could have influenced his behaviour and could have predisposed him to take a decision to end his life.
On 14 September 2002 the applicant was granted victim status in the ongoing criminal investigation.
On 25 October 2002 Pte S. was charged with having incited the applicant’s son to commit suicide and having breached the rules on relations between servicemen of equal rank. On the same day his criminal case was sent for trial. The applicant brought a civil claim for damages against Pte S.
On 22 November 2002 the Military Court of the North Caucasus Circuit set the preliminary hearing of the case for 4 December 2002 in order to determine the first-instance court competent to examine the case.
On 4 December 2002, at the request of the defendant, the Military Court of the North Caucasus Circuit referred the case for trial to the Military Court of the Bataysk Garrison. The latter received the case file on 16 December 2002.
The applicant submitted that she had been summoned to court hearings scheduled for 23 January 2003, 10 and 25 February 2003 and 5 March 2003, but as neither the defendant nor the prosecution had appeared, the court hearings had not taken place. On the last hearing the applicant allegedly submitted an application to perform a fresh ballistics examination.
On 6 June 2003 the State Duma passed an act of amnesty which provided, among others, for discontinuation of criminal proceedings against servicemen who had committed criminal offences during the armed conflict and/or anti-terrorist operations in the territory of the former Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic of Chechnya-Ingushetia if they had not yet been examined by the courts.
On 12 August 2003 the military court discontinued the criminal proceedings against Pte S. as the case had not been examined by that moment (see paragraph 29 above). The court found as follows:
“S. is accused of the following: on 8 August 2002 at about 4 a.m. while performing his sentry duty at a station post near the COP of the military unit no. 44822, located at the Borzoy settlement of the Chechen Republic, having discovered that Pte Styazhkov was sleeping on duty, he gave him at least five blows with the rifle into the chest, a blow with the fist onto the face, and then, after having pushed him to the ground, gave about another twenty blows with the rifle on the legs, thus afflicting beatings and physical pain.
Having not borne the cruel treatment, Styazhkov after a short time, at about 6.30 a.m. on 8 August 2002, at the entrenchment of the outpost position committed suicide by making two rifle shots in the head.
The above actions of S. are qualified by the preliminary investigation authorities to fall under Articles 335 § 3 and 110 of the Criminal Code of the RF.
According to Section 2 of [the 2003 Amnesty Act] criminal cases which had not yet been examined in respect of servicemen having committed publicly dangerous actions during anti-terrorist operations in the territory of the former Republic of ChechnyaIngushetia are to be discontinued.
Pte S. committed a publicly dangerous action during the anti-terrorist operation in the territory of the Chechen Republic. S. does not object to the discontinuing of the criminal case against him based on the amnesty act.
Based on the above, the case against S. ..., which had not been examined by the time when the Amnesty Act entered into force, is to be discontinued. ...”
By the same decision the Military Court of the Bataysk Garrison left the applicant’s civil claims unexamined and explained that she retained the right to bring her claims by a separate civil action.
On 9 October 2003 the Military Court of the North Caucasus Circuit rejected the applicant’s appeal against the decision of 12 August 2003 having endorsed the reasoning of the first-instance court.