The case originated in an application (no. 70035/10) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Romanian nationals, Mrs Daniela Nedescu and Mr Călin Nedescu (“the applicants”), on 26 November 2010.
The applicants were represented by Ms Diana-Elena Dragomir, a lawyer practising in Bucharest. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Catrinel Brumar, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicants alleged that they had suffered a violation of their rights under Article 8 of the Convention because they had not been able to use their embryos to have another child after the embryos had been seized by the prosecuting authorities in 2010.
On 6 November 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The first applicant, Mrs Daniela Nedescu, is married to the second applicant, Mr Călin Nedescu. They were born in 1976 and live in Bucharest.
In 2008 the applicants, who were childless but wanted to have children, decided to try assisted reproduction at a private clinic, the S. Clinic.
It appears that the S. Clinic had previously applied to the National Transplant Agency (“the Transplant Agency”) for authorisation to function as a cell and tissue bank and user in accordance with the legal requirements, an application which was still pending completion in 2008.
Following an ovarian stimulation and in vitro fertilisation, seven embryos were obtained, of which three were transferred immediately to Mrs Nedescu, who became pregnant and gave birth.
The four remaining embryos were frozen and put in storage at the S. Clinic in November 2008 with a view to their future use by Mrs Nedescu.
On 15 July 2009 the procedure for obtaining the required authorisation from the Transplant Agency was completed and the S. Clinic was authorised to act as a medical centre that could function as a storage bank for genetic material.
On 24 July 2009, following a criminal investigation into the delivery of the above authorisation, the Directorate for the Investigation of Organised Crime and Terrorism attached to the Prosecutor General’s Office of Romania (DIICOT) closed the S. Clinic, seized all the genetic material found there, including the applicants’ embryos, and transferred it to the Mina Minovici Institute of Forensic Medicine (“the IFM”).
The applicants’ embryos and those of other couples were kept in containers. Each container had different vials for each set of embryos.
It appears from a DIICOT report dated 9 November 2009 that the embryos of more than 240 families were seized at the S. Clinic.
As with other patients of the Clinic, the applicants were neither informed of the seizure, which they learned about from the media, nor consulted about the transfer of the seized embryos from the S. Clinic to the IFM.
On 13 March 2010 the applicants requested that DIICOT allow them to retrieve their embryos as they wished to undergo a new assisted reproduction procedure in another clinic. They pointed out that it was of the utmost importance that they be allowed to retrieve the embryos rapidly since the storage period was to expire in August 2010 and there was a strict procedure for the transfer.
On 30 March 2010 DIICOT allowed the applicants to recover the embryos directly from the IFM. They had to be accompanied by an embryologist and provide a special container with liquid nitrogen.
On 21 July 2010 the applicants went to the IFM accompanied by an embryologist, however, they were not allowed to retrieve the embryos. They were asked instead to show that the Transplant Agency had approved the transfer.
The first applicant, under the supervision of a specialist doctor, therefore attempted to have a new ovarian stimulation in the hope of creating new embryos.
However, on 18 August 2010, while being treated for premature menopause, she underwent a medical examination which revealed that her state of health did not allow her to undergo another ovarian stimulation.
The applicants joined the criminal proceedings instituted against the administrative board of the S. Clinic and the doctors practising within or in cooperation with it, and sought damages under domestic tort provisions for not being able to use the embryos. In an interlocutory judgment of 29 November 2010 the applicants’ action was dismissed for lack of victim status on the grounds that the IFM’s refusal to allow them to recover the embryos had no link with the crimes allegedly committed by the accused. The applicants were directed to bring a claim for damages before a civil court.
The applicants therefore resumed their efforts to retrieve the embryos deposited with the IFM, but were not successful.
In November 2010 they brought an action before the Bucharest Court of Appeal against the Transplant Agency and the Ministry of Health, seeking to obtain the agency’s authorisation to transfer their embryos to an authorised clinic, in Romania or abroad, where Mrs Nedescu could try again to become pregnant.
On 12 December 2010 Mrs Nedescu had another examination, which led to the same conclusions as on 18 August 2010.
On 13 December 2010 the Transplant Agency informed the applicants that it refused to approve a transfer of the embryos. It stated that DIICOT had moved the embryos to the IFM unlawfully as the institute had never obtained the required permit to act as a tissue and cell bank. The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure relied on by DIICOT had also not provided any guarantees for the safety of the embryos deposited with the IFM.
At a hearing on 22 March 2011 the applicants asked the Court of Appeal to order the transfer of the embryos from the IFM to a private clinic of their choice located in Sibiu, the P. Clinic, which was authorised to carry out assisted reproduction and act as a genetic material storage bank.
The court dismissed the applicants’ application on the same day. It relied on the provisions of section 148(4) and (5) of the Health Care Reform Act. It found that the Transplant Agency’s refusal to allow the transfer of the embryos had been lawful since neither the S. Clinic nor the IFM had been accredited or authorised to function as genetic material banks and the transfer of genetic material could only be performed between institutions authorised to function as such storage banks.
The applicants appealed against the judgment to the High Court of Cassation and Justice.
On 12 October 2011 DIICOT appointed a public hospital, the P.S. Hospital, as the new legal custodian for all the embryos, including the ones belonging to the applicants.
The transfer of the embryos to the new custodian took place on 19 October 2011. According to a report drafted by the judicial authorities on that occasion, Ms A.M., the doctor from P.S. Hospital who took delivery of the embryos, drew up a disclaimer to the effect that the genetic material listed in the inventory accompanying the embryos had been received without any prior checks of the vials, that it had not been possible for her to check each individual item owing to the absence of the embryologist who had participated in the initial freezing and that the procedures in use at that time were different from those used by the first custodian.
On 20 December 2011 the High Court of Cassation and Justice allowed the appeal against the judgment of 22 March 2011 and ordered the Transplant Agency to implement the prosecutor’s decision to return the embryos by allowing their transfer from the IFM to an authorised clinic or hospital of the applicants’ choice in Romania or abroad.
It found, firstly, that the Transplant Agency, which was organised as a structure within the Ministry of Health, had been duly informed about the investigating authorities’ decision to deposit the material seized at the S. Clinic with the IFM, and that, secondly, the Ministry of Health had signed the record drawn up at the end of the procedure for moving the embryos to the IFM, together with the investigating authorities.
It held that in so far as the Transplant Agency’s task was to coordinate the activities of procuring, processing, preserving, storing, approving and distributing human tissue and cells in Romania, there had been no legal grounds for it to interfere with the implementation of the prosecutor’s decision to return the embryos to the applicants.
The High Court further relied on the Government’s observations submitted to the Court in the case of Knecht v. Romania (no. 10048/10, 2 October 2012), from which it could be seen that the investigating authorities had authorised Ms Knecht to retrieve her embryos from the IFM, and that the Government’s understanding was that Ms Knecht had been lawfully entitled to arrange for their transfer to an authorised clinic. The High Court stressed that Mr and Mrs Nedescu’s embryos had been stored in the same container as those belonging to Ms Knecht. There was therefore nothing to prevent them from arranging the transfer of their embryos to an authorised clinic or hospital of their choice, in Romania or abroad.
Lastly, the court granted costs and fees of 4,000 Romanian lei (RON) to the applicants.
On 26 March 2012 DIICOT informed the applicants that the prosecutor had appointed P.S. Hospital as the new legal custodian of their embryos. They therefore had to agree on a transfer date with that institution in order to retrieve the embryos.
The applicants contacted P.S. Hospital, which informed them on 27 September 2012 that they could only retrieve the embryos if they were accompanied by a representative from the Transplant Agency, an embryologist from the S. Clinic, where the embryos had been stored initially, and a DIICOT representative.
On 1 November 2012 P.S. Hospital informed the applicants that in order to retrieve their embryos they had to agree on a date, obtain an authorisation document from the Transplant Agency, make sure a certified specialist embryologist was present and provide a special container with liquid nitrogen from an accredited transportation company.
On 12 November 2012, in reply to a request from the applicants, P.S. Hospital informed them that it could not transfer the remaining embryos to Mrs Nedescu as they had only been appointed as a custodian by DIICOT. Nevertheless, the applicants could attempt to obtain new embryos at the hospital which could then be transferred to her.
In a letter dated 7 January 2013 to the Government Agent, a representative of P.S. Hospital reiterated that the embryos could only be retrieved after prior approval from the Transplant Agency and that an embryologist from the S. Clinic and a DIICOT representative had to be present.
It also stated that they declined any responsibility for the identification, quality and viability of the frozen embryos deposited with the IFM because DIICOT had not organised any individual identification when the embryos had been transferred. The hospital could therefore only assume that the embryos belonging to the Nedescus were among those that had been transferred to it. The hospital reiterated that the IFM had no authorisation to function as a genetic material bank (for tissues and cells).
Furthermore, the hospital did not only have the task of implementing DIICOT’s decision to allow the applicants to remove the embryos and ensure respect for the conditions that the removal be made in the presence of an embryologist and include the provision of a container with liquid nitrogen. It also had to comply with the relevant legislation on the removal and transfer of genetic material and with the conditions set down by the Transplant Agency in a decision of 3 June 2011, Decision no. 5.
The representative also stated that the existing embryos could be transferred to the mother at the hospital but that the hospital’s own doctors would not carry out the procedure as they could not assume any responsibility owing to the quality of the embryos. However, the hospital preferred that such a transfer be performed elsewhere.
On 16 January 2013 the applicants applied to DIICOT to be appointed custodians of their own embryos. They indicated that they were able to bear the costs of becoming custodians.
A DIICOT prosecutor informed the applicant’s lawyer by telephone that the application had been rejected.
In a letter dated 18 April 2013 to the Government’s Agent, a DIICOT chief prosecutor stated that the cost of appointing the applicants as custodians was very high and that the judicial bodies involved had no competence to make such a decision. In any event, “no formula allowing for consensus among all the parties involved has so far been identified”.
Following the criminal investigation of the S. Clinic (see paragraph 10 above), the High Court of Cassation on 21 October 2014 found its managers, owner and the then director of the Transplant Agency guilty of association for the purposes of creating a criminal group. It handed down various prison sentences.
The Act is divided into seventeen titles, covering a wide array of subjects specific to public health. Title VI contains provisions covering the procurement and transplant of organs, tissues and cells of human origin used for therapeutic purposes, the donors of organs, tissues and cells of human origin, the donation and transplant thereof and the financing of transplant activity. It transposes into national legislation Directive 2004/23/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 on setting standards for the quality and safety of the donation, procurement, testing, processing, preservation, storage and distribution of human tissue and cells.
Section 143 provides that the National Transplant Agency is responsible for “the coordination, supervision, approval and implementation of any provisions regarding transplant activities”.
The relevant subsections of section 148, which deals mainly with the procurement and transplant of tissues and cells from dead bodies, provide as follows:
“(4)  Procured tissue and cells of human origin can be used immediately for transplants or can be processed and deposited in tissue and cell banks, accredited with or approved by the National Transplant Agency.
(5)  Any transplant of tissue and cells of human origin may be processed only from banks accredited with or approved by the National Transplant Agency ...”
According to subsection 9, the import or export of tissue and cells has to be specifically authorised by the National Transplant Agency in the manner referred to in Annex 7 (export of tissue and cells from dead bodies) and 9 (import), and must be carried out in accordance with the relevant customs legislation.
The Orders listed a number of establishments, including the P. Clinic in Sibiu, which were authorised to function as tissue and cell banks and users, but neither the S. Clinic nor the IFM were included.
The decision reads as follows:
“From the date of the current decision the transfer of biological material on the territory of Romania between clinics that are legally authorised and accredited must be performed in strict accordance with the following specifications:
- the procedure for freezing and preserving the embryos;
- the freezing method used: vitrifying or slow freezing;
- the freezing kit used and the name of the manufacturer;
- if a freezing kit was prepared, the components and exact proportions used in the preparation process;
- the stage of development of the embryos at the time of freezing;
- documents allowing for the identification of the embryos and their position inside the transport container;
- documents proving ownership of the embryos;
- documents proving that keeping the embryos in the cell bank does not present a danger of contamination (in other words, the results of medical tests of the couple during in vitro fertilisation treatment);
- the conditions of storage of the embryos (with appropriate evidence, for instance temperature charts).
 “All private and public medical institutions shall implement the provisions of the current decision.”
Article 118, in force until 2014, read as follows:
“The following property can be subjected to special confiscation:
In its relevant parts concerning the procedure for the seizure of property during a criminal investigation, the code in force at the time of the events, in June 2009, reads as follows:
“Precautionary measures are those measures taken during a criminal trial by the prosecutor or by the court and consist of freezing assets, by ordering the seizure of movable and immovable property with a view to a subsequent special confiscation, remedying damage suffered as a result of the crime and to guaranteeing the enforcement of a fine.
Precautionary measures taken with a view to remedying damage can be ordered in respect of property belonging to the accused or the person facing civil liability.
Precautionary measures taken with a view to guaranteeing the enforcement of a fine can be ordered in respect only of property belonging to the accused.
...”
“(1)  The authority that enforces the seizure (sechestru) must identify and value the property in question; it may, if need be, have recourse to experts.
(2)  Perishable goods, objects made of precious metal or jewels ... works of art ... and money which have been seized shall in all cases be taken away.
...
(9)  If there is a danger of alienation, the other movable items that have been seized will be sealed or also taken away, and a custodian can be appointed.”
“(1)  The body that carries out the seizure draws up an official report on all the acts performed under Section 165, including a detailed description of the property seized and specifying its value ... Objections to the seizure by the parties and other interested persons are also mentioned.
...”
“(1)  The defendant, the party with civil liability, as well as any other interested person, may complain about the precautionary measure and the means of its enforcement to the prosecutor or to the court at any stage in the proceedings.
(2)  An appeal can be lodged separately against the decision of a court. An appeal does not suspend execution.
(3)  If after completion of a criminal trial no complaint has been lodged against the enforcement of the precautionary measure, it may be challenged under the civil law.”
“(1)  Where prosecutors or courts finds that property taken from a defendant, or from any other person who received them in his or her custody, is the property of the victim or has been wrongly taken away from him/her, they order the return of those items to the victim. Any other person who claims a right over the confiscated property can ask under Article 168 for enforcement of that right and the return of the property.
(2)  Confiscated property is only returned if it does not impede the search for the truth and the just settlement of the case, and it imposes on the person to whom it is returned an obligation to retain it until the issuing of a final decision.”
The relevant parts of the Recommendation read as follows:
“...5.  [The Parliamentary Assembly] Considering that, from the moment of fertilization of the ovule, human life develops in a continuous pattern, and that it is not possible to make a clear-cut distinction during the first phases (embryonic) of its development, and that a definition of the biological status of an embryo is therefore necessary;
Aware that this progress has made the legal position of the embryo and foetus particularly precarious, and that their legal status is at present not defined by law;
Aware that adequate provisions governing the use of living or dead embryos and foetuses do not at present exist;
Convinced that, in view of scientific progress which makes it possible to intervene in developing human life from the moment of fertilisation, it is urgent to define the extent of its legal protection;
Having regard to the variety of ethical opinions on the question of using the embryo or the foetus or their tissues, and to the conflicts between values which arise;
Considering that human embryos and foetuses must be treated in all circumstances with the respect due to human dignity...”
In its relevant parts the Oviedo Convention reads as follows:
“The interests and welfare of the human being shall prevail over the sole interest of society or science.”
“1.  Where the law allows research on embryos in vitro, it shall ensure adequate protection of the embryo.
The creation of human embryos for research purposes is prohibited.”
“None of the provisions of this Convention shall be interpreted as limiting or otherwise affecting the possibility for a Party to grant a wider measure of protection with regard to the application of biology and medicine than is stipulated in this Convention.”
The relevant parts of Directive 2004/23/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 on setting standards for the quality and safety for the donation, procurement, testing, processing, preservation, storage and distribution of human tissues and cells provide as follows:
“(2)  The availability of human tissues and cells used for therapeutic purposes is dependent on Community citizens who are prepared to donate them. In order to safeguard public health and to prevent the transmission of infectious diseases by these tissues and cells, all safety measures need to be taken during their donation, procurement, testing, processing, preservation, storage, distribution and use.
...
(7)  This Directive should apply to tissues and cells including haematopoietic peripheral blood, umbilical-cord (blood) and bone-marrow stem cells, reproductive cells (eggs, sperm), foetal tissues and cells and adult and embryonic stem cells.
...
(13)  The donation, procurement, testing, processing, preservation, storage and distribution of human tissues and cells intended for human applications should comply with high standards of quality and safety in order to ensure a high level of health protection in the Community. This Directive should establish standards for each one of the steps in the human tissues and cells application process.
...
(16)  Tissues and cells used for allogeneic therapeutic purposes can be procured from both living and deceased donors. ...
(20)  Any establishment may also be accredited as a tissue and cell establishment, provided it complies with the standards.
...
(25)  An accreditation system for tissue establishments and a system for notification of adverse events and reactions linked to the procurement, testing, processing, preservation, storage and distribution of human tissues and cells should be established in the Member States.
...
(28)  An adequate system to ensure the traceability of human tissues and cells should be established. This would also make it possible to verify compliance with quality and safety standards. Traceability should be enforced through accurate substance, donor, recipient, tissue establishment and laboratory identification procedures as well as record maintenance and an appropriate labeling system.
...
Member States shall ensure that tissue and cell procurement and testing are carried out by persons with appropriate training and experience and that they take place in conditions accredited, designated, authorised or licensed for that purpose by the competent authority or authorities.
...
Member States shall ensure that all tissue establishments where activities of testing, processing, preservation, storage or distribution of human tissues and cells intended for human applications are undertaken have been accredited, designated, authorised or licensed by a competent authority for the purpose of those activities.
...
The competent authority or authorities may suspend or revoke the accreditation, designation, authorisation or licensing of a tissue establishment or of a tissue or cell preparation process if inspections or control measures demonstrate that such an establishment or process does not comply with the requirements of this Directive.
...
Member States shall ensure that all tissues and cells procured, processed, stored or distributed on their territory can be traced from the donor to the recipient and vice versa. This traceability shall also apply to all relevant data relating to products and materials coming into contact with these tissues and cells.
Member States shall ensure the implementation of a donor identification system which assigns a unique code to each donation and to each of the products associated with it.
All tissues and cells must be identified with a label that contains the information or references allowing a link to the information referred to in Article 28(f) and (h).
Tissue establishments shall keep the data necessary to ensure traceability at all stages.
...
Tissue establishments shall keep a record of their activities, including the types and quantities of tissues and/or cells procured, tested, preserved, processed, stored and distributed, or otherwise disposed of, and on the origin and destination of the tissues and cells intended for human applications, in accordance with the requirements referred to in Article 28(f). ...
The competent authority or authorities shall establish and maintain a publicly accessible register of tissue establishments specifying the activities for which they have been accredited, designated, authorised or licensed.
...
Member States shall endeavour to ensure voluntary and unpaid donations of tissues and cells.
Donors may receive compensation, which is strictly limited to making good the expenses and inconveniences related to the donation. In that case, Member States define the conditions under which compensation may be granted.
 ...
The procurement of human tissues or cells shall be authorised only after all mandatory consent or authorisation requirements in force in the Member State concerned have been met.
...
The activities related to tissue procurement shall be carried out in such a way as to ensure that donor evaluation and selection is carried out in accordance with the requirements referred to in Article 28(d) and (e) and that the tissues and cells are procured, packaged and transported in accordance with the requirements referred to in Article 28(f).
...
Member States shall take all necessary measures to ensure that each tissue establishment puts in place and updates a quality system based on the principles of good practice.
...
Tissue establishments shall take all necessary measures to ensure that the quality system includes at least the following documentation:
Tissue establishments shall take all necessary measures to ensure that this documentation is available for inspection by the competent authority or authorities.
Tissue establishments shall keep the data necessary to ensure traceability in accordance with Article 8.
Tissue establishments shall ensure that all donations of human tissues and cells are subjected to tests in accordance with the requirements referred to Article 28(e) and that the selection and acceptance of tissues and cells comply with the requirements referred to in Article 28(f).
...
Tissue establishments shall verify and record the fact that the packaging of human tissue and cells received complies with the requirements referred to in Article 28(f). All tissues and cells that do not comply with those provisions shall be discarded.
...
Tissue establishments shall ensure that human tissues and cells are correctly identified at all times. Each delivery or batch of tissues or cells shall be assigned an identifying code, in accordance with Article 8.
Tissue and cells shall be held in quarantine until such time as the requirements relating to donor testing and information have been met in accordance with Article 15.
Tissue establishments shall ensure that all procedures associated with the storage of tissues and cells are documented in the standard operating procedures and that the storage conditions comply with the requirements referred to in Article 28(h).
Tissue establishments shall ensure that all storage processes are carried out under controlled conditions.
Tissue establishments shall establish and apply procedures for the control of packaging and storage areas, in order to prevent any situation arising that might adversely affect the functioning or integrity of tissues and cells.
...
Member States shall ensure that tissue establishments have agreements and procedures in place to ensure that, in the event of termination of activities for whatever reason, stored tissues and cells shall be transferred to other tissue establishment or establishments accredited, designated, authorised or licensed in accordance with Article 6, without prejudice to Member States’ legislation concerning the disposal of donated tissues or cells, according to the consent pertaining to them.”
The relevant provisions of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (2007/C 303/01) are worded as follows:
“Human dignity is inviolable. It must be respected and protected.”
“Everyone has the right to respect for his or her private and family life, home and communications.”
In a judgment of 18 October 2011 (C-34/10 Oliver Brüstle v. Greenpeace e.V.) the Court of Justice of the European Union (“the CJEU”) clarified the legal definition of the “human embryo”: “any human ovum after fertilisation, any non-fertilised human ovum into which the cell nucleus from a mature human cell has been transplanted, and any non-fertilised human ovum whose division and further development have been stimulated by parthenogenesis”. The CJEU further ruled that Article 6(2)(c) of Directive 98/44 excluded an invention from patentability where the technical teaching which is the subject-matter of the patent application would require the prior destruction of the human embryo. The Advocate General Yves Bot recalled in his opinion delivered on 10 March 2011 on that matter that “Directive 98/44 prohibits the patentability of the human body, at the various stages of its formation and development, including germ cells” and asserted that “human dignity is a principle which must be applied not only to an existing human person, to a child who has been born, but also to the human body from the first stage in its development, i.e. from fertilisation” (§ 96).
The relevant parts of the Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights adopted by UNESCO’s General Conference on 19 October 2005 provide as follows:
“The General Conference,
...
Recognizing that, based on the freedom of science and research, scientific and technological developments have been, and can be, of great benefit to humankind in increasing, inter alia, life expectancy and improving the quality of life, and emphasizing that such developments should always seek to promote the welfare of individuals, families, groups or communities and humankind as a whole in the recognition of the dignity of the human person and universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms,
...
Also recognizing that decisions regarding ethical issues in medicine, life sciences and associated technologies may have an impact on individuals, families, groups or communities and humankind as a whole,
...
Proclaims the principles that follow and adopts the present Declaration.
...
Within the scope of this Declaration, in decisions or practices taken or carried out by those to whom it is addressed, the following principles are to be respected.
Human dignity, human rights and fundamental freedoms are to be fully respected.
The interests and welfare of the individual should have priority over the sole interest of science or society.
...”