The case originated in an application (no. 76760/12) against the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a British national, N.J.D.B. (“the applicant”), on 22 November 2012. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by Mr Andrew Smith QC, an advocate practicing in Edinburgh. The United Kingdom Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms I. Rao, of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the length of the child contact proceedings in his case resulted in a violation of his rights under Articles 6 § 1 and 8 of the Convention and that the refusal of legal aid to pursue an appeal to the Supreme Court violated his Article 6 § 1 rights.
On 2 September 2013 these complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Hertfordshire.
The applicant has a son, S., who was born in April 2000. The applicant was not married to the child’s mother, G., and the relationship ended a few months after S.’s birth. After the separation, S. continued to live with G. and the applicant maintained contact with him. On 17 August 2003 G. stopped the applicant’s contact with S.
In October 2003 the applicant instituted proceedings before Alloa Sheriff Court seeking parental rights and responsibilities and residence or, alternatively, residential contact.
In early July 2004 the applicant and G. agreed that the S. should reside with G. and that the applicant should have contact. The agreement was set out in a joint minute of agreement, on the basis of which the Sheriff Court, in an interlocutor dated 7 July 2004, granted the applicant parental rights and responsibilities in respect of S.; found that the applicant was entitled to residential and non-residential contact with S. on a basis and on dates specified in the interlocutor; and held that G. was to consult with the applicant when making decisions of importance with respect to the health, welfare, education and upbringing of S. The interlocutor did not provide for the dates upon which the regular contact was to begin or when during each four-week period it was to occur. It also failed to take into account pre-arranged holidays.
Because of the ambiguity in the interlocutor, the relationship between the applicant and G. quickly deteriorated. On 17 December 2004 the applicant lodged two minutes at the Sheriff Court: one to vary the July 2004 interlocutor by seeking a residence order in respect of S.; the other seeking a finding that G. was in contempt of court for breaching the July 2004 interlocutor. A curator ad litem was appointed by the Sheriff to represent S.’s interests.
The applicant was granted legal aid and was represented before the Sheriff Court by Mr Halley (counsel). The instructing solicitors were Jardine Donaldson.
Following a number of procedural hearings, a substantive hearing began on 9 September 2008 and concluded on 2 November 2009, after fifty-two non-consecutive court days.
The Sheriff’s decision on the application to vary the July 2004 interlocutor was issued on 22 January 2010. He considered that having regard to S.’s age, the history of the case and the influences at work on S., he would derive no benefit from contact in such circumstances. The Sheriff therefore concluded that there had been a material change in circumstances since the interlocutor of 7 July 2004; that it was in S.’s best interests that he did not have contact with his father; and that the interlocutor of 7 July 2004 required to be recalled.
The applicant appealed to the Inner House of the Court of Session. He contested the Sheriff’s decision and complained, inter alia, that the action had not been concluded within a reasonable time.
The applicant was granted legal aid to pursue his appeal. He was represented before the Inner House by Mr Andrew Smith QC and Mr Halley (counsel). The instructing solicitors were Drummond Miller LLP, for Jardine Donaldson.
The Inner House delivered its judgment on 22 October 2010. It did not uphold the applicant’s appeal. However, it varied the January 2010 interlocutor to make it clear that it in turn only varied the July 2004 interlocutor in respect of contact but did not make any change to the finding that the applicant enjoyed parental rights and that he had to be consulted on matters concerning S.’s health, welfare, education and upbringing.
In November 2010 a note was prepared by counsel supporting an application for legal aid to pursue an appeal to the Supreme Court. On 2 December 2010 a full application for legal aid was submitted to the Scottish Legal Aid Board, with counsel’s note in support. Shortly afterwards an appeal to the Supreme Court was lodged and the appeal process was suspended pending the determination of the legal aid application.
The curator ad litem objected to legal aid being granted to the applicant. The applicant responded to the observations of the curator ad litem.
By January 2011 the legal aid application had not yet been determined. The applicant expressed concern about the delay and the impact it would have on his chances of contact being re-established with S. He was told that there would be no meeting of the committee charged with making the legal aid decision until 7 March 2011.
On 5 April 2011 the Scottish Legal Aid Board intimated its refusal of legal aid to the applicant. On 6 April 2011 the applicant lodged an application for internal review.
On 5 July 2011, after reconsideration, the Board again refused legal aid. It found that there was no substantive issue of law arising to merit an appeal and that no practical benefit to the applicant could ensue.
On 22 July 2011 the applicant’s counsel and solicitors considered commencing judicial review proceedings in respect of the refusal to grant legal aid. It was decided on the applicant’s behalf that, as the delay involved in judicial review was likely to be extensive and given that legal aid for judicial review proceedings would almost certainly not be granted, no judicial review proceedings would be commenced. Counsel and the solicitors were not prepared to act pro bono in judicial review proceedings since the prospects of success would be low. However, they agreed to act pro bono in pursuing the appeal before the Supreme Court without legal aid. The Supreme Court waived its fees in respect of the appeal.
The applicant was represented before the Supreme Court by Mr Andrew Smith QC and Mr Halley. The instructing solicitors were Jardine Donaldson.
On 23 May 2012 the court handed down its judgment. It refused to uphold the applicant’s appeal.
Section 1 of the Children (Scotland) 1995 Act (“the 1995 Act”) provides that a parent has “parental responsibilities” in relation to his child. To enable parents to fulfil their responsibilities, section 2 bestows upon them “parental rights”, including the right: (a) to have the child living with him or otherwise to regulate the child’s residence; (b) to control, direct or guide, in a manner appropriate to the stage of development of the child, the child’s upbringing; (c) if the child is not living with him, to maintain personal relations and direct contact with the child on a regular basis; and (d) to act as the child’s legal representative.
Under section 11(1) of the 1995 Act the court may make orders relating to parental responsibilities and rights. Section 11(7) provides:
“... [I]n considering whether or not to make an order under subsection (1) above and what order to make, the court—
(a) shall regard the welfare of the child concerned as its paramount consideration and shall not make any such order unless it considers that it would be better for the child that the order be made than that none should be made at all; and
(b) taking account of the child’s age and maturity, shall so far as practicable—
(i) give him an opportunity to indicate whether he wishes to express his views;
(ii) if he does so wish, give him an opportunity to express them; and
(iii) have regard to such views as he may express.”
The Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 1986 (“the 1986 Act”) makes provisions for legal aid in Scotland and established the Scottish Legal Aid Board. Pursuant to section 1 of the Act, the Board has the general functions of ensuring that legal aid is available in accordance with the Act and administering the legal aid fund.
Section 13 provides that civil legal aid is available in relation to civil proceedings in, inter alia, the Sheriff Court, the Court of Session and the Supreme Court. Sections 14 and 15 provide that, subject to financial eligibility conditions, civil legal aid is to be available to a person if the Board is satisfied that he has a probabilis causa litigandi (i.e. sufficient grounds for commencing legal action) and it appears to the Board that it is reasonable in the particular circumstances of the case that he should receive legal aid.
It is possible to seek judicial review of a decision of the Board and to apply for legal aid funding for the judicial review proceedings. Section 14(4) of the 1986 Act provides that where the Board has refused an application for civil legal aid sought for the purposes of raising an action against the Board, and the applicant has applied to the Board for a review of the application, then the Board must, unless it decides to grant the application forthwith, refer the application to the Sheriff for Lothian and Borders at Edinburgh.
In McAllister, Petitioner [2010] CSOH 112, the petitioner lodged a petition of judicial review of the Board decision refusing legal aid for the employment of junior counsel in a criminal trial before the Sheriff Court. The Court of Session upheld the petition and ordered the Board to reconsider the application for legal aid.
In EM, Petitioner [2011] CSOH 134, the petitioner contested a decision of the Board to refuse an increase in authorised expenditure for the purposes of instructing a parenting assessment report in child care proceedings. On an unknown date in late 2009/early 2010 she lodged an application for legal aid to seek judicial review of the refusal. Her application was refused. On 29 January 2010 she sought a review of the decision and on 19 May 2010 the matter was referred to the Sheriff Principal of Lothian and Borders. On 26 October 2010 he indicated that legal aid should be granted for the purpose of allowing the petitioner to obtain counsel’s advice as to the prospects of success of judicial review proceedings against the Board. A legal aid certificate was subsequently issued for judicial review proceedings. In the judicial review proceedings, on 19 August 2011 the Court of Session quashed the Board’s decisions refusing legal aid. Drummond Miller LLP acted as instructing solicitors for the petitioner in the case before the Court of Session.
In McGeoch, Petitioner [2013] CSOH 6, the petitioner sought judicial review of the refusal of the Board to award civil legal aid to enable him to challenge a refusal to include his name on the electoral register. His petition was partially successful.
Section 3(1) of the Human Rights Act 1998 (“the Human Rights Act”) requires legislation to be “read down” so far as possible in order to be interpreted compatibly with the Convention.
Section 6(1) of the Act provides that it is unlawful for a public authority to act in a way which is incompatible with a Convention right.
Section 7(1) provides that a person who claims that a public authority has acted in a way made unlawful by section 6(1) may bring proceedings against the authority.