The applicants were found guilty of misdemeanours in separate sets of proceedings for not having the proper documents for the lumber that they had been transporting in their lorries. In addition to a fine, their lorries were confiscated in those proceedings, which allegedly violated their right to the peaceful enjoyment of their possessions, as protected under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
The applicants were born in 1968 and 1965 and live in Veles and Demir Hisar respectively. They were represented by Mr O. Gashev and Mr T. Torov, lawyers practising in Veles and Shtip respectively. The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms D. Djonova.
The facts of the cases, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant, Mr Anev, owned two lorries which he used to transport lumber. On 7 August 2013 he was stopped by the police, who summoned the forestry police. The forestry police determined that the information in the permit (испратница) for the transport of lumber presented by the applicant did not match the stamp (жиг) on the lumber and the vehicle. As a result, misdemeanour proceedings were instituted against him before the Veles Court of First Instance (Основен суд Велес) for not having a valid permit for the transport of lumber. The applicant’s lorry, along with the lumber that he was transporting, was temporarily seized.
On 16 January 2014 the court found Mr Anev guilty of “transporting lumber without a proper stamp or permit”, a misdemeanour provided for in section 104(1)11 of the Forests Act. He was fined 3,000 euros (EUR). By the same decision the applicant’s lorry and the lumber were confiscated in accordance with section 104(3) of that Act and section 105 of the Misdemeanours Act (see paragraphs 12 and 14 below).
His subsequent appeal challenging the fine and confiscation order as unlawful and excessive was dismissed by the Skopje Court of Appeal (Апелационен суд Скопје), which upheld the lower court’s judgment in full (finding that confiscation of the lorry and the lumber had been mandatory for the offence in question).
The applicant, Mr Najdovski, worked as a private transporter. He owned the lorry he used to transport lumber, which was registered in his name.
On 1 July 2014 he obtained a permit to transport some lumber. The permit specified that he had to transport the lumber between 11 a.m. and 5 p.m. on the same day, using his lorry.
He claims that he began transporting the lumber within the period specified in the permit but that his lorry broke down. He then parked it by the side of a road and left it there. The following morning he was stopped by the forestry police, who checked his permit and determined that it had expired in the meantime. As a result, his lorry and the lumber were temporarily seized and misdemeanour proceedings against him were initiated before the Bitola Court of First Instance (Основен суд Битола).
On 18 September 2014 the court found the applicant guilty of “transporting lumber without a proper stamp or permit” (see paragraph 4 above). It held that he had been stopped by the forestry police while transporting the lumber on 2 July 2014 outside the time frame specified in the permit. He was fined EUR 2,400. By the same decision the court confiscated the applicant’s lorry and the lumber in accordance with section 104(3) of the Forests Act and sections 41 and 105 of the Misdemeanours Act (see paragraphs 12-14 above).
The applicant’s subsequent appeal challenging the fine and confiscation order was dismissed on 5 November 2014 by the Bitola Court of Appeal (Апелационен суд Битола), which upheld the lower court’s findings in full.
Section 104(1)11 of the Act provides that anyone found to be transporting lumber without a proper stamp or permit will be issued with a fine of between EUR 3,500 and EUR 4,000.
Section 104(3) of the Act provides that in cases of offences defined in section 104(1) the domestic courts are to order the confiscation of any objects used in the commission of the offence, as well as the lumber, in addition to the fine.
Section 41 of the Misdemeanours Act specifies that in cases involving the confiscation of goods in misdemeanour proceedings, the courts are to refer to sections 97 to 100-A of the Criminal Code.
Under section 105 of the Misdemeanours Act, after completion of proceedings temporarily seized objects are to be confiscated in accordance with the Criminal Proceedings Act.
Section 100-A of the Criminal Code specifies that objects which were used, or were intended to be used, to commit an offence will be confiscated from the offender if the interests of general security, the health of other persons or reasons of morality so require.