The case originated in an application (no. 12686/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Greek national, Mrs Anthi Gorou (“the applicant”), on 23 January 2003.
The applicant was represented by Mr H. Mylonas, a lawyer practising in . The Greek Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent’s delegates, Mr K. Georgiadis, Adviser at the State Legal Council, and Mr I. Bakopoulos, Legal Assistant at the State Legal Council.
The applicant’s complaint concerned, in particular, under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, the fairness and length of proceedings that she had initiated by filing a criminal complaint.
By a decision of 14 February 2006 the Chamber declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant is a public servant in the Ministry of National Education. On 2 June 1998 she filed a criminal complaint for perjury and defamation against S.M., with an application to join the proceedings as a civil party, but without seeking reparation. S.M., a public servant in the same ministry, is the applicant’s immediate superior. She alleged in particular that, in connection with an administrative investigation opened against her, S.M. had stated that she did not observe working hours and did not get on well with her colleagues.
On 26 September 2001, when the case was heard before the Athens Criminal Court, the applicant reiterated her civil-party application and adduced her arguments. On the same day, the Athens Criminal Court acquitted S.M. of the charges laid against him, finding that the applicant’s allegations were unsubstantiated. In particular, after examining all the evidence, the court considered that the offending remarks had been truthful and that it had not been the intention of the accused to defame or insult the applicant (judgment no. 74941/2001).
On 5 August 2002 this judgment was finalised and entered in the register of the Criminal Court.
On 24 September 2002 the applicant requested State Counsel at the Court of Cassation to lodge an appeal on points of law against judgment no. 74941/2001 of the Athens Criminal Court. She alleged, in particular, that the judgment did not contain sufficient reasoning.
On 27 September 2002 the applicant’s request was dismissed by State Counsel at the Court of Cassation, who endorsed the application itself with the handwritten comment: “there is no legal or well-founded ground of appeal to the Court of Cassation”.
The Code of Criminal Procedure contains the following relevant provisions:
Article 139
“Judgments, orders of the chamber of judges, and orders of the investigating judge or of the public prosecutor shall give specific and precise reasons ...
...
Even where it is not required by a specific provision, all judgments and orders shall include reasoning, whether they are final or interlocutory and whether or not they depend on the discretion of the judge hearing the case.”
Article 505 § 2
“State Counsel at the Court of Cassation shall be entitled to appeal on points of law against any decision within the time-limit provided for in Article 479 § 2 ...”