The case originated in two applications (nos. 15018/11 and 61199/12) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Bulgarian nationals, Mr Mitko Georgiev Harakchiev and Mr Lyudvik Slavov Tolumov (“the applicants”), on 22 February 2011 and 11 September 2012 respectively.
The applicants were represented by Mr M. Ekimdzhiev and Ms S. Stefanova, lawyers practising in Plovdiv. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Ms I. Stancheva-Chinova and Ms K. Radkova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that Mr Harakchiev’s whole life sentence (доживотен затвор без замяна) amounted to inhuman and degrading punishment, that the regime and material conditions of their detention amounted to torture or inhuman and degrading treatment, and that they did not have an effective domestic remedy in respect of the material conditions of their detention.
On 19 February 2013 the Court decided to join the applications, declare them partly inadmissible and give the Government notice of the complaints concerning (a) Mr Harakchiev’s sentence to whole life imprisonment; (b) the regime and conditions of the applicants’ detention; (c) the alleged monitoring of Mr Tolumov’s correspondence in prison; and (d) the alleged lack of an effective domestic remedy in respect of the material conditions of the applicants’ detention.
On 17 July 2013 the Court invited the parties to deal with an additional point in their respective observations.
The applicant in the first application (no. 15018/11), Mr Harakchiev, was born in 1968. He is currently serving a whole life sentence (see paragraphs 58-60 and 65 below) in Stara Zagora Prison.
The applicant in the second application (no. 61199/12), Mr Tolumov, was born in 1954. He is currently serving a life sentence (see paragraphs 56 and 65 below) in Plovdiv Prison.
Between 1992 and 2005 Mr Harakchiev, a driver and car mechanic, was convicted eight times of non-violent offences: theft and aggravated theft (four convictions), and fraud and aggravated fraud (three convictions). He was given sentences ranging from two to five years’ imprisonment.
On 21 January 2003 the Haskovo Regional Court convicted Mr Harakchiev of illegal possession of a firearm and four armed robberies of motor vehicles carried out between 14 October and 6 November 2001, two of which had been accompanied by attempted murder and two by murder. It sentenced him to whole life imprisonment.
On 26 June 2003 the Plovdiv Court of Appeal upheld Mr Harakchiev’s conviction and sentence.
In a final judgment of 23 November 2004 (реш. № 476 от 23 ноември 2004 г. по н. д. № 901/2003 г., ВКС, ІІІ н. о.) the Supreme Court of Cassation likewise upheld Mr Harakchiev’s conviction and sentence. It held, inter alia, that in view of the gravity of his offences – in particular, the determination and cruelty with which they had been carried out – a more lenient sentence, such as life imprisonment (доживотен затвор със замяна), would not be adequate. That conclusion could not be altered by the fact that Mr Harakchiev had confessed and had helped the investigating authorities to uncover his criminal activities.
Mr Harakchiev has been detained in Stara Zagora Prison since 18 January 2002. He was initially placed under the “enhanced regime” (see paragraph 115 below). With the entry into force of the Execution of Punishments and Pre-Trial Detention Act on 1 June 2009, that regime was replaced by the “severe regime” (see paragraph 118 below) by operation of law. On 17 June 2009 the Execution of Punishments Commission (see paragraph 121 below) proposed that the Stara Zagora Regional Court place Mr Harakchiev under the “special regime” normally applicable to life prisoners, citing his “negative attitude” and lack of respect for internal order, as well as the fact that he should in any case have been placed under that regime from the outset. On 21 July 2009 the Stara Zagora Regional Court accepted the proposal. Mr Harakchiev’s legal challenge against that decision, filed on 12 July 2010, was rejected by the Stara Zagora Regional Court and the Plovdiv Court of Appeal as being out of time. The Government submitted that there was at present no intention on the part of the prison authorities to make further changes to Mr Harakchiev’s prison regime.
Between December 2005 and March 2013 Mr Harakchiev was given nine disciplinary punishments. The latest such punishments, in August 2012 and March 2013, were imposed in relation to (a) a scuffle between himself and another inmate during the daily walk on the morning of 4 August 2012, and (b) the theft on 18 February 2013 of food that another inmate had left in the communal toilet. In relation to the former, Mr Harakchiev was given a reprimand, and in relation to the latter isolation in a disciplinary cell for three days.
Mr Harakchiev’s cell – in which he is currently alone but which he apparently shared with another inmate between 2002 and 2007 – is in the prison’s high-security wing, reserved for life prisoners. According to Mr Harakchiev, the cell was quite small, especially bearing in mind that the furniture alone occupied 4.50 square metres, and was lit at night by a 60watt incandescent light bulb that was constantly on. According to the Government, the cell was not undersized. It measured 4.30 by 1.81 metres and was 3.95 metres high, with a total floor space of 7.78 square metres. It was furnished with a metal locker, a double metal bunk bed, two stools and a small table, all of which were attached to the floor for security reasons. It had a window, facing south, that measured 1.76 by 1.25 metres. Artificial lighting in the cell consisted of two 36-watt luminescent light bulbs. According to Mr Harakchiev, the incandescent bulbs had only been replaced with luminescent bulbs in 2012. He also pointed out that the cell did not have any low-intensity night lighting.
Stara Zagora Prison does not have a ventilation or airconditioning system. Mr Harakchiev claimed that as a result temperatures in his cell were very high in summer and there was no fresh air. In winter, heating was only turned on for periods of one hour in the morning, at noon and in the evening. According to the Government, the cell window could be opened, which allowed the cell to be aired at any time. The prison had its own heating installation with two boilers and a heat exchanger. The boilers were fired for nine hours a day, but the water that they heated circulated in the heating installation permanently. According to Mr Harakchiev, the radiator in his cell was hot for only thirty minutes each day and the poor state of repair of the cell window and the metal door were factors contributing to the low temperature in the cell in winter. Mr Harakchiev also submitted that as he had to dry his clothes in the cell, it was very damp. As a result, the paint and rendering were peeling off the walls.
According to Mr Harakchiev, the common areas of the prison could only be kept clean by bleaching with calcium hypochlorite, and the cells were only cleaned with water. In support of that assertion, Mr Harakchiev relied on the witness statement of one of his co-inmates made in the course of proceedings brought by him. According to the Government, the common areas of the prison were not merely cleaned with bleach. They were cleaned daily with detergents, and at least twice a year subjected to pest and rat control, as evident from fourteen invoices for such services carried out during the last four years. Mr Harakchiev replied that those invoices did not prove that the detergents had indeed been used as alleged by the Government. He also submitted that his cell was constantly infested with cockroaches and mice, and that all his complaints to the prison administration in that respect had gone unheeded. He submitted further that, since the window of his cell was not covered with a net, insects came into the cell all the time, drawn by the smell of excrement and the constant lighting at night, and bit him.
There is no toilet or running water in the cell. Mr Harakchiev submitted that as a result, apart from the three daily visits to the communal toilets, he had to use a plastic bucket to relieve himself. During the period he had had to share his cell with another inmate, he had had to do so in his presence. The lack of running water prevented him from washing his hands or the bucket after relieving himself. The Government pointed out that the toilet and bathroom in the high-security unit were accessible to inmates three times a day, and also whenever they asked the guards. It could not therefore be said that Mr Harakchiev was forced to use the bucket to relieve himself; that was his own choice. In fact he had more than ten buckets in his cell, in which he stored clothes, laundry and other items. Mr Harakchiev replied that, apart from the three daily visits to the toilet, between 5.30 a.m. and 8 p.m. the guards never opened his cell to let him visit the toilet. It was therefore not his choice to resort to the bucket for his sanitary needs.
Apart from his one-hour daily walk, Mr Harakchiev can leave his cell to visit the toilet three times a day. During each of those visits, he can also empty the bucket, wash his hands, and fill plastic bottles with water for drinking and sanitary needs. According to him, the visits to the toilet lasted no more than three minutes in the morning and no more than ten minutes at lunch and in the evening, and did not coincide with the visits of the other inmates in the unit.
According to Mr Harakchiev, inmates in Stara Zagora Prison could only take a shower once every fourteen or fifteen days. According to the Government, all inmates in the prison’s high-security unit could take a shower twice a week.
According to Mr Harakchiev, visits by relatives or lawyers took place in a special room. Prisoners and visitors were separated by a wire net, and prisoners had to remain seated. A prison officer was always present. According to the Government, the prison officer present during visits was only there to ensure good order and could not overhear conversations. Visits by lawyers took place in a separate room, in which no other person was present. The only form of control there was visual monitoring. In that context, the Government drew attention to the fact that as a result of the many claims that he had brought against the prison authorities, until mid2009 Mr Harakchiev had spent 97 days outside Stara Zagora Prison, and between 1 January 2010 and 18 May 2012 had spent 255 days, or 54% of the time, outside the prison.
According to Mr Harakchiev, food in the prison was poorly prepared, of low quality, tasteless, served cold and in unhygienic conditions, and insufficient in quantity. Meat was served once a week. The rest of the time food consisted of beans, lentils, cabbage and potatoes, served as soups or stews. According to the Government, the quantity and the chemical and calorie content of the food were fully adequate. The daily portions comprised 2,662 calories, and there was meat in the meals at least once a day. Mr Harakchiev replied that “meat” in effect meant boiled bones or canned meat. Both parties submitted menus and tables in support of their respective assertions.
According to Mr Harakchiev, medical care in Stara Zagora Prison consisted of routinely giving all inmates aspirin or Analgin, and inmates had to purchase all other medicines themselves. According to the Government, the prison’s medical centre was staffed by a general practitioner, three feldshers (paramedics – one for the main prison building and one for each of the two separate prison hostels), a nurse, a psychiatrist and a dentist. Medical examinations were carried out daily, and in cases of emergency inmates could be taken to the emergency ward of Stara Zagora Hospital. Medical examinations in the high-security unit were normally carried out on Fridays. Inmates could also consult outside specialists, or be treated in the prison hospitals in Sofia and Lovech. Medicines were normally provided by the prison medical centre, or could be obtained from outside the prison. The only medicine that Mr Harakchiev had had to obtain himself, because the centre had not had any in stock, had been Rivotril (clonazepam), at a unit cost of 7.31 Bulgarian levs (BGN). Mr Harakchiev replied, without giving further details, that he routinely had to purchase medicines himself. He also submitted that his dental care had consisted merely in extracting teeth; in spite of the obvious need to provide him with dental prostheses, the prison authorities had failed to take any action in that respect. The Government replied that dental prostheses did not form part of the standard medical cover for any health-insured person in Bulgaria, and could not be obtained free of charge.
The Government also asserted that Mr Harakchiev could see the social inspector in charge of his unit daily; he could ask to see a psychologist, the prison governor or deputy governor, the prison legal officer, or another member of the prison staff; he could socialise with other inmates of the same category during his daily walk and during meal times; and he had access to cable television, with fifty channels, to the prison library, and to religious services. For his part, Mr Harakchiev submitted that, in spite of having expressed his desire to do so, he had not been given any opportunity to work or take part in sport, cultural or educational activities. In reply, the Government stated that in November 2006 Mr Harakchiev had been allowed to take part in a yoga course in order to reduce his stress levels.
The annual psychological assessments of Mr Harakchiev for 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2013, submitted by the Government, are very similar. All of them say, often using the same language, that his conduct was characterised by the “campaign that he ha[d] mounted” against the institutions and prison officials with whom he had had contact, which chiefly consisted in his bringing various legal challenges and in inciting other prisoners to give “false evidence” in his favour. Dialogue with him was very difficult, chiefly because of his lack of respect for authority, acute awareness of his own rights, stubbornness, and tendency to call the officials concerned to give evidence in the cases that he was bringing against the prison authorities. The risk of serious harm was high in view of his personality, the nature of his offences and the rigidity of his conduct. He had been verbally aggressive to prison staff.
Since his incarceration in 2002 Mr Harakchiev has brought a number of claims for damages against the authorities under section 1 of the State and Municipalities Liability for Damage Act 1988 (see paragraph 136 below).
In a final judgment of 12 February 2009 (реш. № 1993 от 12 февруари 2009 г. по адм. д. № 9586/2008 г., ВАС, III о.) the Supreme Administrative Court dismissed a claim for damages brought by Mr Harakchiev under that provision in relation to the failure of the prison administration to provide him with newspapers. The court held that Mr Harakchiev had not proved that he had suffered any non-pecuniary damage as a result of that failure.
In a final judgment of 26 May 2009 (реш. № 6892 от 26 май 2009 г. по адм. д. № 14849/2008 г., ВАС, III о.) the Supreme Administrative Court dismissed a claim for damages brought by Mr Harakchiev under the above-mentioned provision in relation to a failure by the prison administration to organise his daily walk in such a way as to compensate him for one he had previously missed on account of bad weather. The court – overturning the lower court’s ruling on that point – held that Mr Harakchiev had failed to establish that he had suffered any non-pecuniary damage; he could not simply be assumed to have sustained damage on the basis of the prison administration’s failure to organise a daily walk.
In a final judgment of 18 January 2010 (реш. № 695 от 18 януари 2010 г. по адм. д. № 8404/2009 г., ВАС, ІІІ о.) the Supreme Administrative Court dismissed a claim for damages brought by Mr Harakchiev under the above-mentioned provision in relation to the refusal of the prison administration to allow him to watch films in the prison’s video-projection room. The court held that that would have been incompatible with the requirement, imposed by the “special regime” under which Mr Harakchiev was serving his sentence (see paragraphs 115 and 118 below), that he remain isolated in a locked cell at all times. The prison administration’s refusal had therefore not been unlawful.
In a final judgment of 9 November 2010 (реш. № 13333 от 9 ноември 2010 г. по адм. д. № 6668/2009 г., ВАС, III о.) the Supreme Administrative Court allowed a claim for damages brought by Mr Harakchiev under the above-mentioned provision in relation to the failure of the prison administration, for about five years, to provide him with shoes free of charge, as required by statute. Relying on Article 3 of the Convention, the court held that that failure had humiliated Mr Harakchiev and had diminished his human dignity. The court went on to say that Mr Harakchiev’s feelings of humiliation had been exacerbated as a result of his solitary confinement, and awarded him BGN 3,000 (the equivalent of 1,533.88 euros (EUR)), plus interest.
On 27 October 2009 Mr Harakchiev brought nine claims for damages against the Ministry of Justice and nine identical claims for damages against the Chief Directorate for the Execution of Sentences, which is a unit within that Ministry. He considered that the Ministry bore responsibility for all acts and omissions relating to his imprisonment before 1 June 2009, the date of entry into force of the Execution of Punishments and Pre-Trial Detention Act of 2009 (see paragraph 117 below), and that the Chief Directorate bore responsibility for all acts and omissions relating to his imprisonment after that date.
In a judgment of 21 December 2010 (реш. № 370 от 21 декември 2010 г. по адм. д. № 564/2010 г., АС-Стара Загора) the Stara Zagora Administrative Court, having carried out an inspection on the spot, allowed Mr Harakchiev’s claims against the Ministry of Justice and the Chief Directorate for the Execution of Sentences in relation to (a) the material conditions of his detention; (b) the failure of the prison administration to provide him with clothing, shoes and bed linen; (c) the failure of the prison administration to put in place conditions in which he could keep in good physical shape; and (d) the failure of the prison administration to enable him to take his outdoor exercise. The court dismissed the remaining claims, which concerned (a) the failure of the prison administration to provide Mr Harakchiev with toiletries; (b) the quality and quantity of the food that had been provided to him; (c) the failure of the prison administration to provide him with dental prostheses; (d) the failure of the prison administration to provide him with conditions allowing him to keep his mental health intact; and (e) the failure of the prison administration to provide him with work. The court awarded Mr Harakchiev a total of BGN 8,200 (the equivalent of EUR 4,192.59). It held, in particular, that the conditions of his detention had been in breach of Article 3 of the Convention and that he had accordingly suffered non-pecuniary damage. However, the court also held that the claim relating to the material conditions of detention was time-barred on the ground that it related to a period of time that predated the claim by five years.
In its findings of fact the court noted, inter alia, that under the regime in the ward where Mr Harakchiev was being detained, he had to spend about twenty-three hours in his cell and could only leave it during his daily walk and three visits to the toilet. He was not allowed to go to the prison canteen or library. His cell was adequate in size for one prisoner, but too small for two, and did not have a toilet or running water. As result, outside toilet times, Mr Harakchiev had to use a bucket. In winter the cell was too cold owing to inadequate heating, and in summer full of insects as a result of the lack of a window net. The cell was infested with cockroaches, moles and even rats, and there was no indication that the prison administration had disinfested it regularly. When the cell was locked, the only way to call the guards was to bang continuously on the metal door; the guards did not always respond, especially at night. Mr Harakchiev did not have adequate materials with which to clean his cell, and evidence of the provision of cleaning products was inconclusive. It was undisputed that the prison administration had not provided him with work; that had indeed been very difficult in view of the limitations imposed by his prison regime. Social work with all life prisoners had been very restricted, consisting essentially of meetings whenever a problem occurred. Relations between Mr Harakchiev and the prison social worker assigned to deal with him were difficult, and their meetings rare. The prison psychologist had met with Mr Harakchiev several times, but had stopped the meetings because he was displeased that they were taking place in the presence of a guard.
Mr Harakchiev, the Ministry of Justice and the Chief Directorate for the Execution of Sentences all appealed. However, as Mr Harakchiev had failed to pay the requisite court fee, the Supreme Administrative Court refused to examine his appeal (see опр. № 8931 от 21 юни 2011 г. по адм. д. № 5865/2011 г. ВАС, ІІІ о., upheld by опр. № 14723 от 14 ноември 2011 г. по адм. д. № 10633/2011 г., ВАС, петчл. с-в). As a result, the only part of the case that remained pending were the claims concerning the material conditions of Mr Harakchiev’s detention and the failure of the prison administration to provide him with clothing, shoes and bed linen.
In a judgment of 8 January 2013 (реш. № 179 от 8 януари 2013 г. по адм. д. № 5865/2011 г., ВАС, ІІІ о.) the Supreme Administrative Court quashed the lower court’s judgment in the part still under appeal and remitted the case to the lower court. It held that the lower court had failed to address in sufficient depth the conflicting witness statements of inmates on the one hand, and prison staff on the other hand, and analyse them in the light of the voluminous written evidence in the case. It had also failed to subject the expert report that it had obtained in the course of the proceedings to proper scrutiny, and had uncritically accepted it as correct.
In a judgment of 5 April 2013 (реш. № 38 от 5 април 2013 г. по адм. д. № 17/2013 г., АС-Стара Загора) the Stara Zagora Administrative Court found that the claims against the Ministry, which concerned the period before 1 June 2009, following which the 2009 Act had come into force, were inadmissible, but that the claims against the Chief Directorate for the Execution of Sentences, which concerned the period after that date, were admissible and, when analysed by reference to, inter alia, Article 3 of the Convention and this Court’s case-law under that provision, well-founded. It awarded Mr Harakchiev BGN 400 (EUR 204.52). The court found that Mr Harakchiev’s cell did not have ventilation and was damp, and that the cell window was not equipped with an insectproof net. In winter the cell was cold owing to the lack of adequate heating, and in summer too hot. The court went on to note that the cell did not have a toilet or running water, and that access to the communal toilets was very restrictive, with no real possibility to use them outside the three brief daily visits. It also observed that, in spite of the efforts of the prison authorities, the prison was infested with cockroaches and rats; that the authorities were not providing Mr Harakchiev with adequate cleaning products; and that the furniture in the cell was old and worn. It was true that work had been carried out in the cell in 2001 and then in 2005-06, but that had only consisted in repainting it.
Mr Harakchiev and the Chief Directorate for the Execution of Sentences appealed. The proceedings on appeal (адм. д. № 9946/2013 г.) are still pending before the Supreme Administrative Court. A hearing was due to be held on 24 February 2014, but the case was adjourned sine die on account of the failure of Mr Harakchiev’s court-appointed counsel to appear.
As can be seen from the documents in the case file, Mr Tolumov, a driver by profession, had four previous convictions and had spent a year and a half in prison in 1988. In 2000 he was convicted on a charge of armed robbery accompanied by murder and a further charge of murder and sentenced to life imprisonment.
Mr Tolumov was placed in Plovdiv Prison on 29 December 2000. In September 2005, when his life sentence imprisonment apparently became final, he was placed under the “enhanced regime” (see paragraph 115 below). With the entry into force of the Execution of Punishments and PreTrial Detention Act of 2009 on 1 June 2009, that regime was replaced with the “special regime” (see paragraph 118 below) by operation of law. On 11 February 2013 the competent Execution of Punishments Commission decided to change Mr Tolumov’s regime from “special” to “severe”. However, according to Mr Tolumov and an affidavit of another life prisoner detained in the same unit, he continues to be kept locked in his cell and is handcuffed whenever he is taken out of the highsecurity unit.
During his stay in prison, Mr Tolumov has been given four disciplinary punishments, the latest of which was in 2009. One of those punishments, imposed in in 2000 or 2001, was isolation in a disciplinary cell for seven days for his involvement in a scuffle with another prisoner. He was, on the other hand, given rewards for good conduct on a number of occasions.
In Plovdiv Prison Mr Tolumov has spent time in cells nos. 4, 9 and 7 in the prison’s high-security unit, situated on the first floor. He submitted that during unspecified periods of time he had had to share those cells with other inmates. The Government submitted that cell no. 7, in which Mr Tolumov was now being detained, was 7.5 square metres in size, and that Mr Tolumov was alone in it. According to the Government, the cell had a window measuring 1.15 x 0.97 metres. Artificial lighting was provided by a 100-watt incandescent light bulb, which was not on during the day and was turned off at 10 p.m. According to Mr Tolumov, the light bulb was very dim, installed behind a grille, and on all the time.
Mr Tolumov’s cell is furnished with a plank bed, two small cabinets, a table, which is fixed to the floor, and a stool, also fixed to the floor. Mr Tolumov submitted that humidity from the communal bathroom, which was adjacent to the cell, penetrated the walls and the floor and produced mould on one of the walls. An additional factor that increased dampness in the cell was the need to dry clothes in it. The Government submitted that the cell adjoined the part of the bathroom which contained the sinks and did not generate humidity; it was therefore impossible for mould to appear on the cell walls. According to an affidavit drawn up by one of Mr Tolumov’s fellow inmates in August 2013, humidity was indeed permeating the walls of the bathroom, and for that reason in June 2013 the prison authorities had had the gaps between the bathroom tiles filled in, unfortunately to little effect.
Plovdiv Prison does not have a ventilation or air-conditioning system. Mr Tolumov claimed that as a result temperatures in his cell were very high in summer and there was no fresh air. In winter, heating was inadequate. The Government pointed out the cell window could be opened, and that Mr Tolumov had a ventilator. As for heating, the prison had its own heating installation, which was normally turned on between 6 a.m. and 9 p.m., and permanently on colder days.
None of the cells in which Mr Tolumov was detained had a toilet or running water. Mr Tolumov submitted that as a result, apart from the daily visits to the communal toilets, he had to use a plastic bucket to relieve himself. During the period he had had to share his cell with another inmate, he had had to relieve himself in his presence. The lack of running water prevented him from washing his hands or the bucket after relieving himself. The Government submitted that the communal toilet and bathroom in the high-security unit were accessible to Mr Tolumov four times a day, and also whenever he asked the guards.
Mr Tolumov submitted that on any given day he could leave his cell once for his one-hour daily walk and three more times, for thirty minutes, to visit the toilet. Mr Tolumov also submitted that he took his meals in his cell. The Government submitted that all prisoners in the high-security unit could leave their cells once for their daily walk, and in addition four times a day, for forty-five minutes each time, for meals and visits to the toilet. According to an affidavit drawn up by one of Mr Tolumov’s fellow inmates in August 2013, the practice of allowing inmates in the high-security unit to visit the toilet four times a day instead of three had been introduced very recently. According to a document produced by the Government, since the end of January 2013 Mr Tolumov could also visit the prison gymnasium three times a week: between 3 p.m. and 4 p.m. on Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. Mr Tolumov submitted that each time he was taken out of the prison’s high-security unit he was handcuffed. The Government submitted that he was only handcuffed when taken out of the prison for transfers.
According to Mr Tolumov, the food in prison was poorly prepared, of low quality, tasteless to the point of being inedible, and insufficient in quantity. According to the Government, the quantity and the calorie content of the food were fully adequate. Mr Tolumov was being provided with vegetarian meals on account of an illness, as well as fresh fruit and vegetables. In support of their assertion, the Government provided three randomly chosen daily menus. Mr Tolumov disputed the accuracy of those menus and submitted that he had never been given the meals stated in them. According to him, the “fresh fruit and vegetables” consisted of a daily portion of one onion and three carrots.
According to Mr Tolumov, medical care in Plovdiv Prison consisted of routinely giving all inmates aspirin or analgin, and inmates had to purchase all other medicines themselves. According to the Government, the prison’s medical centre was staffed by a general practitioner, a feldsher, a psychiatrist and a dentist. Medical and dental examinations were carried out weekly. Mr Tolumov could also consult outside specialists, and since the end of 2010 he had been examined nine times, by a cardiologist, a surgeon, an ophthalmologist, an endocrinologist and a dermatologist. All medicines required for Mr Tolumov’s treatment had been covered either by the national health insurance fund or the prison’s budget.
The Government asserted, further, that Mr Tolumov could see the social inspector in charge of his unit daily. He could also ask to see a psychologist, the prison governor or deputy governor, the prison legal officer, or another member of the prison staff. He could also socialise with other inmates of the same category during his daily walk and during meal times. He had access to cable television, with fifty channels, to the prison library, and to religious services. For his part, Mr Tolumov submitted that he could not attend religious services, and that, in spite of having expressed his desire to do so, he had not been given any opportunity to work or take part in other meaningful activities. The Government went on to say that at present Mr Tolumov was enrolled in a basic computer literacy class that he attended each Thursday between 3 p.m. and 4 p.m.
The annual psychological assessments of Mr Tolumov for 2008, 2009, 2011 and 2013, submitted by the Government, are quite similar. All of them say, often using the same language, that he has not changed his thinking and attitudes (though the 2013 report says that it was possible to detect a positive trend in that respect), but that he was not making any unjustified claims. He was able to defend his position, but usually avoided getting drawn into conflicts, and treated prison staff with respect. The risk of his hurting himself or others was average. He had expressed the wish to work, but it had not been possible to find work for him. He had willingly taken part in activities.
Mr Tolumov submitted that all letters from his legal representative before the Court were being opened and read by the prison administration. He also submitted that he had to hand over all letters to his legal representative to the prison administration without sealing the envelopes. The monitoring of his correspondence was proved by the letter “P” stamped on the back of each envelope.
In support of his allegations, Mr Tolumov submitted photocopies of the envelopes of three letters that he had sent to his legal representative in January, February and March 2012. They bear illegible postmarks and the word “checked” is stamped on the back of each one.
The Penal Act of 1896, which was the first comprehensive criminal-law enactment after Bulgaria was recreated as an autonomous State in 1878, made provision for life imprisonment as a form of custodial sentence (section 15(1)). Persons sentenced to life imprisonment could be released, for “good conduct”, if they had served at least fifteen years of their sentence (section 20(1) and (3)).
The Penal Act of 1951, which superseded the 1896 Act and in 1956 was renamed the Criminal Code, did not make provision for life imprisonment as a form of punishment.
Article 36 of the 1968 Criminal Code, which superseded the 1956 Criminal Code, defines the aims of criminal punishment. Paragraph 1 provides that punishment is imposed with a view to (a) reforming the convicted offender and rehabilitating him or her to comply with the law and good morals; (b) deterring the convict and preventing him or her from committing further offences; and (c) cautioning and deterring other members of society. Paragraph 2 states that punishment cannot be intended to cause physical suffering or humiliation of human dignity.
The various criminal penalties are listed in Article 37 of the Code, and Articles 38-52 specify the characteristics of those penalties. Until 1986 the longest possible custodial penalty was twenty years’ imprisonment (Article 39 §§ 2 and 3 of the Code, as worded between 1968 and 1986). In 1986 the maximum was increased to thirty years’ imprisonment.
Under Articles 37 § 2 and 38 of the Code, as worded before the abolition of capital punishment in December 1998, the courts could impose the death penalty only for particularly serious intentional offences and only if they were of the view that the punitive and deterrent purposes of criminal punishment could not be achieved by a lesser sentence. Under Article 38 § 4 of the Code, the death penalty could not be carried out until the President of the Republic had considered commuting it.
Until 1995 the harshest sentence after the death penalty was imprisonment for up to thirty years in exceptional cases (Article 39 § 2 of the Code, as worded after 1986). In 1995 a new penalty was introduced: life imprisonment (доживотен затвор), defined by the newly added Article 38a § 1 of the Code as “confinement of the convicted person in an incarceration facility until the end of his or her life”. That sentence may be commuted by a court to thirty years’ imprisonment after the convicted offender has served at least twenty years (Article 38a § 3 of the Code).
The last executions of persons sentenced to death were carried out in November 1989. Following a period of de facto moratorium on executions, Parliament imposed a formal moratorium on 20 July 1990. For more details on that point, and the ensuing debates concerning the abolition of the death penalty, see Iorgov v. Bulgaria (no. 40653/98, §§ 12-28, 11 March 2004).
The death penalty was abolished with effect from 27 December 1998. At the same time, a new penalty was introduced: whole life imprisonment (доживотен затвор без замяна). That penalty replaced capital punishment in the provisions of the 1968 Criminal Code dealing with specific offences.
Article 37 § 2 of the Code, as worded after the amendment, reads as follows:
“The most serious offences, which threaten the foundations of the Republic, and other particularly serious intentional offences, shall, provisionally and exceptionally, be punishable by whole life imprisonment.”
Article 38 of the Code, as worded after the amendment, reads as follows:
“1.  A whole life sentence ... shall be imposed only if the specific offence is particularly serious and the aims [of the punishment] laid down in Article 36 cannot be attained by means of a lesser penalty.
A whole life sentence cannot be imposed on a person who at the time of the commission of the offence has not attained the age of 20 or, as regards persons serving in the armed forces or during a time of war, the age of 18. A whole life sentence cannot be imposed on a woman who was pregnant at the time of the commission of the offence or is pregnant at the time when the sentence is imposed.”
The relevant part of the explanatory note that accompanied the bill amending the Code reads as follows:
“The bill proposes to replace the death penalty with a new penalty: whole life imprisonment, which differs from life imprisonment. This penalty will remove the prisoner from society, depriving him of the possibility of committing new offences, and the penalty will have a deterrent effect on other would-be offenders.”
The parliamentary debates on the bill took place on 27 November 1998 (first reading) and 10 December 1998 (second reading).
In the course of the first of those debates, a number of members of parliament spoke in favour of the abolition of the death penalty. At the same time, one member of parliament said that he would only support that proposal if it were accompanied by the introduction of whole life imprisonment. Misgivings were also expressed about the possibility that such a sentence could be overturned through the exercise of the presidential power of clemency. Another member of parliament pointed out that the public could hardly be regarded as being in favour of abolition and that society had to be assured that those who would be spared the death penalty would remain fully isolated from it. For his part, the Minister of Justice undertook to amend substantially the legislation relating to the execution of criminal punishments with a view to isolating those sentenced to whole life imprisonment and thus preventing them from committing offences in prison or enjoying comfortable conditions. He went on to say that the level of that isolation would have to be gauged carefully, so as not to infringe the human rights of those concerned.
In the course of the second of those debates, a member of parliament observed that it would be paradoxical to have two types of life sentence, but that he could accept it as a provisional state of affairs. He went on to say that in his view the presidential power of clemency could not be circumscribed by statute. However, another member of parliament said that arrangements had to be made, if need be by limiting the scope of the presidential power of clemency, to prevent those who, but for the amendment, would be sentenced to death from one day walking free. Another member of parliament expressed the view that the very wording of the new provisions of the Code would prevent the exercise of the presidential power of clemency with respect to persons serving a whole life sentence.
Accordingly, since the abolition of the death penalty the Code has provided for three types of custodial penalty: imprisonment for a fixed period of up to thirty years, life imprisonment with the possibility of commutation, and (whole) life imprisonment without the possibility of commutation. There is no offence which is punishable only by whole life imprisonment.
By two decrees of 25 January and 6 March 1999, the Vice-President of the Republic commuted all death sentences which had become final but had not been executed to either life imprisonment (in one case) or whole life imprisonment (in twenty-one cases).
On 31 January 2014 the Government laid before Parliament a draft Criminal Code intended to supersede the 1968 Criminal Code. That draft Code does not envisage the penalty of whole life imprisonment; it only makes provision for life imprisonment. The relevant part of the draft reads as follows:
“...
Particularly serious intentional offences are punishable by life imprisonment.”
“1.  Life imprisonment consists in the isolation of the convict until the end of his life in an incarceration facility.
Life imprisonment shall be imposed where the offence is particularly serious compared with offences of the same kind and the aims of the punishment cannot be attained by means of a lesser penalty.
Life imprisonment is not to be imposed on
“1.  The remaining part of life imprisonment may be replaced by fifteen years’ imprisonment if the convicted offender has served not less than fifteen years and has, through his conduct, shown proof of his rehabilitation.
...
The term of imprisonment under paragraph 1 is to be served separately from the life imprisonment already served.”
The explanatory note accompanying the draft Code says the following with respect to life imprisonment (at p. 8):
“The penalty of whole life imprisonment is to be abolished because it is at present perceived as too inhuman on account of the lack of any hope for the persons sentenced to it.
It is on the other hand proposed to retain the penalty of commutable life imprisonment. The cases in which it is likely to be imposed are limited owing to the exceptional harshness of that penalty. It is to be resorted to only when the offence is particularly serious compared with offences of the same kind and the aims of the punishment cannot be attained by means of a lesser penalty. For humanitarian reasons, it is envisaged that that penalty cannot be imposed on offenders who have not reached 20 years of age at the time of the offence or on women who were pregnant at the time of the offence or are pregnant at the time of sentencing.”
Parliament has not yet debated the draft.
Under Article 70 § 1 of the Criminal Code of 1968, release on licence is only applicable to fixed-term prison sentences. Offenders sentenced to whole life or life imprisonment are not eligible for release on licence.
The Code of Criminal Procedure of 1974 and the Code of Criminal Procedure of 2005 provide that a regional court may, at the request of the regional public prosecutor, commute a life sentence to a fixed-term prison sentence (Articles 427-28 of the 1974 Code and Articles 449-50 of the 2005 Code). The regional court rules by means of a reasoned decision; a negative decision may be challenged before the higher courts. If the public prosecutor’s proposal is rejected, no further commutation request may be submitted for two years. The legislation makes no provision for the public prosecutor to seek an adjustment of the sentence of offenders sentenced to whole life imprisonment.
Under Article 98, point 11, of the 1991 Constitution, which came into force on 13 July 1991, the power of clemency is a prerogative of the President of the Republic.
At that time Article 74 of the 1968 Criminal Code, which determines the scope of that presidential power, read as follows:
“The President may use his [or her] power of clemency to grant a pardon in respect of all or part of the sentence and, in the case of the death penalty, grant a pardon or commute the sentence.”
With effect from 13 October 2006, Article 74 of the Code was amended to provide that the powers of the President in relation to the death penalty also applied in relation to sentences of whole life or life imprisonment.
This is a discretionary power which the President has since 1991 traditionally delegated to the Vice-President of the Republic, as envisaged under Article 104 of the 1991 Constitution. Its exercise is not subject to review by the ordinary courts (see опр. № 2429 от 20 февруари 2012 г. по адм. д. № 817/2012 г., ВАС, ІІІ о.).
In its decision no. 6 of 11 April 2012 (реш. № 6 от 11 април 2012 г. к. д. № 3/2012 г., обн., ДВ, бр. 15 от 2012 г.), given following an application made by sixty-one members of parliament, the Constitutional Court gave a binding interpretation of Article 98, point 11, of the 1991 Constitution (see paragraph 72 above) and declared unconstitutional, as ultra vires and in breach of the principle of the separation of powers, a decision of Parliament of 15 February 2012 to set up an ad hoc committee mandated to conduct an inquiry into, inter alia, the way in which the former President and Vice-President had exercised the power of clemency during their two terms of office between 22 January 2002 and 22 January 2012 (see paragraph 89 below). The court explained that the presidential power of clemency under that provision was the modern-day equivalent of the royal prerogative of mercy, and was based on the principle of humanity. For that reason, it could not be tied to specific grounds, but was to be exercised by the President – or, by delegation, by the Vice-President – on the basis of the specific circumstances of each case. It could be exercised from the time when the sentence became final, and could consist in full or partial commutation of the sentence or its replacement with a less severe one. It did not impinge on the independence of the judiciary because it did not relieve a person of criminal liability but merely exempted that person from serving the sentence imposed by the criminal courts. It was permissible to lay down the manner of exercise of that power in a statute, but it was not permissible for Parliament to define or circumscribe the grounds on which it could be exercised or seek to influence the reasons for its exercise. Nor was it permissible to limit the types of penalties in respect of which the power could be exercised, or to exclude a given class of convicted offender from its scope.
The power of clemency, which was in a way an exception to the principle of equality before the law, was based on the need to give effect to higher constitutional values that could not be protected by way of abstract statutory rules. It was therefore implicit in the Constitution that that power had to be exercised in a non-arbitrary way, and was subject to the duty to give effect to constitutional values and principles. It followed that the Constitution required that in the exercise of that power the President had to take into account equity, humanity, compassion, mercy, and the health and family situation of the convicted offender. In cases where exercise of the power of clemency concerned not the entire sentence but only part of it, it was very important to take account of any positive changes in the convicted offender’s personality. The President was not under a duty to give reasons: in as much as it was impermissible for the legislature to circumscribe his or her power of clemency in any way, it was equally impermissible to require him or her to give reasons. Indeed, if reasons were given for clemency decrees they could bind the President or the Vice-President to grant future clemency requests if they concerned identical circumstances, and lead convicted offenders to believe that they were entitled to clemency because they satisfied the conditions set out in previous clemency decrees.
At the same time, the President was under a duty to respect everyone’s right to equality before the law. It was therefore necessary to have in place broad guarantees that the President would treat all requests for clemency in the same way and apply the same criteria to all of them. Naturally, those criteria could not be imposed on the President by the legislature because that would run counter to the principle of the separation of powers. However, the President was in a position to set out the manner in which he or she would exercise the power of clemency and the general criteria that would guide him or her in that respect. Such a policy statement would make the practical exercise of that power transparent and stable. It was thus possible for the President or the Vice-President to make known, at the outset of their term of office, the criteria that they would follow in dealing with requests for clemency.
The President could at any time – either at the beginning of the term of office or later – delegate the power of clemency to the Vice-President, who could exercise it in the same way as the President. The delegation could be withdrawn at any time, and did not prevent the President from exercising the delegated power himself or herself. In the event of a re-election of the President and the Vice-President for a second term of office, the delegation from the first term subsisted and did not need to be renewed.
Presidential clemency decrees did not need to be co-signed by a government minister. They came into effect when signed and could not be reviewed by any other authority. Nor could they be withdrawn or varied by the President once they had produced their effects. In that sense, clemency, once granted, was irrevocable, and the person benefiting from it could not be required to resume service of his or her sentence based on subsequent conduct. Clemency, whether full or partial, could not be made subject to conditions either.
There was no constitutional requirement for clemency decrees to be published in the State Gazette. The decision whether those decrees were to be made public hinged on the delicate balance that needed to be struck between the private life, personal data and dignity of the person benefiting from an act of clemency and the right of the public to be informed of the way in which the authorities dealt with issues of public interest. The practice in the course of the previous twenty years had been not to publish clemency decrees unless the person concerned had acquiesced to their publication. However, there was no obstacle to requiring them to be published. That was a point to be decided by the legislature.
Clemency decrees, like all other presidential and vicepresidential decrees, were not administrative decisions and could not be equated with these. They were therefore not subject to judicial review, and could only be challenged, on grounds of unconstitutionality, under Article 149 § 1 (2) of the Constitution before the Constitutional Court by any of the authorities or persons entitled to institute proceedings before that court under Article 150 of the Constitution: one-fifth of the 240 members of parliament, the President, the Council of Ministers, the Supreme Court of Cassation, the Supreme Administrative Court, or the ProsecutorGeneral.
In a partly dissenting opinion, three constitutional judges said, inter alia, that it was not impermissible for the President to be required by statute to give reasons for his or her clemency decrees. Indeed, such reasons would show that those decrees were not arbitrary and would greatly facilitate their review by the Constitutional Court.
The previous President and Vice-President were in office for two terms, the first between 22 January 2002 and 22 January 2007 and the second between 22 January 2007 and 22 January 2012.
Between 1 January 2002 and 31 December 2009 the Vice-President received 6,967 applications for clemency. 477 of those were granted.
In practice a committee of officials from the President’s administration examined requests for clemency and made proposals to the Vice-President. In forming its opinion in each case, the committee took into account the position of the President’s legal advisers on criminal policy and relied on information about the convicted offender provided by the prison administration. Before reaching a decision, the Vice-President could also interview the prisoner.
According to a report by the Director-General of Prison Administration of 15 September 2009, approximately 100 applications for clemency had been submitted to the successive Vice-Presidents by prisoners serving a whole life sentence; none of those had been granted. According to the chief of the Vice-President’s staff, between 21 January 2002 and 7 September 2009, the advisory committee had received 29 requests for clemency from 16 persons sentenced to whole life imprisonment; none of those had been granted. He further explained that the Vice-President was not required to give reasons for his or her refusal, but that the prisoners concerned could renew their applications for clemency without limitations. In a report published in April 2010, the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee also mentioned that information and went on to say that its research had shown that even before January 2002 no persons serving a whole life sentence had benefited from presidential clemency (see paragraph 175 below).
The applicants submitted four letters dated 27 June 2006, 29 November 2007 and 17 February 2011, in which the presidential administration had informed two life prisoners in identical terms that their “applications for clemency [had been] duly considered and turned down”. The letters did not contain any further particulars.
On 15 February 2012 Parliament decided to set up an ad hoc committee mandated to conduct an inquiry into, inter alia, the way in which the former President and Vice-President had exercised the power of clemency during their two terms of office between 22 January 2002 and 22 January 2012 (see paragraph 84 above). Shortly after that, on 11 April 2012, the Constitutional Court declared that decision unconstitutional as ultra vires and in breach of the principle of the separation of powers (see paragraph 76 above). In response, on 16 May 2012, Parliament decided to set up an ad hoc committee mandated to conduct an inquiry into, inter alia, how officials from various executive departments had carried out their duties in connection with that matter. In its report, published on 1 November 2012, the committee observed, inter alia, that the former VicePresident, to whom the President had delegated the power of clemency, had been advised by a special commission. The practice of that commission had been to obtain from the respective prison governor, medical doctor and psychologist information, including psychological assessments, about the prisoners who had applied for clemency (see also paragraphs 85-88 above). However, it was impossible to say whether all the information in the prisoners’ personal files had been fully reflected in the data provided to that commission. It was also important to note that the presidential administration which had taken over in January 2012 had vastly increased the level of transparency of the clemency system (see also paragraphs 90-107 below). The committee went on to note that there were no statutory criteria governing the assessment of the conduct or the psychological profile of a convicted offender who applied for presidential clemency. As a result, the provision of information on those points was entirely within the discretion of the competent officials. It was therefore necessary to legislate on that point, and to introduce a statutory requirement for the publication of presidential clemency decrees. The practice of the incumbent presidential administration of publishing reports was entirely appropriate, but could not bind future presidential administrations.
In two decrees of 23 January 2012, the newly elected President, who had taken office the previous day, decided, like his predecessors, to delegate the power of clemency to the Vice-President. He also set up a Clemency Commission to advise the Vice-President in the exercise of that power, and laid down rules of procedure governing the work of the Commission.
Rule 1 § 3 of those Rules provides that in its work the Commission must take into account, inter alia, relevant case-law of international courts and other bodies on the interpretation and application of international human rights instruments in force in respect of Bulgaria. The Commission deliberates twice a month (Rule 5 § 2). Each request for clemency is allocated to one member of the Commission, who has to report on it (Rule 4 § 1(1)) within two weeks (Rule 6). Decisions are taken by a majority, with the chairperson having the casting vote in the case of a tie (Rule 5 § 4). The chairperson then apprises the Vice-President of the Commission’s recommendations (Rule 4 § 1(5)). Prisoners who have requested clemency must be informed in writing of the Vice-President’s decision, and every three months the Commission has to publish a report on its activities.
In practice, throughout 2012 the Clemency Commission published comprehensive monthly reports.
On 24 January 2013 the Commission published its first annual report, which was approved by the Vice-President. It is a comprehensive document containing information about the Commission’s activities in 2012, analytical information about the types of ground on which requests for clemency made during the year had been based, statistical data, the Commission’s approach to the examination of requests for clemency, the types of outcome suggested by the Commission (non-examination of the request, refusal, or full or partial pardon), and the Commission’s conclusions and recommendations.
According to the report, 840 persons had filed 988 requests for presidential clemency in 2012. Sixty-five of those persons had filed more than one request. The vast majority of requests (98%) filed by prisoners (as opposed to their relatives) had relied on one or a combination of the following reasons: 34% on the convicted offender’s attitude to his or her offence, with some prisoners expressing regrets and others seeking to vindicate their acts or challenge their convictions or sentences; 18% on the convicted offender’s rehabilitation following incarceration; 48% on humanitarian grounds (family difficulties, need to take care of children or elderly relatives, need to provide financial assistance to family members, need to be reunited with family members, ill health, old age); and 7% had sought to portray the prisoners as victims of the prison, the courts or the system, with some requests citing the ill effects of incarceration or the impossibility for personal development in prison. The remaining 2% of requests had not cited specific grounds. Only four requests had been filed not by the person concerned himself or herself, but by a legal representative.
In 2012 the Commission had held thirty-three rounds of deliberations, three to five times a month.
The practice of the Commission had been based on the idea that clemency was a subsidiary means of reduction of sentence, and was only applicable in situations in which, on the one hand, there were no other means of alleviating criminal repression, and on the other, the continued execution of the sentence was morally unjustifiable and against the spirit of the law in that, due to circumstances obtaining after conviction, the convicted offender’s situation had become unusual, and the continued execution of the sentence did not have the intended beneficial effects but became unnecessarily repressive and ran counter to the humane goals of criminal policy.
In the examination of each request for clemency, the Commission had had regard to all of the prisoner’s circumstances: the existence of a criminal model of conduct and its characteristics; the gravity of the offence; the particularities of the criminal environment; the motives underlying the offence; the post-offence conduct; the criminal record, including the effectiveness of previous criminal sanctions; the victims; the time elapsed since the commission of the offence and the time when the conviction and sentence had become final; any interruptions in the service of the sentence; the part of the sentence already served and the manner in which it had been served; the prisoner’s prospects of personal development, including the risk of reoffending; whether the correctional process had been successful; the degree to which the aims of punishment had been attained; the availability of persons or institutions that could resocialise the prisoner; the prisoner’s state of health and its effects on the service of the sentence; the prisoner’s family situation and its effect on his or her legal or moral obligations (state of health and age of the members of the prisoner’s family, or the existence of any pregnancies, young children or unemployed family members); any post-conviction changes in the law abolishing or reducing criminal liability for the acts committed by the prisoner; and the availability of other means of alleviating criminal repression.
The Commission had proposed that the Vice-President pardon three prisoners.
One of them was a 58-year-old, sentenced to death in 1990 for murder, infliction of grievous bodily harm and rape, whose death sentence had been commuted to life imprisonment in 1999 following the abolition of capital punishment in Bulgaria (see paragraph 58 above). In 2012 he had requested that his sentence be commuted to life imprisonment, citing his repentance and good behaviour and the inhumanity of his sentence. The Commission had noted that he had already spent twentytwo years in prison, eighteen of which had been in solitary confinement, under the “special regime” applicable to life prisoners (see paragraphs 115-16, 118 and 121 below). The Commission had researched his case for six months and had found a special circumstance – sustainable positive changes in his personality – which made it intolerable for him to continue to serve a sentence of whole life imprisonment. That development had been unequivocally established on the basis of the available documents, the reports of the experts who had worked with the prisoner throughout his incarceration, a special expert psychologist’s report obtained by the Commission, and an assessment, based on a variety of methods, of the risk of his reoffending. All of those showed that the prisoner was very different from other life prisoners and prisoners serving long terms of imprisonment. He had renounced his criminal way of life and instead spent his time behaving compassionately towards other prisoners and reflecting on his crimes. The prisoner’s profile showed that the correctional process had been successful, which was rare even for persons convicted of similar offences and sentenced to much shorter terms of imprisonment than the period of time that he had already served. Those factors placed him outside the scope of application of Article 38 § 1 of the Criminal Code of 1968 (see paragraph 60 above).
The Commission had come to the view that the commutation of that prisoner’s sentence to life imprisonment would serve the aims of punishment and would not diminish the moral condemnation of his acts. Commutation would not be tantamount to forgiveness of his criminal past but would represent an acknowledgement of his efforts to distance himself from that past. It would also demonstrate to all other persons sentenced to whole life imprisonment that they could improve their situation because their efforts would be recognised by society, which continued to consider them as members thereof. Lastly, the commutation of whole life imprisonment to life imprisonment did not give rise to a risk of reoffending.
The Commission had proposed that the Vice-President commute the prisoner’s sentence on 20 December 2012, and the Vice-President had agreed with the proposal and done so by a decree of 21 January 2013.
On 11 February 2013 a national daily newspaper, 24 Hours, published an article about that prisoner. The article said, inter alia, that the person who had been instrumental in reforming him had been a retired prison inspector who had worked with him for about fifteen years. The prisoner had thus been persuaded that anyone could change if he or she met the right people, and was for that reason helping other prisoners.
Throughout 2013 the Clemency Commission continued to publish monthly reports setting out statistical data and detailed information on the reasons underlying the proposals for clemency that it had made to the VicePresident. According to information on the Commission’s website, 419 persons had filed 475 requests for clemency in 2013, and the Commission had proposed that the Vice-President pardon three prisoners. It had received six requests from persons serving a whole life sentence. In its report for the period July-August 2013, the Commission said that it had examined two of those requests and had recommended that they be refused because the persons concerned had not shown sufficient progress towards rehabilitation.
The Commission’s annual report for 2013 was published in February 2014. Like the Commission’s report for 2012, it is a comprehensive document containing information about the Commission’s activities in 2013, analytical information regarding the grounds on which requests for clemency made during the year had been based, statistical data, the Commission’s approach to the examination of requests for clemency, the types of outcome suggested by the Commission (non-examination of the request, refusal, or full or partial pardon), and the Commission’s conclusions and recommendations.
According to the report, in 2013 the Commission had dealt with 587 requests for clemency (roughly 45 per month) filed by 420 persons. All but 23 of those requests had concerned prisoners. The requests had been filed personally by 387 convicts, in 34 cases the requests had been filed by relatives, and in 11 cases by legal representatives. 31% of the requests had relied on the alleged atonement of the convict; 33% on the alleged excessive harshness of the penalty, an alleged lack of recognition that the convict had reformed himself or herself, and an alleged lack of possibility of personal development in prison; 68% on humanitarian grounds (old age, illness, need to take care of sick relatives, indigence, need to provide assistance to family members); 4% on alleged rehabilitation, work in prison, alleged good conduct, and the fact of having served more than half of the sentence; 16% on the alleged severity of the sentence, the alleged excessive length of the criminal proceedings, the alleged incorrectness of the conviction, etc.; and 8% on alleged actual innocence.
In 2013 the Commission had held thirty-two rounds of deliberations.
In 2013 the Commission had fully adhered to its earlier practice, and had had regard to identical factors (see paragraph 97 above) when examining requests for clemency. It had proposed that the Vice-President pardon nine prisoners; by 21 January 2014 the Vice-President had accepted seven of the proposals and rejected one. The report set out a summary of the reasons for each of the proposals.
Article 31 § 5 of the 1991 Constitution provides that prisoners must be kept in conditions allowing them to exercise those of their fundamental rights that have not been restricted by virtue of their sentence.
Section 8(2)(1) of the 1969 Execution of Punishments Act, as worded after June 2002, provided that prisoners were rehabilitated by, inter alia, ensuring that they were detained in conditions that safeguarded their physical and mental health and their human dignity.
Section 3(1) of the Execution of Punishments and Pre-Trial Detention Act of 1 June 2009, which superseded the 1969 Act, provides that prisoners may not be subjected to torture or cruel or inhuman treatment. Section 3(2) defines torture and inhuman and degrading treatment as (a) any intentional act or omission that causes strong physical pain or suffering, except those arising from the use of force, auxiliary means or firearms where allowed under the Act; (b) intentional placement in poor conditions of detention, consisting of insufficient living space, food, clothing, heating, light, ventilation, medical care, opportunities for physical exercise, prolonged isolation without human contact, or other culpable acts or omissions that are capable of damaging a person’s health; and (c) humiliating treatment that diminishes the convicted offender’s human dignity, coerces him to commit or suffer acts against his will, or arouses in him feelings of fear, vulnerability or inferiority. Section 3(3) provides that such acts or omissions include those committed by a public official or by any other person at the instigation or with the connivance, overt or tacit, of a public official.
Section 40(2)(1) provides that prisoners are rehabilitated by, inter alia, ensuring that they are detained in conditions that safeguard their physical and mental health and their human dignity.
Section 90(6) (subsection (5) before 1 January 2013) provides that prisoners cannot be held disciplinarily liable for making applications and complaints.
Section 47(1) of the 2009 Execution of Punishments and Pre-Trial Detention Act provides that incoming prisoners are to be placed in a reception ward, where they have to remain for between a fortnight and one month. Within two days of a prisoner’s arrival in that ward, the prison administration has to compile a personal file for him or her (section 54(1) of the Act and regulation 31(1) of its implementing regulations, issued on 2 February 2010). Section 55(2) of the Act provides that before the prisoner leaves that ward, the social worker, medical doctor and psychologist attached to the prison must draw up an assessment of his or her personality, state of health and capacity to work, and give recommendations about group or individual work with the prisoner. With effect from 1 January 2013, that subsection was amended to provide that the assessment must also cover the risk of reoffending or damage. At the same time, a new subsection 3 was added to section 55, providing that prisoners serving sentences of life or whole life imprisonment, or more than ten years’ imprisonment, or prisoners whose risk assessment was “very high” or “high”, must in all cases be subjected to a psychological assessment. For other prisoners, such an assessment may be carried out at the request of the prison’s social activities and re-education inspector.
Until 1 June 2009 the regime of life prisoners was governed by sections 127a to 127e of the 1969 Execution of Punishments Act, which were added in 1995 when life imprisonment was introduced as a form of punishment (see paragraph 56 above), and by the implementing regulations of that Act, issued in 1990 and subsequently amended several times. Following its amendment with effect from June 2002, the Act expressly provided that persons sentenced to whole life imprisonment were to be placed under the same prison regime as those serving a life sentence.
Section 127b(1) provided that when imposing a life sentence the court had to order the prisoner’s placement under the strictest regime, the so-called “special regime”. The other available prison regimes, applicable to fixed-term prison sentences, were the “light”, “general”, “strict” and “enhanced” regimes (section 43(1)); in contrast to life imprisonment, the sentencing court had a certain discretion in determining which one of these to impose (section 51). Prisoners serving life or whole life sentences placed under the “special regime” were to be kept in locked single cells and subjected to heightened security and supervision (regulations 56 § 1, 167c and 167d § 1). For its part, the “enhanced regime” entailed keeping prisoners in locked cells at night and not allowing them to carry out any maintenance work in prison or any work in external sites (regulation 55 §§ 1 and 4). Prisoners placed under the “enhanced regime” could, by order of the prison governor, be permanently kept in locked cells if, by reason of the seriousness of their offence or the length of their sentence, they could be regarded as dangerous, or if they manifestly and systematically failed to respect internal order or had a negative influence on other inmates (regulation 56 § 1).
Under section 127b(2) and regulation 167d § 2, after five years of imprisonment in execution of their sentence life prisoners could be placed under a more lenient regime for good conduct. Time spent in pre-trial detention did not count towards that period (regulation 167 § 2). The decision to place a life prisoner under a lighter regime was to be taken by a special commission comprising prison staff and various other officials (section 17(1) and (5)1); by contrast, the decision to place any prisoner under a harsher regime was to be taken by the regional court, on a proposal by that commission (section 17(5)2). All proposals in that respect were to be based on an assessment of the risk that the prisoner presented to himself or herself, other inmates and prison staff (section 17a). Under section 58, the commission’s decisions could be set aside by the Minister of Justice. Once placed under the “strict regime”, a life prisoner could, if considered not to pose a risk to himself or herself, other inmates or prison staff, be detained with the general prison population, by decision of the same commission (section 127b(4), added in June 2002).
In June 2009 and February 2010 the 1969 Act and the implementing regulations were superseded by, respectively, the 2009 Execution of Punishments and Pre-Trial Detention Act and its implementing regulations, issued on 2 February 2010.
Section 61(1) of the 2009 Act provides that when sentencing an individual to whole life or life imprisonment the court must order that he or she be placed under the “special regime” (the three regimes applicable in prisons are the “special regime”, the “severe regime” and the “general regime” – section 65(2)). Under section 71(2), persons placed under the “special regime” must be kept in permanently locked cells and under heightened supervision. Section 71(3), which was inserted in December 2012 and came into effect on 1 January 2013, provides that persons sentenced to whole life or life imprisonment and placed under the “severe regime” are likewise to be kept in permanently locked cells and under heightened supervision unless it is possible, having regard to the requirements of section 198(2) (see paragraph 121 below), to detain them with the general prison population. According to the explanatory note to that amendment, the new provision was necessary to fend off legal challenges brought by life prisoners to their being kept permanently under lock and key even though their regime had been changed from “special” to “severe” (see paragraphs 130-34 below).
Sections 197 to 199 deal specifically with the regime of whole life or life prisoners.
Section 197(1) provides that those two sentences are to be served in purpose-built prisons or, in the absence of such prisons, in separate units of other prisons. Section 197(2) provides that in the absence of special provisions applicable to life prisoners, the provisions governing other custodial sentences apply to them as well.
Section 198(1) provides that a life prisoner may be placed under a more lenient regime for good conduct and if he or she has served not less than five years of his or her sentence. Section 198(2) provides that life prisoners may be placed with the general prison population and take part in common work, training, educational activities, sport, or other activities by decision of the Execution of Punishments Commission on the basis of a personality assessment, provided that they have already been placed under the “severe regime”. That commission consists of the prison governor, a member of a supervisory board, the deputy prison governor in charge of security, the head of the prison’s social and educational department, and the prison psychologist (section 73(1)). It deliberates at least twice a month (regulation 55 § 1).
Section 199(1) provides that life prisoners cannot be placed under the “general regime” or given perks that cannot be used inside prison. Section 199(2) provides that persons who have been sentenced to life imprisonment and whose sentence has been commuted by a court to a fixed term of imprisonment (see paragraph 71 above) may be transferred from prison to an open penitentiary facility, where they may be placed under the “general regime” or the “light regime” (which is only available in open penitentiary facilities – section 65(3)).
The regime of life prisoners is also governed by regulations 213 to 220 of the implementing regulations of the 2009 Act. The regulations in respect of whole life imprisonment are the same as for life imprisonment (regulation 220).
Regulation 213 provides that life prisoners must be kept in purposebuilt prisons or separate high-security units in other prisons. It also provides that life prisoners must be kept in permanently locked cells under heightened supervision, and can only take part in communal activities with other prisoners of the same category.
Regulation 214 provides that life prisoners have to be kept isolated from other prisoners also during transfers, medical treatment, visits, open-air activities or other occasions when they leave their cells.
Regulation 216 § 1 provides that life prisoners may work in their cells or at purpose-built workstations, if available. By contrast, section 71(1) provides, with respect to other prisoners, that they can work in the area of the respective prison or dormitory and, in exceptional cases, on secure external sites. Records have to be kept of life prisoners’ work days (regulation 216 § 2). However, under Article 38a § 4 of the 1968 Criminal Code, in force since 1995, work performed by a life prisoner does not generate early release credits; that is in marked contrast to the position in relation to prisoners serving determinate custodial sentences, in respect of whom two days of work count as three days of incarceration for the purposes of early release (Article 41 § 3 of the same Code).
Regulation 217, which echoes section 198(2) of the 2009 Act (see paragraph 121 above), provides that life prisoners may be placed with the general prison population and take part in common work, training, educational activities, sport, or other activities by decision of the Execution of Punishments Commission on the basis of a personality assessment, provided that they have already been placed under the “severe regime”.
Regulation 218, which echoes section 198(1) of the 2009 Act (see paragraph 121 above), provides that a life prisoner may be placed under a more lenient regime for good conduct and if he or she has served not less than five years of his or her sentence (periods of pretrial detention do not count).
Regulation 219 § 1, which echoes section 197(1) of the Act (see paragraph 120 above), provides that for a period of five years after their sentence has become final, life prisoners may be placed in special units of existing prisons or in a purpose-built prison determined by the Minister of Justice. During that period, a special team is in charge of the prisoner (regulation 219 § 2). After the expiry of that period, and following an overall assessment of the prisoner, he or she may be placed in another prison and under different conditions (regulation 219 § 3).
In 2010 two life prisoners brought a legal challenge to regulations 213, 214 and 219 of the implementing regulations of the 2009 Act. They argued that these ran counter to the provisions of the Act.
In a judgment of 28 March 2011 (реш. № 4373 от 28 март 2011 г. по адм. д. № 10758/2010 г., ВАС, І о.), a three-member panel of the Supreme Administrative Court upheld the challenge. It found that the Minister of Justice had failed to follow the proper procedure for issuing the regulations. In particular, he had not published the draft regulations on the Ministry’s website with a view to making them available to the public and obtaining comments, as required under section 26(2) of the 1973 Normative Acts Act. This had been a serious omission. The panel went on to find that regulation 213, in as much as it required that life prisoners be kept permanently under lock and key, ran counter to section 197(1) of the 2009 Act (see paragraphs 120 and 124 above) because it laid down a requirement that did not flow from the text of the statute: such a regulation could specify only the manner of application of requirements flowing from the text of the statute. Regulation 213 could not be regarded as based on any other section of the 2009 Act either. The remaining part of regulation 213, as well as regulations 214 and 219 (see paragraphs 124-25 and 129 above), were not contrary to the provisions of the 2009 Act.
On an appeal by the Minister, in a final judgment of 14 September 2011 (реш. № 11411 от 14 септември 2011 г. по адм. д. № 6341/2011 г., ВАС, петчл. с-в) a five-member panel of the Supreme Administrative Court overturned the three-member panel’s judgment. It held that the failure to publish the draft regulations on the Ministry’s website had not amounted to a material breach of the rules of procedure. It went on to state that regulation 213 did not run counter to the provisions of the 2009 Act because it could be regarded as based on section 197(1) read in conjunction with section 71(2) of the Act (see paragraphs 118 and 120 above). The latter applied to all prisoners placed under the “special regime” and required that they be kept in separate and permanently locked cells.
Two judges dissented, saying that the failure of the Ministry to publish the draft regulations on its website had indeed been a serious omission and had vitiated the process of adoption of the regulations.
As a result of the dismissal of that legal challenge, two claims for damages brought by the same life prisoners under section 1 of the State and Municipalities Liability for Damage Act 1988 (see paragraph 136 below) and based on the suffering allegedly endured as a result of their impoverished regime were rejected by the Supreme Administrative Court as inadmissible (see опр. № 3355 от 7 март 2012 г. по адм. д. № 3154/ 2012 г., ВАС, петчл. с-в, and опр. № 5065 от 6 април 2012 г. по адм. д. № 14339/2011 г., ВАС, петчл. с-в). The court held that those claims could only be upheld if the statutory instrument against which they were directed had been set aside in prior proceedings, which was not the case.
On 2 February 2007 the Director of the Directorate for the Execution of Sentences approved, for the first time in Bulgaria, “National standards for the treatment of life prisoners”. The purpose of these standards is to “lay down an effective model for the treatment of life prisoners that guarantees concrete support for their physical and mental preservation and ensures that society and prison staff are protected”. They set out, among other things, minimum requirements for the material conditions in which those prisoners are to be kept, the applicable security arrangements, and the manner in which life prisoners are to be treated. They call on the prison authorities to ensure, where possible and within the constraints flowing from the applicable security arrangements, that life prisoners are provided with suitable work, education (including, if possible, distance learning), social development, tutelage, programmes for the maintenance of their physical and mental health, and medical care. The standards state, inter alia, that all life prisoners are to be enrolled in adaptation programmes oriented towards enabling them to accept their situation, creating a sense of perspective, encouraging self-help, maintaining social contact, stimulating their participation in various activities, and neutralising any depressive and psychosomatic symptoms. The standards also state that life prisoners should have individual sentence plans and periodical assessments, as well as the possibility to discuss issues relating to the execution of their sentence with the prison administration. According to the standards, life prisoners should have access to cultural and sporting activities, the prison library, periodicals, television and radio, religious services and group activities. However, the standards do not appear to make any mention of correctional or rehabilitation programmes.
Section 1(1) of the State and Municipalities Liability for Damage Act 1988 provides that the State is liable for damage suffered by individuals or legal persons as a result of unlawful decisions, actions or omissions by civil servants, committed in the course of or in connection with administrative action. Under Article 204 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Procedure 2006, such a claim can only be brought if the administrative decision (or statutory instrument, as the case may be) has been duly set aside. If the claim relates to an unlawful action or omission, the unlawfulness may be established by the court hearing the claim (Article 204 § 4 of the Code).
In 2003 the Bulgarian civil courts started awarding damages under section 1 of the 1988 Act to persons claiming to have suffered non-pecuniary damage as a result of the poor conditions of their detention (see the domestic cases cited in Hristov v. Bulgaria (dec.), no. 36794/03, 18 March 2008; Kirilov v. Bulgaria, no. 15158/02, §§ 43-48, 22 May 2008; Shishmanov v. Bulgaria, no 37449/02, §§ 58-62, 8 January 2009; Titovi v. Bulgaria, no. 3475/03, § 34, 25 June 2009; Simeonov v. Bulgaria, no. 30122/03, §§ 43-47, 28 January 2010; and Georgiev v. Bulgaria (dec.), no. 27241/02, 18 May 2010). The Supreme Court of Cassation upheld those decisions, relying, inter alia, on Article 3 of the Convention and the standards laid down by the CPT (see реш. от 26 януари 2004 г. по гр. д. № 959/2003 г., ВКС, IV гр. о.; реш. № 104 от 20 февруари 2009 г. по гр. д. № 5895/2007 г., ВКС, II г. о.; реш. № 538 от 22 октомври 2009 г. по гр. д. № 1648/2008 г., ВКС, II г. о.; реш. № 15 от 29 януари 2009 г. по гр. д. № 4427/2007 г., ВКС, III г. о.; реш. № 233 от 8 май 2009 г. по гр. д. № 1625/2008 г., ВКС, II г. о.; and реш. № 581 от 25 юни 2009 г. по гр. д. № 616/2008 г., ВКС, IV г. о.).
However, in some cases the courts refused to award damages, or awarded minimal sums, holding, in particular, that evidence proving poor conditions of detention was not sufficient to also prove that a person who had been kept in such conditions had suffered non-pecuniary damage as a result of them (see the domestic judgments cited in Iovchev v. Bulgaria, no. 41211/98, §§ 62 and 66, 2 February 2006; Iliev and Others v. Bulgaria, nos. 4473/02 and 34138/04, § 15, 10 February 2011; Radkov v. Bulgaria (no. 2), no. 18382/05, §§ 17 and 21, 10 February 2011; and Shahanov v. Bulgaria, no. 16391/05, §§ 9-11 and 13-14, 10 January 2012).
In a decision of 17 October 2012 (опр. № 4681 от 17 октомври 2012 г. по адм. д. № 1347/2012 г., АС-Варна) the Varna Administrative Court discontinued proceedings brought by a prisoner under section 1 of the 1988 Act in relation to the conditions of his detention. It noted that that prisoner had obtained just satisfaction in that respect in proceedings before this Court (see Shahanov, cited above). Therefore, any damage suffered by him as a result of those conditions had been made good with the award of just satisfaction made by this Court. It was not permissible to award compensation twice in relation to the same matter. In a final decision of 30 November 2012 (опр. № 15225 от 30 ноември 2012 г. по адм. д. № 13739/2012 г., ВАС, ІІІ о.) the Supreme Administrative Court fully upheld the lower court’s decision.
The courts have dealt with a number of claims brought by life prisoners under section 1(1) of the 1988 Act in relation to the regime and conditions of their detention. What follows is a selection of some of the more important ones.
In a final judgment of 5 March 2009 (реш. № 1466 от 5 март 2009 г. по гр. д. № 6339/2007, ВКС, V г. о.) the Supreme Court of Cassation upheld an award of BGN 1,000 (the equivalent of EUR 511.29) to a life prisoner in relation to the lack of sanitary facilities in his cell and the consequent need to use a bucket for sanitary purposes between November 2000 and November 2005. In a judgment of 11 July 2012 (реш. № 10166 от 11 юли 2012 г. по адм. д. № 15508/2011 г., ВАС, ІІІ о.) the Supreme Administrative Court awarded the same amounts to each of two life prisoners placed under the “special regime”, in respect of the non-pecuniary damage suffered by them as a result of having to relieve themselves in plastic buckets due to the lack of sanitary facilities in their cells between mid-April 2006 and March 2008, when they had been moved to cells containing such facilities. The court relied on this Court’s judgments in Iovchev v. Bulgaria (no. 41211/98, 2 February 2006), Radkov (no. 2) (cited above) and Shahanov (cited above), and held that that had constituted treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Convention and therefore damages were payable under section 1(1) of the 1988 Act.
However, in another case (реш. № 67 от 6 март 2012 г., адм. д. № 393/2010 г., АС-Кюстендил) the Kyustendil Administrative Court refused to award damages for the use of shackles during the transfer of a life prisoner. In finding that that had not been unlawful, it had regard, inter alia, to the “special regime” applicable to life prisoners and the requirement, flowing from that regime, to isolate such prisoners even during transfers, and to subject them to heightened supervision. The judgment was upheld by the Supreme Administrative Court.
Similarly, in a final judgment of 23 February 2009 (реш. № 82 от 23 февруари 2009 г. по гр. д. № 6452/2007 г., ВКС, III г. о.) the Supreme Court of Cassation dismissed a claim for damages brought by a life prisoner in relation to the failure of the prison administration to allow him to engage in work, educational and cultural activities and sport together with other inmates. The court held that there had been no unlawful omission, within the meaning of section 1(1) of the 1988 Act, on the part of the prison administration because such activities were incompatible with the “special regime” applicable to life prisoners and its requirement that they be isolated from the general prison population (see paragraphs 115 and 118 above).
In a final judgment of 14 January 2010 (реш. № 568 от 14 януари 2010 г. по адм. д. № 4934/2009 г., ВАС, III о.) the Supreme Administrative Court dismissed a claim for damages brought by a life prisoner in relation to the failure of the prison administration to provide him with correctional courses, access to radio and television, decent living and sanitary conditions, social contacts, and timely medical assistance. The court held, inter alia, that the prisoner had not established that he had suffered any damage as a result of those omissions.
In a final decision of 16 March 2012 (опр. № 3837 от 16 март 2012 г. по адм. д. № 3256/2012 г., ВАС, ІІІ о.) the Supreme Administrative Court dismissed a claim in which a person sentenced to whole life imprisonment alleged that Parliament’s enactment of a statute providing for such a punishment had been in breach of Article 3 of the Convention. It held that the enactment of a statute could not be regarded as administrative action within the meaning of section 1(1) of the 1988 Act.
In a judgment of 27 June 2012 (реш. № 421 от 27 юни 2012 г. по адм. д. № 305/2012 г., АС-Плевен, VI с-в) the Pleven Administrative Court dismissed a claim for damages brought by a life prisoner in relation to the size of his cell. It was not fully clear whether the cell had measured six or four and a half square metres, but the court held that even if it had measured only four and a half square metres, it could not be regarded as giving rise to inhuman or degrading treatment. It noted that for the time being Bulgarian law did not lay down minimum requirements for cell size (a requirement that each inmate be provided with at least four square metres was due to take effect in 2013). In any event, the claimant’s cell was larger than four square metres, and it did not matter that he was alone in a cell rather than together with other inmates in a bigger cell. The Supreme Administrative Court refused to entertain the claimant’s appeal, as he had failed to pay the requisite fee (опр. № 14725 от 22 ноември 2012 г. по адм. д. № 12653/2012 г., ВАС, ІІІ о.).
Article 250 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Procedure 2006, which came into effect on 1 March 2007, provides that any person who has the requisite legal interest may request the cessation of actions carried out by an administrative authority or a public official that have no basis in the law or in an administrative decision. The request is to be made to the competent administrative court (Article 251 § 1), which has to deal with it immediately (Article 252 § 1) and, having made the necessary enquiries (Article 252(2)-(4)), rule forthwith (Article 253 § 1). The court’s decision is subject to appeal, which does not have suspensive effect (Article 254 §§ 1 and 2).
In 2009 a life prisoner’s legal challenge under Article 250 § 1 to, inter alia, the fact that the prison authorities were keeping him in a cell without a toilet or running water was dismissed as being outside the scope of that provision (see опр. № 1366 от 2 февруари 2009 г. по адм. д. № 498/2009 г., ВАС, V о.).
Articles 256 and 257 of the same Code, which likewise came into force on 1 March 2007, provide that a person may bring proceedings to enjoin an administrative authority to carry out an action that it has the duty to carry out under a legal provision. If the court allows the claim, it must order the authority to carry out the action within a fixed time-limit.
In 2009 the Supreme Administrative Court dismissed a challenge under those provisions to an alleged failure of a prison governor to provide adequate food to inmates (see реш. № 5924 от 11 май 2009 г. по адм. д. № 12132/2008 г., ВАС, ІІІ о.).
In a judgment of 18 March 2011 (реш. № 65 от 18 март 2011 г. по адм. д. № 501/2010 г., АС-Стара Загора) the Stara Zagora Administrative Court, acting pursuant to a claim by Mr Harakchiev under Article 257 of the Code, ordered the governor of Stara Zagora Prison to provide him with clothes, shoes and bed linen, in accordance with the governor’s obligation under section 84(2)(3) of the Execution of Punishments and Pre-Trial Detention Act of 2009 with which he had failed fully to comply during the previous years. The prison governor appealed. In a final judgment of 27 June 2011 (реш. № 9276 от 27 юни 2011 г. по адм. д. № 5747/2011 г., ВАС, ІІІ о.) the Supreme Administrative Court upheld the lower court’s judgment, fully agreeing with its reasoning.
In a judgment of 8 October 2012 (реш. № 581 от 8 октомври 2012 г. по адм. д. № 337/2012 г., АС-Плевен) the Pleven Administrative Court, acting pursuant to a claim under Article 257 of the Code, ordered the Chief Directorate for the Execution of Sentences to provide, within one month after the judgment became final, a life prisoner with shoes, in accordance with the Directorate’s obligation under section 84(2)(3) of the Execution of Punishments and Pre-Trial Detention Act of 2009 and with which it had failed to comply for almost three years. Following appeals by the Directorate and a public prosecutor, in a judgment of 20 November 2013 (реш. № 15349 от 20 ноември 2013 г. по адм. д. № 15221/2012 г., ВАС, ІІІ о.) the Supreme Administrative Court quashed that judgment on procedural grounds and remitted the case to the lower court. In a judgment of 12 February 2014 (реш. № 72 от 12 февруари 2014 г. по адм. д. № 1115/2013 г., АС-Плевен) the Pleven Administrative Court made the same order as earlier. The Directorate appealed again. The appeal (адм. д. № 4505/2014 г.) is still pending before the Supreme Administrative Court. A hearing is listed for 27 October 2014.
Articles 30 § 5 and 34 of the Constitution of 1991 provide:
“Everyone has the right to meet in confidence with the person defending him. The confidentiality of their communication shall be inviolable.”
“1.  The freedom and secrecy of correspondence and other communications shall be inviolable.
This rule is subject to exceptions only with the permission of the judicial authorities, when necessary for uncovering or preventing serious offences.”
Section 33(1)(c) of the Execution of Punishments Act of 1969 provided that prisoners had the right to correspondence, which was subject to control by the prison administration. Section 132d(3) of the Act, which applied to persons in pre-trial detention, likewise provided that their correspondence was subject to inspection by the prison administration. In a decision of 18 April 2006 (реш. № 4 от 18 април 2006 г. по к.д. № 11 от 2005 г., обн., ДВ, бр. 36 от 2 май 2006 г.) the Constitutional Court declared section 132d(3) unconstitutional. After analysing in detail the relevant constitutional and Convention provisions and referring to, among others, this Court’s judgments in Campbell v. the United Kingdom (25 March 1992, Series A no. 233), Calogero Diana v. Italy (15 November 1996, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1996-V) and Petra v. Romania (23 September 1998, Reports 1998-VII), it held that a blanket authorisation to inspect the correspondence of all detainees without regard to their particular circumstances and the threat which they allegedly posed to society through such correspondence was unconstitutional.
Following the Constitutional Court’s decision, on 1 September 2006 the implementing regulations of the 1969 Act were amended. Under the new regulation 178(1), pre-trial detainees were entitled to unlimited correspondence which was not subject to monitoring. Letters had to be sealed and opened in the presence of a prison officer, in a manner allowing that officer to make sure that they did not contain money or other prohibited items (regulation 178(2)).
Section 86(1)(3) of the Execution of Punishments and Pre-Trial Detention Act of 2009 provides that prisoners have the right to correspondence. Regulation 75(2) of the implementing regulations provides that prisoners’ incoming and outgoing correspondence is to be controlled in the interests of security and with a view to preventing the commission of offences. Regulations 75(3) and (4) lay down the manner in which letters are controlled: they have to be sent and received in the presence of a prison officer, and the envelope has to be sealed or unsealed in a manner that satisfies the officer that it does not contain unauthorised objects. If a reasonable suspicion arises that a letter’s contents may prevent the uncovering of a serious offence or facilitate the commission of such an offence, the letter may be stopped by order of the prison governor. In such cases, the governor must inform the public prosecutor in charge of supervising the prison.
Bulgaria signed the 1966 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (999 UNTS 171) on 8 October 1968 and ratified it on 21 September 1970; it came into force, with the exception of Article 41, on 23 March 1976. It was published in the Bulgarian State Gazette on 28 May 1976 (обн., ДВ, бр. 43 от 28 май 1976 г.), which means that under Article 5 § 4 of the 1991 Constitution it is part of domestic law. Article 10 of the Covenant provides, in so far as relevant:
“1.  All persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated with humanity and with respect for the inherent dignity of the human person.
...
The penitentiary system shall comprise treatment of prisoners the essential aim of which shall be their reformation and social rehabilitation. ...”
In its General Comment No. 21 on Article 10 (Humane Treatment of Persons Deprived of Their Liberty), adopted at its 1,141st meeting (44th session) on 10 April 1992, the Human Rights Committee said, in paragraph 10, that “[n]o penitentiary system should be only retributory; it should essentially seek the reformation and social rehabilitation of the prisoner”.
The European Prison Rules are recommendations of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe to member States on the minimum standards to be applied in prisons. The 1987 European Prison Rules (featuring as an appendix to Recommendation No. R (87) 3) were adopted on 12 February 1987. On 11 January 2006 the Committee of Ministers, noting that the 1987 Rules “need[ed] to be substantively revised and updated in order to reflect the developments which ha[d] occurred in penal policy, sentencing practice and the overall management of prisons in Europe”, adopted Recommendation Rec(2006)2 on the European Prison Rules. The new 2006 version of the Rules featured as an appendix to that Recommendation. The relevant parts read as follows:
“Part I
Basic principles
All persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated with respect for their human rights.
Persons deprived of their liberty retain all rights that are not lawfully taken away by the decision sentencing them or remanding them in custody.
Restrictions placed on persons deprived of their liberty shall be the minimum necessary and proportionate to the legitimate objective for which they are imposed.
Prison conditions that infringe prisoners’ human rights are not justified by lack of resources.
...
All detention shall be managed so as to facilitate the reintegration into free society of persons who have been deprived of their liberty.
...
Part II
Conditions of imprisonment
...
Prison regime
1  The regime provided for all prisoners shall offer a balanced programme of activities.
2  This regime shall allow all prisoners to spend as many hours a day outside their cells as are necessary for an adequate level of human and social interaction.
3  This regime shall also provide for the welfare needs of prisoners.
...
Release of prisoners
...
3  All prisoners shall have the benefit of arrangements designed to assist them in returning to free society after release.
...
Security
1  The security measures applied to individual prisoners shall be the minimum necessary to achieve their secure custody.
...
3  As soon as possible after admission, prisoners shall be assessed to determine:
4  Each prisoner shall then be held in security conditions appropriate to these levels of risk.
5  The level of security necessary shall be reviewed at regular intervals throughout a person’s imprisonment.
...
Part VIII
Sentenced prisoners
Objective of the regime for sentenced prisoners
1  In addition to the rules that apply to all prisoners, the regime for sentenced prisoners shall be designed to enable them to lead a responsible and crime-free life.
2  Imprisonment is by the deprivation of liberty a punishment in itself and therefore the regime for sentenced prisoners shall not aggravate the suffering inherent in imprisonment.
Implementation of the regime for sentenced prisoners
1  The regime for sentenced prisoners shall commence as soon as someone has been admitted to prison with the status of a sentenced prisoner, unless it has commenced before.
2  As soon as possible after such admission, reports shall be drawn up for sentenced prisoners about their personal situations, the proposed sentence plans for each of them and the strategy for preparation for their release.
3  Sentenced prisoners shall be encouraged to participate in drawing up their individual sentence plans.
4  Such plans shall as far as is practicable include:
5  Social work, medical and psychological care may also be included in the regimes for sentenced prisoners.
...
8  Particular attention shall be paid to providing appropriate sentence plans and regimes for life-sentenced and other long-term prisoners.
...
Release of sentenced prisoners
1  Sentenced prisoners shall be assisted in good time prior to release by procedures and special programmes enabling them to make the transition from life in prison to a law-abiding life in the community.
2  In the case of those prisoners with longer sentences in particular, steps shall be taken to ensure a gradual return to life in free society.
3  This aim may be achieved by a pre-release programme in prison or by partial or conditional release under supervision combined with effective social support.
4  Prison authorities shall work closely with services and agencies that supervise and assist released prisoners to enable all sentenced prisoners to re-establish themselves in the community, in particular with regard to family life and employment.
5  Representatives of such social services or agencies shall be afforded all necessary access to the prison and to prisoners to allow them to assist with preparations for release and the planning of after-care programmes.”
The commentary on the 2006 Rules (prepared by the European Committee on Crime Problems) says that Rule 102 is in line with the requirements of key international instruments including Article 10 § 3 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (see paragraph 157 above).
Since 1976 the Committee of Ministers has adopted a series of resolutions and recommendations on long-term and life prisoners. The first was Resolution 76 (2) of 17 February 1976, which recommended to member States, inter alia, to:
“1.  pursue a criminal policy under which long-term sentences are imposed only if they are necessary for the protection of society;
take the necessary legislative and administrative measures in order to promote appropriate treatment during the enforcement of such sentences;
...
encourage a sense of responsibility in the prisoner by the progressive introduction of systems of participation in all appropriate areas;
...
ensure that the cases of all prisoners will be examined as early as possible to determine whether or not a conditional release can be granted;
grant the prisoner conditional release, subject to the statutory requirements relating to time served, as soon as a favourable prognosis can be formulated; considerations of general prevention alone should not justify refusal of conditional release;
adapt to life sentences the same principles as apply to long-term sentences;
ensure that a review, as referred to in 9, of the life sentence should take place, if not done before, after eight to fourteen years of detention and be repeated at regular intervals; ...”
Recommendation Rec(2003)23 on the management by prison administrations of life sentence and other long-term prisoners was adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 9 October 2003. It recommended that in their legislation, policies and practice on the management of life sentence and other long-term prisoners the member States be guided by the principles contained in the appendix to the Recommendation. The relevant parts of those principles read as follows:
“Definition of life sentence and long-term prisoners
For the purposes of this recommendation, a life sentence prisoner is one serving a sentence of life imprisonment. A long-term prisoner is one serving a prison sentence or sentences totalling five years or more.
General objectives
The aims of the management of life sentence and other long-term prisoners should be:
–  to ensure that prisons are safe and secure places for these prisoners and for all those who work with or visit them;
–  to counteract the damaging effects of life and long-term imprisonment;
–  to increase and improve the possibilities for these prisoners to be successfully resettled in society and to lead a law-abiding life following their release.
General principles for the management of life sentence and other long-term prisoners
Consideration should be given to the diversity of personal characteristics to be found among life sentence and long-term prisoners and account taken of them to make individual plans for the implementation of the sentence (individualisation principle).
Prison life should be arranged so as to approximate as closely as possible to the realities of life in the community (normalisation principle).
Prisoners should be given opportunities to exercise personal responsibility in daily prison life (responsibility principle).
A clear distinction should be made between any risks posed by life sentence and other long-term prisoners to the external community, to themselves, to other prisoners and to those working in or visiting the prison (security and safety principle).
Consideration should be given to not segregating life sentence and other longterm prisoners on the sole ground of their sentence (non-segregation principle).
Individual planning for the management of the prisoner’s life or long-term sentence should aim at securing progressive movement through the prison system (progression principle).
Sentence planning
In order to achieve the general objectives and comply with the principles mentioned above, comprehensive sentence plans should be developed for each individual prisoner. These plans should be prepared and developed as far as possible with the active participation of the prisoner and, particularly towards the end of a detention period, in close co-operation with post-release supervision and other relevant authorities.
Sentence plans should include a risk and needs assessment of each prisoner and be used to provide a systematic approach to:
–  the initial allocation of the prisoner;
–  progressive movement through the prison system from more to less restrictive conditions with, ideally, a final phase spent under open conditions, preferably in the community;
–  participation in work, education, training and other activities that provide for a purposeful use of time spent in prison and increase the chances of a successful resettlement after release;
–  interventions and participation in programmes designed to address risks and needs so as to reduce disruptive behaviour in prison and re-offending after release;
–  participation in leisure and other activities to prevent or counteract the damaging effects of long terms of imprisonment;
–  conditions and supervision measures conducive to a law-abiding life and adjustment in the community after conditional release.
Sentence planning should start as early as possible following entry into prison, be reviewed at regular intervals and modified as necessary.
...
Managing reintegration into society for life sentence and other long-term prisoners
In order to enable life sentence and other long-term prisoners to overcome the particular problem of moving from lengthy incarceration to a law-abiding life in the community, their release should be prepared well in advance and take particular account of the following:
–  the need for specific pre-release and post-release plans which address relevant risks and needs;
–  due consideration of the possibility of achieving release and the continuation post-release of any programmes, interventions or treatment undertaken by prisoners during detention;
–  the need to achieve close collaboration between the prison administration and post-release supervising authorities, social and medical services.
The granting and implementation of conditional release for life sentence and other long-term prisoners should be guided by the principles set out in Recommendation Rec(2003)22 on conditional release.
...”
In respect of paragraph 34, the report accompanying the Recommendation states:
“131. Recommendation Rec(2003)23 contains the principle that conditional release should be possible for all prisoners except those serving extremely short sentences. This principle is applicable, under the terms of the Recommendation, even to life prisoners. Note, however, that it is the possibility of granting conditional release to life prisoners that is recommended, not that they should always be granted conditional release. ...”
was adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 24 September 2003. It provides a series of recommendations governing preparation for conditional release, the granting of it, the conditions which may be imposed, and the procedural safeguards. It reads, in so far as relevant:
“3.  Conditional release should aim at assisting prisoners to make a transition from life in prison to a law-abiding life in the community through post-release conditions and supervision that promote this end and contribute to public safety and the reduction of crime in the community.
a.  In order to reduce the harmful effects of imprisonment and to promote the resettlement of prisoners under conditions that seek to guarantee safety of the outside community, the law should make conditional release available to all sentenced prisoners, including life-sentence prisoners.
...
When starting to serve their sentence, prisoners should know either when they become eligible for release by virtue of having served a minimum period (defined in absolute terms and/or by reference to a proportion of the sentence) and the criteria that will be applied to determine whether they will be granted release (‘discretionary release system’) or when they become entitled to release as of right by virtue of having served a fixed period defined in absolute terms and/or by reference to a proportion of the sentence (‘mandatory release system’).
...
Preparation for conditional release
The preparation for conditional release should be organised in close collaboration with all relevant personnel working in prison and those involved in post-release supervision, and be concluded before the end of the minimum or fixed period.
Prison services should ensure that prisoners can participate in appropriate pre-release programmes and are encouraged to take part in educational and training courses that prepare them for life in the community. Specific modalities for the enforcement of prison sentences such as semi-liberty, open regimes or extra-mural placements, should be used as much as possible with a view to preparing the prisoners’ resettlement in the community.
The preparation for conditional release should also include the possibility of the prisoners’ maintaining, establishing or re-establishing links with their family and close relations, and of forging contacts with services, organisations and voluntary associations that can assist conditionally released prisoners in adjusting to life in the community. To this end, various forms of prison leave should be granted.
Early consideration of appropriate post-release conditions and supervision measures should be encouraged. The possible conditions, the help that can be given, the requirements of control and the possible consequences of failure should be carefully explained to, and discussed with, the prisoners. ...”
In its 11th General Report (CPT/Inf (2001) 16), published on 3 September 2001, the CPT noted the following in relation to life-sentenced and other long-term prisoners:
“33.  In many European countries the number of life-sentenced and other long-term prisoners is on the increase. During some of its visits, the CPT has found that the situation of such prisoners left much to be desired in terms of material conditions, activities and possibilities for human contact. Further, many such prisoners were subject to special restrictions likely to exacerbate the deleterious effects inherent in long-term imprisonment; examples of such restrictions are permanent separation from the rest of the prison population, handcuffing whenever the prisoner is taken out of his cell, prohibition of communication with other prisoners, and limited visit entitlements. The CPT can see no justification for indiscriminately applying restrictions to all prisoners subject to a specific type of sentence, without giving due consideration to the individual risk they may (or may not) present.
Long-term imprisonment can have a number of desocialising effects upon inmates. In addition to becoming institutionalised, long-term prisoners may experience a range of psychological problems (including loss of self-esteem and impairment of social skills) and have a tendency to become increasingly detached from society; to which almost all of them will eventually return. In the view of the CPT, the regimes which are offered to prisoners serving long sentences should seek to compensate for these effects in a positive and proactive way.
The prisoners concerned should have access to a wide range of purposeful activities of a varied nature (work, preferably with vocational value; education; sport; recreation/association). Moreover, they should be able to exercise a degree of choice over the manner in which their time is spent, thus fostering a sense of autonomy and personal responsibility. Additional steps should be taken to lend meaning to their period of imprisonment; in particular, the provision of individualised custody plans and appropriate psycho-social support are important elements in assisting such prisoners to come to terms with their period of incarceration and, when the time comes, to prepare for release. Further, the negative effects of institutionalisation upon prisoners serving long sentences will be less pronounced, and they will be better equipped for release, if they are able effectively to maintain contact with the outside world.”
In its twenty-first general report (), published on 10 November 2011, the CPT noted the following in relation to solitary confinement as the result of a court decision:
“56.  ... The CPT considers that solitary confinement should never be imposed – or be imposable at the discretion of the court concerned – as part of a sentence. The generally accepted principle that offenders are sent to prison as a punishment, not to receive punishment, should be recalled in this context. Imprisonment is a punishment in its own right and potentially dangerous aggravations of a prison sentence as part of the punishment are not acceptable. It may be necessary for a sentenced prisoner to be subject, for a certain period of time, to a solitary confinement regime; however, the imposition of such a regime should lie with the prison authorities and not be made part of the catalogue of criminal sanctions.”
A delegation of the CPT visited Bulgaria from 25 April to 7 May 1999. In its ensuing report (), published on 28 January 2002, the CPT noted the following in relation to life prisoners (footnotes omitted):
“91.  Following a moratorium on the execution of the death penalty in force since August 1990, in December 1998 the Bulgarian National Assembly abolished the death penalty, and introduced two types of life imprisonment: with or without parole.
The CPT recognises that the abolition of the death penalty creates new challenges for the Bulgarian prison system. Later sections of the report will describe in detail the conditions under which life sentenced prisoners were being held in the two prisons visited (cf. paragraphs 118 to 124). Suffice it to say at this stage that their situation left a great deal to be desired, in terms of material conditions as well as activities and possibilities for human contact. Prison staff stressed that the lack of new regulations related to this category of prisoner was preventing the introduction of improvements to their conditions of detention (the regulations in force dating back to 1995 and 1996). According to the Director of the Main Prison Directorate, greater integration of life sentenced prisoners with other inmates was a very long way off and would require inter alia a fundamental change in the attitude of prison staff.
Long-term imprisonment is widely considered to have a number of desocialising effects upon inmates. In addition to becoming institutionalised, such prisoners may experience a range of psychological problems (including loss of self-esteem and impairment of social skills) and have a tendency to become increasingly detached from society to which almost all of them will eventually return. In the view of the CPT, the regimes which are offered to prisoners serving long sentences should seek to compensate for these effects in a positive and proactive way.
Prisoners serving life sentences should have access to a wide range of purposeful activities of a varied nature (work, preferably with vocational value; education; sport; recreation/association). Moreover, they should be able to exercise a degree of choice over the manner in which their time is spent, thus fostering a sense of autonomy and personal responsibility. Additional steps should be taken to lend meaning to their period of imprisonment; in particular, the provision of individualised custody plans and appropriate psycho-social support are important elements in assisting such prisoners to come to terms with their period of incarceration and, as appropriate, to prepare for release. Further, the negative effects of institutionalisation upon prisoners serving long sentences will be less pronounced, and they will be better equipped for release, if they are able effectively to maintain contact with the outside world.
In this connection, the CPT wishes to stress that it can see no justification for keeping life sentenced prisoners apart from other prisoners serving lengthy sentences. In many jurisdictions, life sentenced prisoners are not viewed as necessarily more dangerous than other prisoners. Many of them have a long-term interest in a stable and conflict free environment. Risk/needs assessment of life sentenced prisoners, including those without parole, should therefore be made on a case by case basis.
The CPT recommends that the Bulgarian authorities take steps to develop the regulations applicable and regime offered to life sentenced prisoners, taking due account of the factors identified above. Further, the Committee recommends that prison staff be encouraged to communicate and develop positive relationships with this category of prisoner.
...
Both prisons were accommodating a certain number of prisoners placed under a special security regime on account of their sentences (life sentenced prisoners with or without parole), perceived dangerousness or troublesome behaviour. The CPT has serious concerns about the conditions in which these prisoners were being held.
At Stara Zagora Prison, a new unit (‘2Г’) had been in operation since 1996, designed to accommodate life sentenced prisoners as well as prisoners segregated on the basis of [regulation] 56 of the Regulations for the [application] of the [Execution of Punishments Act 1969] and Section 15 of the Order concerning the Status of Accused and Defendants. A total of 14 inmates were held in the unit at the time of the visit, of whom three prisoners serving life sentences without parole, three life sentenced prisoners with eligibility for parole review, five prisoners segregated under [regulation] 56 and three under Section 15.
...
However, as regards out-of-cell activities, hardly anything had changed. Life sentenced prisoners were offered one hour of outdoor exercise every day, which they took together. The only other time which they spent out of their cells consisted of three trips a day to the sanitary facilities and one visit per month. As in 1995, there were no possibilities for work. Inside their cells, prisoners had access to TV and/or radio, books and newspapers. For those who were alone in a cell, human contact was limited to communication with other prisoners during the outdoor exercise period, rare dealings with prison officers, and occasional visits from family members.
The CPT welcomes the improvements made to the material conditions of life sentenced prisoners at Stara Zagora Prison. However, it recommends that a full review of their regime be carried out, taking into consideration the criteria outlined in paragraph 92.
Life sentenced prisoners at Burgas Prison were accommodated in the high security Unit 2B. At the time of the visit, there were five prisoners serving a sentence of life imprisonment without parole and three remand prisoners appealing life sentences. Unit 2B was also accommodating three remand prisoners segregated under Section 15 of the Order concerning the Status of Accused and Defendants, and nine prisoners segregated under [regulation] 56 of the [r]egulations for the [application of the Execution of the Punishments Act 1969].
...
The only time life sentenced prisoners spent out of their cells was one hour of outdoor exercise per day and short visits to the sanitary facilities. During the outdoor exercise, they were forbidden to communicate with other prisoners, and consequently walked in silence in a row with their hands behind their backs. Some prisoners had books, newspapers and radios in the cells; others had close to nothing.
The delegation had the opportunity to examine a new facility under construction designed to accommodate life sentenced and other categories of segregated prisoners. It was located in a former workshop adjacent to the main accommodation building, linked by a door to Unit 2B. The internal structure of the workshop had been demolished, and a plan for repartitioning the area had been drawn up. The plan showed six double-occupancy cells (some 12 m²) and one single cell (7 m²) for disciplinary isolation or control purposes. The cells would have high ceilings and windows situated high in the walls, currently covered by metal plates with small perforations. According to the plan, cell furnishings would comprise a bunk bed, a table, two stools and a twin locker. In-cell sanitation, appropriately partitioned off, was also to be provided. The plan also envisaged a room for visits, as well as access to an association room located in Unit 2B.
The CPT welcomes the plans to construct a new unit for life sentenced and other categories of segregated prisoners, and would like to be informed of its expected date of entry into operation and the regime of activities envisaged in the unit. The Committee recommends that all metal plates covering the cell windows be removed, thereby facilitating access to natural light and ventilation.
Pending the entry into operation of the new unit, the CPT recommends that:
...
–  urgent steps be taken to develop the regime of activities for life sentenced prisoners, taking into consideration the criteria outlined in paragraph 92. As a first step, these prisoners should be allowed to talk with each other during the outdoor exercise period;
–  life sentenced prisoners have access to the prison library and are regularly supplied with newspapers.
As regards prisoners segregated on the basis of [regulation] 56 of the [r]egulations for the [application] of the [Execution of Punishments Act 1969] and Section 15 of the Order concerning the Status of Accused and Defendants, the CPT has already made a number of remarks and recommendations in the 1995 visit report. The delegation was pleased to learn that at both prisons these prisoners were being offered regular outdoor exercise (although some of them alleged that on occasion it could last less than an hour). However, as regards other aspects of their regime, it was as impoverished as the one already described in respect of life sentenced prisoners. In particular, prisoners placed in segregation were not entitled to go to the library, had no possibilities for work or education, and were allowed very little human contact.
The CPT recommends that the Bulgarian authorities take urgent steps to develop the regimes offered to prisoners placed in segregation.
The CPT understands that prisoners segregated under [regulation] 56 of the [r]egulations for the [application] of the [Execution of Punishments Act 1969] are informed in writing of the reasons for the measure taken against them, and are able to contest the measure within 7 days before the Director of the Main Prison Directorate. The CPT would like to be informed whether there also exist provisions for periodic review of the measure.
However, the CPT’s delegation was unable to establish whether prisoners segregated under Section 15 of the Order concerning the Status of Accused and Defendants benefit from the safeguards referred to above. Prisoners spoken to by the delegation affirmed that they had received no information of the reasons for being segregated or the expected length of the segregation, and were not aware of possibilities to have the measure appealed or reviewed. It is noteworthy that the recently adopted Ordinance No 2 of 19 April 1999 on the Status of Accused and Defendants Remanded in Custody (which has superseded the previous Order) details the cases in which remand prisoners may be segregated, but contains no procedural safeguards. The CPT would like to receive clarification of the procedural safeguards for remand prisoners placed in segregation.”
A delegation of the CPT visited Bulgaria from 17 to 26 April 2002. In its ensuing report (), published on 24 June 2004, the CPT noted the following in relation to life prisoners (footnotes omitted):
“92.  In its previous reports, the CPT made recommendations concerning the conditions under which life-sentenced prisoners were held, and the regime applicable to them. The evidence gathered during the 2002 visit suggests that steps have been taken by the Bulgarian authorities to improve the situation of life-sentenced inmates in the light of these recommendations. In this regard, the CPT’s delegation was pleased to learn of plans to progressively integrate life-sentenced prisoners into mainstream prison regimes. Pursuant to the recent amendments to the [Execution of Punishments Act] (cf. [section] 127b), the commission set up at each prison for the purpose of making decisions on prisoners’ regime can decide, on the basis of individual risk assessment, to transfer life-sentenced prisoners to ordinary units with the right to participate in work, education, sport and other activities.
...
... life-sentenced prisoners complained about the lack of possibilities for associating among themselves and with other prisoners. The little time available for face-to-face interaction during daily outdoor exercise (which, at Pleven Prison, they took in groups of two) and recreational/sports activities did not offer adequate scope for human contact. The Committee recommends that life-sentenced prisoners at Pleven Prison be allowed to take outdoor exercise together (and not only in groups of two).
More generally, the CPT recommends that the Bulgarian authorities continue to develop the regime of life-sentenced prisoners at Burgas and Pleven prisons, as well as at other prisons throughout Bulgaria, by integrating them in the mainstream prison population, in accordance with the above-mentioned amendments to the [Execution of Punishments Act 1969]. The Committee would like to receive information on the practical use made by the prison commissions of the possibility to transfer life-sentenced prisoners to ordinary units.”
A delegation of the CPT visited Bulgaria from 10 to 21 September 2006. In its ensuing report (), published on 28 February 2008, the CPT noted the following in relation to life prisoners (footnotes omitted):
“98.  In its previous visit reports, the CPT paid close attention to the situation of prisoners serving life sentences (see paragraph 92 of CPT/Inf (2004) 21; paragraphs 118-124 of CPT/Inf (2002) 1). The delegation which carried out the 2006 visit examined progress made in this area.
At the time of the visit, Pleven Prison was holding 8 life-sentenced prisoners, of whom 5 were held in a special section and 3 had been placed in a unit for prisoners serving sentences under strict regime.
In the special section for lifers, the configuration of the cells remained the same as that observed in 2002 (in particular, the cells still measured only 4.5 m²). On a positive note, the cells’ grille-fronted door remained open throughout the day, which enabled prisoners to move along the corridor, associate with other life-sentenced prisoners in the unit and have ready access to the sanitary facilities; however, at night a bucket in each cell replaced the toilet. Positive developments concerned outdoor exercise, which all prisoners in the lifers’ section took together, and the additional possibility to engage in some sports activities (e.g. table tennis). Further, some work was provided inside the section (making gift bags). All prisoners had a TV set in their cells and there was an additional TV in the corridor. It is also noteworthy that life-sentenced prisoners were not handcuffed when they left their section, took outdoor exercise or saw the doctor.
Since 2004, Pleven Prison had embarked on an ‘experiment’ of integrating certain life-sentenced prisoners into the general prison population. At the time of the 2006 visit, three such prisoners were being accommodated in a unit for prisoners serving sentences under strict regime (and one more was expected to be moved there soon). They were held in a cell measuring some 22 m² with three other prisoners. Conditions in the cell were generally adequate (large windows, various items of furniture, elements of personalisation). One of the prisoners had a job as a cleaner and the other two occasionally made gift bags in the cell. The cell doors were open throughout the day and life-sentenced prisoners enjoyed the same rights as the remainder of prisoners under strict regime. It appeared from conversations with other prisoners and staff that the arrival of the life-sentenced prisoners in the unit had not caused any particular dissatisfaction or problems.
In Sliven Prison, there were three women serving life sentences. Two of them were being accommodated in separate rooms in Group 7, in conditions of a good standard (i.e. the rooms measured some 16 m² and were light, well-equipped, nicely decorated and tidy). They could associate with other prisoners in the unit during outdoor exercise, meal times and recreation, go to the library and the chapel, as well as work in the unit; further, once a week they were allowed an additional 45 minutes in the yard to do some gardening. However, it is noteworthy that in addition to lifers, Group 7 was accommodating prisoners segregated on administrative, medical or disciplinary grounds; thus lifers were housed alongside the disciplinary cells. This juxtaposition is unfortunate and suggests that the lifer segregation rule is of a punitive nature.
The third woman serving a life sentence had recently been moved to a unit for sentenced prisoners (Group 4) and, like in Pleven Prison, this seemed to be working well. The prisoner concerned worked in the sewing workshop and had access to all the other activities available to other inmates (with the exception of education and vocational training which, reportedly, were not available to life-sentenced prisoners).
There were 15 lifers at Sofia Prison at the time of the visit; two were being accommodated in the mainstream prison population, while the rest were held in a separate unit in the section used for disciplinary isolation (cf. the comment above concerning the same practice in Sliven Prison). Lifers in the separate unit were accommodated in single cells measuring 7.5 m²; the cells had a small barred window, set too high in the wall to afford a view out. There was integral sanitation which reduced the limited space in the cell; however, the cells would provide adequate sleeping accommodation for one person provided these prisoners were offered a varied programme of out-of-cell activities during the daytime.
However, in contrast to the situation observed in Pleven and Sliven, life-sentenced prisoners in Sofia Prison lacked communal activities. They were locked up in their cells except for periods of outdoor exercise (1.5 hours like the rest of the inmates at Sofia Prison), which all but four lifers took together. The lack of group activities is not justifiable in security terms, given that life-sentenced prisoners already exercise together. The delegation was told of plans to set up a group room for association and other activities for lifers, which would be opened in the near future. In-cell activities included watching TV and reading books from the library and a daily newspaper; further, nine lifers worked in their cells (making gift bags). One prisoner interviewed by the delegation complained that he had been refused permission to have a personal computer in his cell to do a computer literacy course.
The four lifers who did not join the others for communal exercise were segregated under orders reviewed every 6 months. Whenever they were outside the cell, they were handcuffed, including for exercise which they took alone in a secure yard. In the CPT’s opinion, there can be no justification for handcuffing a prisoner exercising alone in a secure yard, provided there is proper staff supervision. The Committee recommends that the Bulgarian authorities review their current policy as regards the handcuffing of the above-mentioned life-sentenced prisoners, in the light of these remarks.
The ‘experiment’ at Pleven Prison of integrating life-sentenced prisoners into the general prison population is a positive example to be followed in the rest of the country’s prisons. At present, the formal criteria for changing the regime of a lifer is to have served at least 5 years under special regime (not counting the period on remand), to have good behaviour and to have formally applied for the change of regime. The CPT wishes to stress that, whereas initial segregation of a person awaiting or starting a life sentence might be deemed appropriate on the basis of individual risk assessment in a specific case, persons awaiting or serving a life sentence should not be subject to a systematic policy of segregation. The Committee recommends that the Bulgarian authorities review the legal provisions in the light of these remarks.
As regards those life-sentenced prisoners currently held in special units, the CPT recommends that the Bulgarian authorities continue to develop their regime of activities, in particular by providing more communal activities (including access to work and education) and revising the policy on long-distance learning and computer-based courses.
The Committee would also like to receive confirmation that the communal activities room for lifers in Sofia Prison is now in operation; in this context, it wishes to be provided with information on the range of communal activities provided, the number of lifers using the room each week and the number of hours per lifer per week.”
A delegation of the CPT visited Bulgaria from 15 to 19 December 2008. In its ensuing report (), published on 30 September 2010, the CPT noted the following in relation to life prisoners (footnotes omitted):
“74.  ... [A]t the time of the visit, there were 18 life-sentenced prisoners at Sofia Prison. Three of [them] had been integrated into the mainstream prisoner population, while the remainder were being held in a separate unit (Group 1).
Material conditions of detention in the lifer unit had remained basically unchanged since the 2006 visit. The installation of integral sanitation in the cells, with a shower head over the toilet and access to hot water all day, was a positive feature; however, as a result, prisoners had less occasions to leave their cells and interact with staff.
Some of the lifers had their own television sets and playstations in their cells. At the time of the 2006 visit, lifers had had hot plates in their cells, to cook food, which increased their sense of independence and helped to pass the time. The hot plates had reportedly been withdrawn a few weeks before the visit for safety reasons, and lifers had immersion coils for heating water.
As regards activities, one notable change since the 2006 visit was the entry into operation of a social room (‘club’) in the lifer unit. This good facility was decorated in pleasant light colours and furnished with bookcases, a chess table with two chairs, a larger table with five chairs, a cupboard with games including a backgammon board, a television set with DVD player and a sink. Lifers were divided into three subgroups on the basis of common interests (playing cards, chess, discussing legal matters, etc.) and each group was allowed to use the social room for one hour each weekday. At weekends, there were only the two officers present, which made it difficult to organise activities.
Lifers who were willing to work (12 of the 15 in the lifers unit) worked in their cells on the same kinds of piece work as was observed on the 2006 visit (e.g. putting strings on boutique bags).
Further, outdoor exercise for one and a half hours per day was offered to all lifers. The delegation noted that a shelter had been provided at one end of the exercise yard.
Despite the above-mentioned welcome introduction of a social room, which increased the amount of time spent out of the cells and in association with other prisoners, the daily regime in the lifer unit remained monotonous. The CPT recommends that the Bulgarian authorities strive to enhance the programme of activities provided to life-sentenced prisoners at Sofia Prison, if necessary, by increasing staffing.
Staff on the lifer unit indicated that two of the inmates were in their first 5 years of a life sentence and were therefore subject to particular security restrictions. The two lifers were escorted in handcuffs and were not allowed television. It was up to the Director to review the use of handcuffs, but there was no time limit on their use and no regular review period.
As already stated in the report on the 2006 visit, the CPT considers that there can be no justification for routinely handcuffing a prisoner within a secure environment, provided there is proper staff supervision. The Committee recommends that the Bulgarian authorities review the policy of handcuffing life-sentenced prisoners when outside their cells.
The CPT has in the past expressed its serious misgivings about the current legal provisions whereby lifers are systematically subjected to a strict and segregated regime for an initial period ordered by the sentencing court (i.e. 5 years). This approach runs counter to the generally accepted principle that offenders are sent to prison as a punishment, not to receive punishment.
The Committee does not question that it may be necessary for some prisoners to be subject, for a certain period of time, to a special security regime. However, the decision whether or not to impose such a measure should lie with the prison authorities, be based on an individual risk assessment and be applied only for the shortest period of time. A special security regime should be seen as a tool of prison management, and not be made part of the catalogue of criminal sanctions to be imposed by courts.
In many countries, lifers are not viewed as necessarily more dangerous than other prisoners; many of them have a longterm interest in a stable and conflict free environment. Therefore, the approach to the lifer management should proceed from individual risk and needs assessment to allow decisions concerning security, including the degree of contact with others, to be made on a case-by-case basis.
Whereas lifers should not be systematically segregated from other prisoners, special provision should be made to assist lifers and other longterm prisoners to deal with the prospect of many years in prison. In this respect, reference should be made to Rule 103.8 of the European Prison Rules which states that ‘particular attention shall be paid to providing appropriate sentence plans and regimes for life-sentenced prisoners’, taking into consideration the principles and norms laid down in the Council of Europe Recommendation on the ‘management by prison administrations of life-sentence and other long term prisoners’.
Pursuant to Bulgarian law, after the initial 5 years of their sentence, lifers are eligible for allocation within the mainstream prisoner population if they have behaved well and have had no disciplinary punishments. However, in practice, only a minority of lifers (3 out of 18 at Sofia Prison) had found their way into the mainstream, some after many years served in the lifer unit. The CPT invites the Bulgarian authorities to build on the success of the ‘experiment’ of integrating some life-sentenced prisoners into the mainstream prison population, which should be considered as an appropriate part of the management of this category of prisoner and reinforced by legislative measures.
More generally, the CPT recommends that the Bulgarian authorities review the legal provisions and practice concerning the treatment of life-sentenced prisoners, in the light of the above remarks.”
A delegation of the CPT visited Bulgaria from 18 to 29 October 2010. In its ensuing report (), published on 15 March 2012, the CPT noted the following in relation to life prisoners (footnotes omitted):
“116.  During previous visits, the CPT has paid close attention to the situation of life-sentenced prisoners. The 2010 visit provided an opportunity to review progress in this area.
At the outset of the visit, the CPT’s delegation learned that the working group which was in the process of drafting a new Criminal Code had decided to propose that the sentence of ‘life imprisonment without the right to substitution’ (i.e. without possibility of parole) be revoked. This is a welcome development which goes in the direction of the Committee’s recommendations. The new Criminal Code was expected to be submitted to Parliament for adoption in 2011. The CPT would like to receive confirmation that, following the adoption of the new Criminal Code, conditional release (parole) has been made available to all life-sentenced prisoners, subject to a review of the threat to society posed by them on the basis of an individual risk assessment.
At the time of the visit, Plovdiv Prison was holding nine life-sentenced prisoners, three of whom had been sentenced to life imprisonment without possibility of parole. All life-sentenced prisoners were being accommodated in a special unit with reinforced security. The delegation was told that three of them had had their regime changed by the competent court from ‘special’ to ‘strict’. Preparations were underway to integrate these prisoners into the mainstream prison population (one of them had already spent a short period of time in an ordinary group).
Lifers were being held one to a cell (measuring some 7 m²). The cells and their furniture were in an advanced state of dilapidation. Further, there was no integral sanitation in the cells and access to the communal toilet was limited to three times a day; during the rest of the time and especially at night, prisoners resorted to buckets in their cells to comply with the needs of nature. The sanitary facilities were in a dilapidated state and unhygienic.
As regards activities, lifers could spend up to 3.5 hours a day outside their cells associating with other prisoners in the unit, participating in hobby groups, playing chess or engaging in sports. Outdoor exercise of one hour per day was taken in a small yard attached to the special unit (see paragraph 104). Lifers were also offered the possibility to periodically participate in group cultural and sports activities. All of them had a TV set in their cells (but three of the TV sets were broken) and there was access to cable television, as well as a continuous electricity supply. However, none of the lifers had work (though two of the lifers worked as cleaners on a voluntary basis).
There were 18 lifesentenced inmates at Varna Prison at the time of the visit, including six without the right to parole. Five of the lifers had been integrated in the mainstream prison population, while the rest were being held in a separate highsecurity area (Group 3 on the ground floor) which also contained the disciplinary isolation cells.
Lifers were accommodated in multiple-occupancy cells (e.g. 5 prisoners in a cell measuring some 20 m²). Like the rest of the prisoner accommodation at Varna Prison, the cells were dilapidated and unhygienic. Access to natural light was very limited and the artificial lighting had to be constantly on during the day in order for prisoners to be able to read. Similar to Plovdiv Prison, access to the communal toilet was limited to three times a day.
The activities offered to lifers consisted of occasional individual and group work (e.g. anger management) and English classes (twice a week) which took place in the unit’s dining room. Outdoor exercise, lasting one hour a day, took place in a small courtyard topped with a net. Further, a tennis table had been installed in the corridor of the lifers’ unit and could be used for half an hour twice a week. As at Plovdiv Prison, none of the lifers had work. In-cell activities included watching TV and reading books from the library.
The CPT has already stressed in its reports on the visits in 2006 and 2008, that, whereas initial segregation of a person starting a life sentence might be deemed appropriate on the basis of individual risk assessment in a specific case, persons serving a life sentence should not be subject to a systematic policy of segregation. At present, the formal criteria for changing the regime of a lifer is to have served at least five years under special regime (not counting the period on remand), to have good behaviour and to formally apply for the change of regime. However, in practice, only a minority of lifers have been moved to the mainstream. The Committee recommends that the Bulgarian authorities review the legal provisions in order to ensure that the segregation of lifers is based on an individual risk assessment and is applied for no longer than strictly necessary. Meanwhile, the CPT urges the Bulgarian authorities to strive to increase the number of life-sentenced prisoners integrated into the general prisoner population.
Concerning material conditions in the special units for lifers, the Committee recommends that steps be taken to:
–  improve access to natural light in the cells at Varna Prison;
–  ensure that life-sentenced prisoners at both prisons have ready access to the toilet and to discontinue the use of buckets;
–  refurbish the lifers’ cells and improve the state of the common sanitary facilities at both Plovdiv and Varna Prisons;
–  ensure that all inmates have access to a range of basic hygiene products and are provided with materials for cleaning the cells.
As regards those life-sentenced prisoners currently held in special units, the CPT recommends that the Bulgarian authorities continue to develop their regime of activities, in particular by providing more communal activities (including access to work and education).”
In their response (), also published on 15 March 2012, the Bulgarian Government said, inter alia, the following:
“Paragraph 116
The creating of a new Criminal Code complies with the changes in social relations and socio-economic sphere during the last twenty years. One of the leading tendencies in our work on the project of a new CC is to differentiate penal policy in order to respond to the necessity of effective protection of rights and legal interests of citizens. The strictness of criminal repression will be enforced primarily regarding serious offences (punishable with a deprivation of liberty for a term of at least five years or heavier punishment) and recidivism. At the same time criminal responsibility and the order for its realization regarding minor offences will be lightened.
It is essential to reconsider and amend the system of punishments and other measures of state constraint which are imposed upon perpetration of a crime. It is imperative to abolish some punishments which have lost its meaning in the present days among which life imprisonment without commutation has its central place. The abolition of life imprisonment without commutation may have its grounds in the essence of this punishment which is not more effective than life imprisonment. Everywhere in the Special Part of Criminal Code both punishments are stipulated as alternative, i.e. they are imposed for the same kind of offences. In both cases the sentenced person may be pardoned by the President of the Republic. This question will be laid to a wide public discussion.
In November 2009 a working group for preparation of a new Criminal Code was established within the Ministry of Justice. The members include representatives for legal doctrine (from Sofia University ‘St. Kliment Ohridski’ and the MoI Academy), court practitioners (Supreme Cassation Court, Supreme Cassation Prosecutor’s Office, National Investigation Service), the bar associations as well as experts from the Ministry of Justice. The General Part of the project was published on the website of the Ministry of Justice in January 2011 and many suggestions and comments were received with regard to the provisions. The new draft Criminal Code should be ready in the beginning of 2012 and will be subjected to broad public discussion. Then it should be entered into the National Assembly.
It should be noted that the project for a new Criminal Code will not provide conditional release to persons with life imprisonment sentences. Currently its aim is to abolish the punishment “life imprisonment without commutation”. Furthermore, according to the project there will be a possibility for commutation of the punishment “life imprisonment” with “imprisonment for a term of fifteen years”. The prerequisites for such commutation shall be that the person has already served at least 15 years of life imprisonment, and that there is evidence this person has been reformed. The punishment “imprisonment for a term of 15 years”, which will replace the life imprisonment sentence, shall be served apart from the served term of life imprisonment. Once the punishment has been commuted conditional release may be an option as per the general rules.
Paragraph[s] 117-119
In the prisons of Bulgaria, there are 165 prisoners with life-time convictions. Of them 108 have the right to appeal and for 57 the conviction is irrevocable.
The main activities of these prisoners are in compliance with the legal framework and with the national standards for working with prisoners with life-time convictions, as ratified in 2007. For this period, 27 prisoners with life-time convictions have been admitted according to the general procedure.
In the first 5 years of the prisoners’ stay, their personal characteristics and their psychological state are examined in view of evaluating the possibilities of planning a follow-up correction programme. In this case, the point is not to isolate these prisoners, but rather to accommodate them in separate wards. This fiveyear term is stipulated by the law and is not imposed by the administration of the prison.
Although such prisoners are accommodated in a separate area, they are offered the opportunity to participate in the social activities held with other prisoners. Programmes for stress prevention, social skills development and computer literacy are implemented. At present, two of them are included in the individual courses of education at the prison schools.
The use of additional suppressive means (including handcuffs) is strictly laid down in the [Execution of Punishments and Pre-Trial Detention Act 2009]. As regards prisoners with life-time convictions being taken out of prison in handcuffs, this is only applied in single cases, and yet not at order of and with the participation of the prisons.
Measures were taken for intensification and diversification of the group forms of social and educational work with life sentenced persons. In all prisons special inspection teams were set up including social activities and educational work inspector and a psychologist who are entrusted with the obligation to work with life sentenced persons. For each inmate sentenced to life an assessment of the offender is made, which is detailed, specific and allows to fully identifying the risks.
At Varna [P]rison the team working with life sentenced persons performs diagnosis of conditions such as anxiety, neuroticism, psychoticism, suicidal risk, etc. on a regular basis. One of the good practices in working with this category is prisoners is the application of collective forms of social and educational work. Currently the psychologists realize one educational program and one group program for mutual aid. As a consequence of the work of the team of specialists five inmates with life sentences were accommodated under general regime, i.e. were taken out from the high security zone and now live with other prisoners.
In the Plovdiv prison, one life sentenced inmate is accommodated under general regime. The following collective forms of work are applied - courses in computer skills, sports tournaments for among the persons convicted to life, a program for development of logical thinking. The ones who express willingness are provided with opportunities to participate in creative activities.
Paragraph 120
In all cells for persons sentenced to life in the Republic of Bulgaria there is access to and availability of daylight, and this applies to the prison in Varna as well.
In the Plovdiv [P]rison toilets were built in all criminal cells and in two of the dormitories of prisoners sentenced to life. Measures have been identified and taken to ensure access to bathrooms to persons sentenced to life in Varna and Plovdiv.
To solve the problem it is necessary to build the sanitary units in the dormitories of prisoners sentenced to life, and this task is scheduled to take place during the overall renovation of the main premises of the prison. For this purpose a technical task will be prepared.
Cleaning and washing materials are provided to inmates sentenced to life in the manner applicable to all prisoners.”
A CPT delegation visited Bulgaria from 4 to 10 May 2012. In its ensuing report (), published on 4 December 2012, the CPT noted the following in relation to life prisoners (footnotes omitted):
“32.  The 2012 visit provided an opportunity to review the situation of life-sentenced prisoners and the extent to which the recommendations and comments made in previous reports had been taken into account. At the outset of the visit, the delegation was informed that no progress had been made as regards the removal from the Criminal Code of the sentence of ‘life imprisonment without the right to substitution’ (i.e. without possibility of parole). This is highly regrettable.
The CPT considers that it is inhuman to imprison a person for life without any realistic hope of release. Consequently, the CPT must reiterate that it has serious reservations about the very concept according to which life-sentenced prisoners are considered once and for all to be a permanent threat to the community and are deprived of any hope of being granted conditional release. Reference should also be made to paragraph 4.a of the Committee of Ministers’ Recommendation Rec (2003) 22 on conditional release (parole) of 24 September 2003 [see paragraph 164 below], which clearly indicates that the law should make conditional release available to all sentenced prisoners, including life-sentenced prisoners.
The CPT once again invites the Bulgarian authorities to amend the legislation with a view to making conditional release (parole) available to all lifesentenced prisoners, subject to a review of the threat to society posed by them on the basis of an individual risk assessment.
At the time of the visit, there were 27 life-sentenced prisoners at Burgas Prison, 22 of them accommodated in a special unit (Group 1) with reinforced security, and five integrated into the mainstream prison population.
At Varna Prison, there were 13 lifesentenced prisoners accommodated in the same high security unit as during the 2010 visit and six integrated into the mainstream prison population.
While welcoming the efforts to integrate lifers into the mainstream population, this concerned only a minority of them at both establishments. This is hardly surprising considering that the legislation governing the criteria for changing the regime of a lifer had remained unchanged. The CPT reiterates its recommendation that the Bulgarian authorities review the legal provisions in order to ensure that the segregation of lifers is based on an individual risk assessment and is applied for no longer than strictly necessary.
The cells used to accommodate lifers in the high security units were small at both prisons (some 6 m² at Burgas Prison and 6.5 m² at Varna Prison) and yet were holding up to two prisoners each. However, two cells at Burgas Prison had been created out of three and were larger (some 9 m² each) and had a fully partitioned sanitary annexe; this is in principle a far more satisfactory arrangement. At Varna Prison, one larger cell (of some 20 m²) accommodated five prisoners.
The cells accommodating lifers at Burgas and Varna Prisons were in the same advanced state of dilapidation and insalubrity as the rest of the prisoner accommodation. The situation was compounded at Burgas Prison by damage in some cells resulting from leaking sewage pipes.
On a positive note, cell windows at Burgas Prison had been replaced a few years previously and access to natural light was adequate. That said, the artificial lighting was kept on all night, obliging inmates to improvise lampshades to dim the light. At Varna Prison, access to natural light was still very limited and artificial lighting insufficient.
At both prisons, lifesentenced prisoners could shower twice a week. Lifers were released six times a day to go the toilets at Burgas Prison, but only three times a day at Varna Prison. They had to use buckets the rest of the time. As for the common sanitary facilities, they were in an extremely poor state of repair and filthy.
As regards material conditions in the units accommodating life-sentenced prisoners, the CPT recommends that steps be taken to:
–  ensure that all lifesentenced prisoners at both prisons have ready access to a proper toilet facility at all times, including at night; resort to buckets should be abandoned;
–  carry out the necessary repair work in the common sanitary facilities without delay;
–  enlarge and refurbish the cells accommodating lifers, following the example of the two cells of some 9 m² at Burgas Prison;
–  improve access to natural light and artificial lighting in the cells at Varna Prison;
–  reduce the intensity of artificial lighting at night in the cells at Burgas Prison;
–  ensure that all inmates have access to a range of basic hygiene products and are provided with sufficient materials for cleaning their cells, and have access to facilities for washing and drying their clothes.
In addition, the Committee invites the authorities to ensure that all life-sentenced prisoners can use the dining areas in their units instead of eating their meals in the cells.
Similar to the other prisoners at Burgas Prison, lifers took their daily outdoor exercise in two one-hour sessions in the yards described in paragraph 29. At Varna Prison, lifers had one hour of outdoor exercise a day and 30 minutes per week access to table tennis in the corridor’s unit.
The CPT was pleased to note that, at Burgas Prison, nine lifers (of whom seven were in the special unit) had been offered in-cell work consisting of assembling markers; in contrast, at Varna Prison no lifers had work. One lifer integrated in the mainstream prison population at Varna Prison was attending the recently opened school, which represented the only positive development as regards organised activities in comparison with the situation observed during the 2010 visit.
As regards other activities, lifers at both prisons could have TV and radio in their cells, as well as books.
The occasional individual and group work observed in 2010 at Varna Prison had been discontinued. At Burgas Prison, the delegation was informed that regular anger management, behavioural and emotional group work organised by the social worker, which had been discontinued 18 months previously, was about to resume. The CPT would like to receive confirmation of the resumption of these activities at Burgas Prison.
The delegation noted that some written individual plans had been developed at both prisons for lifers. That said, there appeared to be little or no structurally planned intervention on the part of the staff to attempt to provide appropriate mental and physical stimulation to these prisoners. In the CPT’s opinion, the regime for life-sentenced prisoners should be fundamentally reviewed. Small-group isolation for extended periods is more likely to de-socialise than re-socialise people. There should instead be a structured programme of constructive and preferably out-of-cell activities; educators and psychologists should be proactive in working with life-sentenced prisoners to encourage them to take part in that programme and attempt to engage them safely with other prisoners for at least a part of each day.
The CPT recommends that the Bulgarian authorities continue to develop the regime of activities for life-sentenced prisoners in the light of the above remarks, in particular by providing more communal activities (including access to work and education).”
In their response (), also published on 4 December 2012, the Bulgarian Government said, inter alia, the following:
“...
The Varna [P]rison
...
Material conditions in the lifers ward
–  currently a repair is being carried out in the ward – plastering and painting;
–  sanitary units are being constructed in each bedroom;
–  it is presently technically impossible to expand and restructure the cells for purely architectural and engineering reasons;
–  the artificial lighting in the Varna [P]rison is turned off for the night;
–  the access to daylight is improved by removal of obsolete physical security facilities;
–  the amateur team of the prison society gives away on a monthly basis hygiene preparations and detergents. In addition, the health officer of the prison receives preparations for maintenance of the prison kitchen, the common areas and the prison hostel. Access is provided to laundry washing and drying room.
The window bars are replaced in the cells of the lifers in the Varna prison. More daylight is thus ensured. Repairs are currently being carried out in their cells, as a wash-basin and toilet with constant running water are being installed in every room.
...
In relation to the CPT’s recommendations for further development of the programmes for labour, educative and professional activities with the persons deprived of liberty the Managements of the Burgas and Varna prisons have taken steps in this aspect, and namely:
In the Burgas [P]rison
...
–  The specialized programmes were increased and more persons deprived of liberty were included in the training group for development of social skills. Seven such programmes function for the time being. About 200 persons deprived of liberty visit them for one year. These programmes include charged and accused persons, as well as lifers. Every inspector conducts the programme they are in charge of two times in the year, i.e. one per six months.
...
In the Varna [P]rison
...
–  A lifer accommodated in the common areas will continue his education in a school. A lifer accommodated in the common areas is appointed as a construction worker under the staff-table.
...
–  Anger mastering teamwork is conducted with the participation of 8 persons deprived of liberty – lifers and a group of 12 persons deprived of liberty-sentenced.
As regards lifers, the social-and-educative activities performed in respect of them are conducted on the basis of the provisions of the Execution of [Punishments] and [PreTrial Detention] Act and the [implementing regulations], as well as in compliance with the national standards for treatment of lifers.
As of 01 September 2012 167 persons serve life imprisonment punishment in the penitentiary facilities, 59 of them without parole and 108 – with parole.
Considerable efforts were made in the last years to improve the conditions of daily activities in the high security areas. The goal is to achieve treatment of the lifers that is closer to the European standards.
The improvement of their quality of life is precondition for a decrease of the number of appeals to various institutions, claims and demands to the state. This allows the employees to seek for new opportunities to give meaning to their stay, as well as opportunities for more purposeful individual and educative work with them. There is a striving to stimulate the proper behaviour, preservation of their psychological status and revealing before them of prospects of change in the legal status. The successful integration of lifers with the other persons deprived of liberty is not only an ‘experiment’ but it is an affirmed practice in the prisons and is a part of the management of this category of legal offenders.
In 2011 8 lifers were accommodated under the general procedure or twice as many compared to 2010. This positive trend, except for effective corrective activity, is also indicative of a considerable change in the attitude towards this category of sentenced persons on the part of the relevant prison administration.
Important progress in the social-and-educative work with lifers is reported towards activation in the implementation of the group forms of work with them in the high security areas. In addition, psychological consultations are deployed and diagnostic activities with respect of the current psychological status of this category of sentenced persons. Thereby, forecasts are made at an earlier stage for conditions of higher anxiety, depressive conditions and suicidal risks.
Lifers are included in the school-and-educative process through an individual form of training at the schools in the respective prisons.
All teams implementing specialized group programmes with lifers report high effectiveness towards restriction of the personal regress from the continuous isolation, improvement of the interrelations between the prison administration and the lifers and development of social skills necessary in their accommodation under the general procedure.
Considerable difficulties in the social-and-educative work are reported in respect of lifers with personal disorders, whose number is constantly increasing. High risk is identified about these persons of causing serious damages to the surrounding people and it remains relatively constant despite the interventions applied.”
Having carried out research on the topic of whole life imprisonment in Bulgaria between June 2009 and February 2010, in April 2010 the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee published a report entitled “Life Without Parole – An Inhuman and Degrading Punishment”. The report only dealt with persons serving a whole life sentence, not those serving life imprisonment.
The report said, among other things, that at the time of the visits to individual prisons, all life prisoners in Plovdiv Prison had been in single cells. In Stara Zagora Prison, two life prisoners had shared a cell, but all the others had been in single cells as well. Save for Plovdiv Prison and some other prisons that did not include Stara Zagora Prison, the units housing life prisoners were in a very poor state of repair: the floors and walls were dirty, and the furniture, invariably attached to the floor, was very old. Some units had double bunk beds, which were seldom used, however. Life prisoners took their meals in their cells. Sunlight in the units earmarked for them was often insufficient. Windows typically measured 1 by 0.6-0.8 metres and were situated about 2 metres from the floor, which prevented the inmates from looking out of them. The window frames in the life prisoners’ unit of Plovdiv Prison – but not in that of Stara Zagora Prison – were new. Artificial lighting was never turned off, so as to make it possible for guards visually to inspect the cells at all times. Some inmates complained that that made it hard for them to go to sleep, especially if the lights were luminescent. No life prisoners’ unit had a ventilation system, and fresh air only came through the windows when they were open, which was a problem in winter because even on the coldest days heating was only turned on for one hour in the morning and one hour in the afternoon. Life prisoners had to wash their clothes during their visits to the toilet, and dry them in their cells. In-cell toilets had been built in several prisons, but not in Plovdiv or Stara Zagora Prisons. Access to the common toilets was possible for thirty minutes in the morning, at lunch and in the evening. During that time, life prisoners also had to wash their buckets and eating utensils. The rest of the time, if they needed to go to the toilet, they had to call the guards. Since most prisons did not have a signalling system, prisoners had to bang on the doors of their cells or shout. That often caused conflicts with the guards, and prisoners therefore often preferred to relieve themselves in buckets in their cells. In all prisons except Pleven Prison, life prisoners remained permanently locked in their cells. In Plovdiv Prison, the one-hour daily walk had been extended by thirty minutes, and in Stara Zagora Prison by twenty minutes. In most prisons, life prisoners took their daily walks in separate yards. Those yards were quite small and in some prisons, such as Plovdiv Prison, did not allow a proper workout.
The report went on to say that in August 2009 only eight persons serving a whole life sentence had been provided work: seven inside their cells and one outside. Later, that number had fallen. Finding suitable work for such prisoners was not an easy task for the prison authorities and in Stara Zagora Prison, for instance, no life prisoner had ever been provided with work. In Plovdiv Prison life prisoners had for a period of time been given the job of packing surgical gloves.
The report also noted that most life prisoners had their own television sets, and some also had radios. Since most of those prisoners had lived in the same cells for a number of years, they had tried to arrange them in such a way as to resemble, as far as possible, home interiors. Plovdiv Prison and Stara Zagora Prison did not have clubs in their high-security units. Only a few life prisoners had been given the opportunity to engage in meaningful activities. Caring for them was very hard because of the lack of prospects of release. Nevertheless, in some prisons the teams working with life prisoners had made serious attempts to support them psychologically and give them a sense of perspective and the impetus to keep up their social contact, take part in activities, and counter any depressive or psychosomatic symptoms. In some prisons, however, the treatment of life prisoners fell short of the requirements of the “National standards for the treatment of life prisoners” (see paragraph 135 above), and some of the prisoners concerned had complained that no individual work was being carried out with them and that no cultural, informational or sporting activities were being organised for them.