The case originated in an application (no. 14305/17) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Selahattin Demirtaş (“the applicant”), on 20 February 2017.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Karaman, Ms A. Demirtaş Gökalp, Ms B. Molu, Mr R. Demir and Mr K. Altıparmak, lawyers practising in Diyarbakır, in Istanbul and in Ankara. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his pre-trial detention had breached Articles 5, 10 and 18 of the Convention and Article 3 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 29 June 2017 the Government were given notice of the application.
A Chamber of the Second Section, composed of Robert Spano, President, Ledi Bianku, Işıl Karakaş, Paul Lemmens, Valeriu Griţco, Jon Fridrik Kjølbro, Ivana Jelić, judges, and also of Stanley Naismith, Section Registrar, delivered a judgment on 20 November 2018. It unanimously declared admissible the applicant’s complaints concerning Article 5 § 1 (as to the alleged lack of reasonable suspicion), Article 5 § 3, Article 5 § 4 (as to the alleged lack of a speedy review before the Constitutional Court) and Article 18 of the Convention and Article 3 of Protocol No. 1. It declared further complaints under Article 5 § 1 inadmissible by a majority, and under Article 5 § 4 inadmissible unanimously. The Chamber found, unanimously, that there had been no violation of Article 5 § 1 and of Article 5 § 4 of the Convention and that there had been a violation of Article 5 § 3 of the Convention and of Article 3 of Protocol No. 1. It held by six votes to one that there had been a violation of Article 18 of the Convention in conjunction with Article 5 § 3. It also found, unanimously, that there was no need to examine separately the admissibility and merits of the applicant’s complaint under Article 10 of the Convention. Lastly, the Chamber held, unanimously, that the respondent State had not failed to comply with its obligations under Article 34 of the Convention and that it was to take all necessary measures to put an end to the applicant’s pre-trial detention. The partly dissenting opinion of Judge Karakaş was annexed to the judgment.
On 19 February 2019 both the Government and the applicant requested that the case be referred to the Grand Chamber in accordance with Article 43 of the Convention, and the panel of the Grand Chamber accepted the requests on 18 March 2019.
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined according to the provisions of Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24 of the Rules of Court. During the second deliberations, Vincent A. De Gaetano, whose term of office had expired in the course of the proceedings, continued to deal with the case (Article 23 § 3 of the Convention and Rule 24 § 4). Ksenija Turković succeeded Linos-Alexandre Sicilianos as President of the Grand Chamber (Rules 10 and 11). In addition, Pauliine Koskelo, Yonko Grozev, Péter Paczolay and Lado Chanturia replaced Angelika Nußberger, André Potocki, Armen Harutyunyan and Egidijus Kūris, who were unable to take part in the further consideration of the case (Rule 24 § 3).
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the admissibility and merits of the case.
The Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights (“the Commissioner for Human Rights”) exercised her right to intervene in the proceedings and submitted written comments (Article 36 § 3 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 2).
The Section President had given leave to the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) and to two non-governmental organisations acting jointly, Article 19 and Human Rights Watch (“the intervening NGOs”), to intervene under Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3, and their written comments were included in the file.
The Government and the applicant each replied to the intervening parties’ comments.
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 18 September 2019.
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Ms Çalı, Mr Altıparmak, Mr Demir, Ms Molu, Mr Açıkgül, Mr Talmon and Ms Mijatović, and the replies by Ms Çalı, Mr Altıparmak and Mr Talmon to questions put by the judges.
On various dates between 19 November 2019 and 14 July 2020, the Government and the applicant submitted additional observations.
The applicant was born in 1973. On the date of lodging his application, he was detained in Edirne.
At the material time, the applicant was one of the co-chairs of the Peoples’ Democratic Party (HDP), a left-wing pro-Kurdish political party. From 22 July 2007 onwards he was a member of the Turkish Grand National Assembly (“the National Assembly”). Following the parliamentary elections on 1 November 2015, he was re-elected as a member of the National Assembly for the HDP and held office until the parliamentary elections on 24 June 2018, in which he did not stand as a candidate.
In the presidential election of 10 August 2014 the applicant received 9.76% of the vote. He also stood in the presidential election on 24 June 2018 and obtained 8.32% of the vote.
In September and October 2014, members of the armed terrorist organisation Daesh (Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant) launched an offensive on the Syrian town of Kobani (Ayn al-Arab in Arabic), some 15 km from the Turkish border town of Suruç. Armed clashes took place between Daesh forces and the YPG (People’s Protection Units, founded in Syria and regarded as a terrorist organisation by Turkey on account of its links with the PKK (Workers’ Party of Kurdistan, an armed terrorist organisation)).
Following the outbreak of the clashes in Syria, the Turkish government opened the country’s borders to thousands of refugees, the majority of whom were Kurdish women, children and elderly people who had gathered at the Turkish/Syrian border. However, it closed the same border in the direction of Syria in order to prevent volunteers from leaving to fight in Kobani. From 2 October 2014 onwards, a large number of demonstrations were held in Turkey and several non-governmental organisations at local and international level published statements calling for international solidarity with Kobani against the siege by Daesh. In particular, they urged the government to allow fighters to pass through to Syria.
On 5 October 2014 a tweet was posted on a Twitter account apparently controlled by one of the PKK leaders, reading as follows:
“We call upon all the young people, women and everyone from 7 to 70 to stand up for Kobani, to protect our honour and dignity and to occupy the metropolitan areas.” (“Gençleri kadınları 7’den 70’e herkesi Kobane’ye sahip çıkmaya onurumuzu namusumuzu korumaya metropolleri işgal etmeye çağırıyoruz.”)
On 6 October 2014 the following three tweets were posted on the official HDP Twitter account, @HDPgenelmerkezi:
– “Urgent call to our people! Urgent call to our people from the HDP central executive board, currently in session! The situation in Kobani is extremely dangerous. We urge our people to join and support those protesting in the streets against Daesh attacks and the AKP [Justice and Development Party] government’s embargo over Kobani.” (“Halklarımıza acil çağrı! Şuanda toplantı halinde olan HDP MYK’dan halklarımıza acil çağrı! Kobane’de duruş son derece kritiktir. IŞİD saldırılarını ve AKP iktidarının Kobané’ye ambargo tutumunu protesto etmek üzere halklarımızı sokağa çıkmaya ve sokağa çıkmış olanlara destek vermeye çağırıyoruz.”)
– “We call upon all our people, from 7 to 70, to [go out into] the streets, to [occupy] the streets and to take action against the attempted massacre in Kobani.” (“Kobané’de yaşanan katliam girişimine karşı 7 den 70 e bütün halklarımızı sokağa, alan tutmaya ve harekete geçmeye çağırıyoruz.”)
– “From now on, everywhere is Kobani. We call for permanent resistance until the end of the siege and brutal aggression in Kobani.” (“Bundan böyle her yer Kobane’dir. Kobane’deki kuşatma ve vahşi saldırganlık son bulana kadar süresiz direnişe çağırıyoruz.”)
On the same day, a statement from an organisation known as the KCK (Koma Civakên Kurdistan – “Kurdistan Communities Union”), regarded by the Court of Cassation as a terrorist organisation and the “urban wing” of the PKK, was published on the website www.firatnews.com. The statement read as follows:
“The wave of revolution that started in Kobani must spread throughout Kurdistan, and on that basis we call for an uprising by the Kurdish youth ... All those among our people who can make it to Suruç must go there immediately without wasting a second, and every inch of Kurdistan must rise up for Kobani ... We call upon all our people, from 7 to 70, to make life unbearable for Daesh and their collaborators the AKP wherever they are, and to take a stand against these gangs [responsible for] massacres by fostering rebellion [Serhildan in Kurdish] up to the highest level.” (“Kobani ile başlayan devrim dalgası tüm Kürdistan’a yayılmalı ve Bu temelde Kürt gençliğinin ayaklanması çağrısında bulunuyoruz... Bütün halkımız Suruç’a gidebilecekler hemen bir saniye zaman kaybetmeden gitmeli ve Kürdistan’ın her karış toprağı Kobanê için ayağa kalkmalıdır... Tüm halkımızı yediden yetmişe bulunduğu her yerde yaşamı IŞİD ve işbirlikçisi AKP’ye dar etmeye ve serhıldanı en üst düzeyde geliştirerek bu katliamcı çetelere karşı durmaya çağırıyoruz.”)
On 7 October 2014 the following statement by the KCK Executive Council was published on the same website:
“Our people must carry on the resistance they have started against this terrible and insidious massacre, by spreading it everywhere and at all times. Our people in the North [in the region of south-eastern Turkey] must give the Daesh gangs and their supporters no chance of survival. All the streets must be turned into the streets of Kobani and the strength and organisation of this historic and unique resistance must be developed further. From now on, millions of people must take to the streets and the crowds must flood to the border. All Kurds and all honourable people, friends and groups who are sympathetic [to our cause] must take action. Now is the time to develop and amplify the act of resistance. On this basis, we call upon our people, all groups that are sympathetic [to our cause] and our friends to embrace and amplify the Kobani resistance and we call upon all young people, particularly the Kurdish youth, to join the ranks of freedom in Kobani and to intensify the resistance.” (“Halkımız bu çirkin ve sinsi katliam karşısında başlattığı mücadeleyi her yere, her zamana taşıyarak süreklileştirmelidir. Kuzey halkımız İŞİD çetelerine, uzantılarına ve destekçilerine hiçbir yerde yaşam şansı tanımamalıdır. Tüm sokaklar Kobani sokaklarına dönüştürülmeli, tarihin bu eşsiz direnişine denk bir direniş gücü ve örgütlülüğü geliştirilmelidir. Bu saatten itibaren milyonlar sokaklara akmalı, sınır insan seline dönüşmelidir. Her Kürt ve onurlu her insan, dostlar, duyarlı kesimler bu andan itibaren eyleme geçmelidir. An direniş eylemini geliştirme ve büyütme anıdır. Bu temelde tüm halkımızı, duyarlı kesimleri, dostlarımızı Kobani direnişini sahiplenerek büyümeye, başta Kürt gençleri olmak üzere tüm gençleri Kobani de özgürlük saflarına katılarak direnişi yükseltmeye çağırıyoruz.”)
From 6 October 2014 onwards, demonstrations (see paragraph 18 above) became violent. Clashes took place between different groups, and the security forces intervened forcibly. Following the escalation of violence, the governors of a number of towns imposed curfews on unspecified dates.
In two statements made on 7 and 9 October 2014 the applicant emphasised that he was opposed to the use of violence during the demonstrations. He stated that his party was prepared to cooperate with the government but that the latter first needed to identify the agitators behind the violence.
According to the figures mentioned in the Constitutional Court’s judgment of 21 December 2017 (no. 2016/25189) on an individual application by the applicant, the violence on 6 and 8 October 2014 caused the death of fifty people and injured a further 772, including 331 members of the security forces. No fewer than 1,881 vehicles and 2,558 buildings, including hospitals and schools, suffered damage. In the course of the subsequent criminal investigations by the competent prosecuting authorities, 4,291 people were arrested and 1,105 of them were placed in pre-trial detention (see paragraph 30 of the Constitutional Court’s judgment). According to the public prosecutors, the acts of violence had been prompted by calls posted on the HDP Twitter account (see paragraph 20 above).
On 9 October 2014 the applicant gave a speech at the HDP offices in Diyarbakır. The relevant parts of the speech read as follows:
“We issued the calls in question [the tweets posted on the HDP Twitter account] because we had found out that Daesh had reached the border at Mürşitpınar. People went out into the streets and there was no violence anywhere. We did not tell anyone to resort to violence. We called for political struggle. What aggravated the violence was not the call issued by the HDP, or the demonstrations by the people. It is the government’s responsibility to find those who provoked [the demonstrations]. There should be no acts of violence. There is no need for intervention in demonstrations [held] in support of Kobani ...” (“DAEŞ örgütünün Mürşitpınar sınır kapısına dayandığını öğrendiğimiz için bahsi geçen çağrıları yaptık, insanlar sokağa çıktı hiçbir yerde şiddet kullanılmadı. Şiddet kullanılsın demedik. Siyasi mücadele amaçlı bir çağrı yaptık. Şiddeti büyüten HDP’nin çağrısı değil, halkın gösterileri değil. Tahrik edenleri bulmak hükümetin görevidir. Şiddet eylemleri olmamalı. Kobane’yi sahiplenme eylemlerine müdahale edilmemeli ...”)
In an interview published on 13 October 2014 in the daily newspaper Evrensel, the applicant was quoted as follows:
“It is directly linked to Kobani. It is not for us to calm down the anger. We do not have so much influence over the people, nor is it necessary. We believe that the practical measures the government could take to drive Daesh out of Kobani will end this anger. Of course, I am not talking about acts of violence. We have not encouraged acts of violence such as the use of weapons, arson, destruction [and] robbery. We have not incited or organised [such acts]. But we have called for the people’s anger to be channelled into an ongoing protest, day and night, everywhere, on the squares, in homes, in the streets, in cars. We still stand behind that call.” (“Doğrudan Kobaniyle bağlantılıdır. Öfkeyi yatıştırabilecek olan biz değiliz. Bizim halk üzerinde ne böyle bir gücümüz vardır ne de buna gerek vardır. Yani halk IŞİD’e karşı durmasın sempati duysun diye uğraşacak değiliz. Biz hükümetin atacağı pratik adımların IŞİD’in Kobani’den püskürtülmesiyle sonuçlanmasının bu öfkeyi durduracağını düşünüyoruz. Elbette ki bundan kastettiğim şiddet olayları değil. Biz silah kullanma, yakıp yıkma, yapmalama gibi şiddet eylemlerini teşvik etmedik, tahrik etmedik, örgütlemedik ama halkın öfkesinin alanlarda, meydanlarda, gece gündüz evinde, sokakta, arabasında elindeki bütün imkanlarla bir protestoya dönüşmesinin çağrısını yaptık. O çağrının da halen arkasındayız.”)
On 11 October 2011 the applicant, who at the time was co-chair of the Peace and Democracy Party ((BDP), a left-wing pro-Kurdish political party), gave a speech at a meeting of his party’s parliamentary group. The relevant parts of the speech read as follows:
“He [Abdullah Öcalan] is not a person being detained in İmralı, he is the future of Turkey as far as freedom and peace are concerned. For that reason, the government should move him to house arrest as soon as possible. This is a serious proposal. Look, for years we said ‘go to İmralı and meet [him]’, [and] you attacked [us], you insulted [us], you said ‘is that possible?’ Yet you went there and met [him]. You did well. You stopped the bloodshed after years; you managed [to agree] a ceasefire. Is that a bad thing? Who knows how many lives have been saved, how many young people have been saved, how many mothers have been spared suffering? Our proposal was appropriate [and] correct, we insisted and it became a reality. Now, Turkey must also discuss our current proposal, in a common-sense, rational manner. We are showing the right, rational, realistic path which we know [and] believe in. No other path leads to the solution [of the Kurdish question]. By planting flags, trying to plant flags here and there, you will only cause bloodshed, you will only put off the question for decades, you will only amplify the question. If you try to lynch those who show you rational paths, there will be no one to talk to and negotiate with. This lynching attitude towards us, this insulting approach to our proposals is the most serious and problematic behaviour that is obstructing the solution to the question. We have to discuss openly, what is wrong with house arrest? Is there a Kurdish question in this case? Yes. Are we faced with a historical question that we inherited from the Ottoman [Empire]? Yes. Do we have to solve this question? Yes. Has this question led to twenty-nine uprisings? Yes. What is the latest uprising? Who is its leader? Abdullah Öcalan. Where is he? In İmralı.” (“İmralı’da tutulan bir şahıs değildir, Türkiye’nin özgürlüğe, barışa dair geleceğidir. O nedenle ev hapsini kısa vadede hemen uygulamaya koymalıdır hükümet, bu öneri ciddi bir öneridir. Bakın yıllarca, "gidin İmralı’da görüşme yapın" dedik, saldırdınız, hakaretler ettiniz "böyle şey mi olur" dediniz. Bunu söylerken bile gidip görüştünüz. İyi de yaptınız. Görüştüğünüz yıllarda akan kanı durdurdunuz, ateşkesleri sağladınız. Fena mı oldu? Kim bilir kaç bin insanın canı kurtuldu, kaç bin gencin canı kurtuldu, kaç bin ananın acısını önlediniz fena mı oldu? Önerimiz yerindeydi, doğruydu, ısrar ettik gerçekleşti. Şimdi bu yaptığımız öneriyi de sağduyuyla sağlıklı, akılcı bir şekilde Türkiye tartışmak durumundadır. Bildiğimiz, inandığımız, doğru, akılcı, gerçekçi yolu gösteriyoruz. Bunun dışındaki hiçbir yol çözüm yolu değildir. Şuraya buraya bayrak dikmekle, bayrak dikmeye çalışmakla sadece kan dökersiniz, sadece sorunu on yıllarca ertelersiniz, sorunu büyütürsünüz. Ama akılcı yolları gösterenleri linç etmeye çalışırsanız ortada görüşebileceğiniz, ortada konuşabileceğiniz hiç kimse kalmayacaktır. Bize yönelik bu linç tutumu, bizim önerilerimize karşı bu hakaretvari yaklaşım çözümün önünü tıkayan en ciddi, en sıkıntılı anlayıştır. Açıkça tartışılsın, ev hapsinin neyi yanlıştır? Ortada bir Kürt sorunu var mı ? Var. Osmanlı’dan devraldığımız tarihi bir sorunla karşı karşıya mıyız ? Evet. Bu sorunu çözmek zorunda mıyız ? Evet. Bu sorun 29 isyana konu olmuş mu ? Evet. Son isyan hangisi ? Bu isyan, bu isyanın lideri kim ? Abdullah Öcalan. O nerede ? İmralı’da.”)
Towards the end of 2012, a peace process known as the “solution process” was initiated with a view to finding a lasting, peaceful solution to the Kurdish question. A series of reforms aimed at improving the protection of human rights in Turkey were implemented. A delegation of members of parliament, including the applicant, made several visits to İmralı island, the site of the prison holding Abdullah Öcalan, the leader of the PKK, who had been convicted in 1999 of carrying out acts designed to bring about the secession of part of Turkey’s territory and forming and leading a terrorist organisation for that purpose, and who had also called in 2013 for an end to the armed struggle. On 28 February 2015 the delegation, together with the then Deputy Prime Minister, presented the “Dolmabahçe consensus”, a ten-point reconciliation declaration. The then Prime Minister stated that the consensus meant that significant steps were being taken towards halting terrorist activities in Turkey. However, shortly after the announcement, the President of Turkey said that it was out of the question that the government would reach an agreement with a terrorist organisation. That statement appears to have marked the end of the consensus. Subsequently, several weeks before the parliamentary elections of 7 June 2015, the Deputy Prime Minister made the following statement to the press: “If the HDP exceeds the threshold [for representation in Parliament] and the AKP government loses power, there will be no solution process.”
On 5 June 2015 a terrorist attack apparently carried out by Daesh caused the death of two people in Diyarbakır following two explosions of unknown origin at the HDP’s final election rally. More than 100 other people were injured in the blasts.
Parliamentary elections were held on 7 June 2015, and for the first time a pro-Kurdish party passed the threshold for representation in the National Assembly. The HDP received 13.12% of the vote and became the second-largest opposition party. In addition, the AKP lost its majority in Parliament for the first time since 2002.
On 20 July 2015 a terrorist attack apparently carried out by Daesh took place in Suruç, leaving thirty-four people dead and more than 100 others injured.
On 22 July 2015, in another terrorist attack, two police officers were murdered at their homes in Ceylanpınar, allegedly by PKK members. The perpetrators of the murders, which resulted de facto in the end of the “solution process”, have yet to be identified.
The day after that attack, armed clashes resumed between the security forces and the PKK. The PKK’s leaders urged the people to arm themselves and to build underground systems and tunnels that could be used during armed clashes. They also called for the proclamation of a political system of self-governance. In addition, they announced that all civil servants in the region would now be considered accomplices of the AKP and as a result would risk being targeted.
On 28 July 2015 the President of Turkey gave a statement to the press insisting that the HDP leaders would have to “pay the price” for the acts of terrorism. The relevant part of the statement reads as follows:
“I do not approve of dissolving political parties. But I say that the leaders of that party [the HDP] must pay the price. Personally and individually.” (“Ben parti kapatılması olayını doğru bulmuyorum. Fakat bu partinin yöneticilerinin bu işin bedelini ödemeleri gerekir diyorum. Fert fert, birey birey.”)
On the same day, the applicant gave a speech at a meeting of his party’s parliamentary group, stating the following:
“We will not allow the murder of anyone who is in the mountains [image used to refer to PKK members], or in the army, or in the police; we will not view that as normal. They must not pay the price. We have taken the reins of power from our people to pay the price; they voted for us for that purpose. We are ready to pay any price, but those who fight us and those who are hostile to us should be as brave as we are. Otherwise, they will lose, they will lose. We will all see this together. They will be defeated by this resistance. The feeling of peace in Turkey will triumph. The free future of Turkey will triumph, provided that we do not forget the HDP principle that we united around.” (“Biz, ne dağdakinin, ne askerdekinin, ne polisin öldürülmesine izin vermeyeceğiz, hiçbirini normal karşılamayacağız. Onlar bedel ödemesin. Biz bedel ödemek için halkımızdan yetki aldık, bize bunun için oy verdiler. Ne bedel ödenecekse, biz hazırız. Ama bizimle mücadele edenler de, bize düşmanlık yapanlar da en az bizim kadar cesur olmalılar. Yoksa kaybederler, kaybedecekler. Bunu hep birlikte göreceğiz. Onlar bu direniş karşısında yenilecekler. Türkiye’nin barış duygusu kazanacak. Türkiye’nin özgür yarınları, özgür geleceği kazanacak. Yeter ki, nasıl bir HDP ilkesi etrafında birleştiğimizi tek bir dakika bile unutmayalım.”)
Between 10 and 19 August 2015 self-governance was proclaimed in nineteen different towns in Turkey, the vast majority of them in the south-eastern region.
Members of the YDG-H (Patriotic Revolutionary Youth Movement), regarded as the PKK’s youth wing, dug trenches and put up barricades in several towns in eastern and south-eastern Turkey, including Cizre, Silopi, Sur, İdil and Nusaybin, to prevent the security forces from entering. According to the security forces, members of the YDG-H had brought a large number of weapons and explosives into the region.
In August 2015, local governors imposed curfews in various towns in south-eastern Turkey. The stated aim of such measures was to clear the trenches that had been dug by members of terrorist organisations, to remove any explosives planted there, and to protect civilians from acts of violence. The security forces carried out operations in the areas where the curfew was in place, using heavy weapons.
On 19 August 2015 eight soldiers were killed in a terrorist attack in Siirt carried out by members of the PKK.
On 6 and 8 September 2015, sixteen soldiers and thirteen police officers were killed in two terrorist attacks carried out by the PKK.
Following the imposition of a curfew in Sur, the applicant gave a statement to the press in Lice on 13 September 2015. He stated:
“Our people want self-governance, their own assemblies and municipalities where responsibility lies with elected officials rather than appointees. Our people have the power to resist against pressure and massacre policies everywhere. We have the power to protect ourselves against any attack. We will show that we are not despairing; we will resist together; we will achieve salvation without forgetting our motherland and our history and by defending our rights.” (“Halkımız atananların değil seçilmişlerin yetkili olduğu kendi meclisleri ile belediye ile kendini yönetmek istiyor. Halkımız her yerde baskı politikalarına katliam politikalarına karşı direnebilecek güçtedir. Bütün saldırılara karşı kendimizi koruyacak gücümüz var. Çaresiz olmadığımızı gösteriyoruz, birlikte direneceğiz, kendi ana vatanımızı da tarihimizi de unutmadan haklarımızı da savunarak hep birlikte kurtuluşa gideceğiz.”)
On 10 October 2015 a terrorist attack, generally considered to have been the deadliest one ever committed in the history of Turkey, was carried out by Daesh in Ankara. More than 100 people were killed and more than 500 others injured. Most of the victims were demonstrators who had answered the call of several non-governmental organisations, including the HDP, to express their discontent at the surge of violence in Turkey.
Following the failure of negotiations aimed at forming a coalition government, early elections were held on 1 November 2015, in which the HDP polled 10.76% of the vote. The AKP won the elections and regained its majority in the National Assembly.
In a statement to the press on 18 December 2015 the applicant stated:
“Everywhere you carry out [security] operations is filled with an atmosphere of enthusiasm rather than fear and panic. Do you know why? [Because] these people are absolutely certain that they will triumph from the very first day. They are the defenders of an honourable, noble and dignified cause. We will not let cruelty and fascism win any more; this resistance will triumph. Those who try to downplay it by calling it [resistance of] ditches and holes should look back at history. There are tens of millions of heroes and brave people resisting against this coup. You are waging a war against the people. The people are resisting and will resist everywhere. Next week, on 26 and 27 December, we will attend the extraordinary meeting of the Democratic Society Congress [DTK] in Diyarbakır. We will have intensive discussions and take important decisions concerning the processes of self-governance and autonomy and their operation in the political arena. We will implement them all.” (“Bugün operasyon yaptığınız her yerde korku ve panik havası değil coşku havası hakim. Neden biliyor musunuz ? O insanlar daha ilk günden kazandıklarından o kadar eminler ki. Onurlu, şerefli, haysiyetki bir davanın savunucularıdır. Bir kez daha zulmün, faşizmin kazanmasına izin vermeyeceğiz, bu direniş kazanacaktır. Öyle hendek, çukur diye küçümsemeye çalışanlar da dönüp tarihe baksınlar. On milyonlarca kahraman, yiğit bu darbeye karşı direnen insan var. Sen halka karşı savaş açmışsın. Halk her yerde direnir, direnecektir. Önümüzdeki haftasonu 26-27 Aralık’ta Diyarbakır’da Demokratik Toplum Kongresi’nin olağanüstü kongresine bizler de katılacağız. Öz yönetimin, özerkliğin inşası ve içinin doldurulması sürecinn siyasi zeminde daha güçlü yönetilmesi için çok yoğun tartışmalar yapacağız, önemli kararlar alacağız. Bunların hepsini hayata geçireceğiz.”)
On 22 December 2015, in a statement to the National Assembly, the applicant said the following:
“Look at Sarajevo. For four years Sarajevo was under siege, four years. Neighbourhood by neighbourhood, [there was a] blockade. The people who are now enthusiastically praised as heroes – what did they do against policies of massacre and genocide? They dug trenches, put up barricades, hung up curtains so the snipers did not kill them, dug tunnels to escape the siege and tried to set up an underground transport system to find food and water. Today, Davutoğlu is imposing the same thing on the districts of his own country. If the military operations end, the police operations stop, the curfews are lifted, if the government says ‘What is self-governance? What is autonomy? Let’s go and listen’, what does the government have to lose?” (“Saraybosna’ya bakın. 4 yıl boyunca Saraybosna’da bir kuşatma yaşandı, 4 yıl. Mahalle mahalle ablukaya aldılar. Ne yaptı oradaki insanlar? Bugün övgüyle, coşkuyla, kahramanlık öyküsüyle anlattığımız Saraybosna’da o katliam, soykırım politikalarına karşı ne yaptı insanlar; hendek kazdılar, barikat kurdular, perde astılar keskin nişancılar vurmasın diye, yeraltına tüneller kazdılar ablukayı kırmak için, kendilerine yemek ve su bulabilmek için yeraltından ulaşım sağlamaya çalıştılar. Aynı şeyi bugün Davutoğlu kendi ülkesinde ilçelere dayatıyor. Askeri operasyonlar son bulsa, polis operasyonları son bulsa, şu sokağa çıkma yasakları kaldırılsa, « özyönetim nedir, özerklik nedir, bunu bir dinleyelim, gelin, müzakere edelim » dese bir hükümet, ne kaybedecek ?”)
On 26 December 2015 the applicant attended the extraordinary meeting of the DTK. He gave a speech in which he defended self-governance and the resistance. He stated that barricades had been put up and trenches dug to thwart the Ankara authorities’ plans for a massacre. The DTK’s closing declaration included a call for the creation of autonomous regions.
On 29 December 2015 the President of Turkey stated to the press that the applicant’s speeches amounted to “clear provocation and treason”.
In a statement to the press on 2 January 2016, the President of Turkey said the following:
“The statements by the two co-chairs clearly amount to crimes against the Constitution. They are both currently the subject of proceedings initiated by public prosecutors. These matters deserve to be followed up. Closing down the party should not even be on the agenda. But there may be members of parliament, mayors or other people who have committed offences. They must pay for it. The investigations initiated by the Diyarbakır and Ankara chief public prosecutors should also be seen against this background. I believe that the process that will start with the lifting of [parliamentary] immunity will also have a positive impact on the atmosphere in our country in terms of combating terrorism. We cannot accept messages intended to divide the country. We can never accept a State within the State. We must take steps by providing the necessary responses to these problems, by applying sanctions and by setting the judicial [authorities] in motion. There are over 160 files with the National Assembly. When they have been examined, [their contents] will be laid on the table and steps will be taken accordingly.” (“İki eşbaşkanın yaptığı açıklamalar kesinlikle anayasa suçu. Haklarında cumhuriyet başsavcılıklarının başlattıkları süreçler var. Bu konular takip edilmeli. Parti kapatma olayı gündeme dahi gelmemeli. Ama suçu irtikap eden milletvekili, belediye başkanı veya başkaları olabilir. Bunlar bunun bedelini ödemek durumundadır. Diyarbakır ve Ankara başsavcılıklarının başlattığı soruşturmaları da bu çerçevede değerlendirmek lazım. Dokunulmazlıklarının kaldırılması suretiyle başlayacak süreç, inanıyorum ki terörle mücadele açısından ülkemizdeki havayı da olumlu yönde etkileyecektir. Ülkeyi parçalayıp bölmeye yönelik mesajları kabul etmemiz mümkün değil. Devlet içinde devleti kabul etmemiz asla mümkün değil. Bunlara karşı gerekli cevabın verilmesi, müeyyide uygulanması, yargı mekanizmasının devreye girmesi suretiyle atılması gereken adımlar var. Meclis’te 160’ı aşkın dosyaları var. Bunlar gözden geçirildiği zaman neyi kapsıyor, masaya yatırılacak ve ona göre adım atılacaktır.”)
On 12 January 2016, at a meeting of his party’s group within the National Assembly, the applicant gave a speech in which he once again defended self-governance and praised the “resistance”. The relevant parts of his speech read as follows:
“Dear friends, believe me, if powers are delegated to local authorities, not only municipalities run by the HDP, but also those run by the AKP, the MHP [Nationalist Movement Party] and the CHP [Republican People’s Party] will work better. We want [this] so local authorities can work better, and not to divide or break up the country. We want power to belong to the local [authorities], we want them to take their own decisions, to be open to public scrutiny when adopting their own budgets or [implementing] their own practices, to be transparent and strong; that is what we call self-governance, this is what we call autonomy. I say that, inshallah, our country will one day regain that administrative model, rather than dictatorship. I wish success this week to all my friends in Parliament and all party officials and members. I want to convey our affection and greetings to our people [and] all our friends resisting in Cizre, Silopi and Sur.” (“İnanın ki değerli arkadaşlar, bizim arzu ettiğimiz yerel yönetimlere yetki devri de yapılsa, sadece HDP’li belediye değil, AKP’li belediyeler de dahi iyi çalışacak, MHP’li belediyeler de, CHP’li belediyeler de daha iyi çalışacak. Biz yerel yönetimler daha iyi çalışsın istiyoruz, ülke bölünsün, parçalansın değil. Yerelde yetki olsun, kendi kararlarını, bütçelerini, uygulamalarını yaparken, halkın denetimine açık, şeffaf, güçlü yerel yönetimler olsun istiyoruz; özyönetim dediğimiz budur, özerklik dediğimiz budur. İnşallah ülkemiz bir gün o yönetim modeline kavuşacak, diktatörlüğe değil diyorum. Bu hafta içerisinde hem milletvekili arkadaşlarıma, hem bütün Parti görevlilerine, çalışanlarımıza ben başarılar diliyorum. Cizre’ye, Silopi’ye, Sur’a da, bütün halkımıza, direnen bütün arkadaşlarımıza da buradan bir kez daha sevgi, selamlarımızı iletiyorum.”)
On 9 February 2016, at a meeting of his party’s group within the National Assembly, the applicant stated the following:
“To keep silent on the subject of Cizre [and] Sur and all these atrocities is to capitulate to the AKP’s policies of polarisation and division, which are causing a civil war. We are in the streets, demonstrating, because we object to this.” (“Cizre’ye, Sur’a ve yaşanan bütün bu vahşete sessiz kalmak işte bu AKP’nin kutuplaştırıcı, ayrıştırıcı ve iç savaşı giderek tetikleyen politikalarına teslim olmak demektir. Biz buna itiraz ettiğimiz için yollardayız, yürüyüşlerdeyiz.”)
On 23 February 2016 the applicant gave a speech at a meeting of his party’s group within the National Assembly. The relevant parts of the speech read as follows:
“Will the Kurdish question be resolved when you lift the curfew in Cizre in three to five days? Will the Kurdish question be resolved when you massacre some 200 civilians, including women [and] children, who are now putting up resistance in Sur [and,] as you did in Cizre, [when] you act barbarically by pouring petrol onto their corpses [so] their families cannot recognise them, [so] they cannot hold funerals?” (“Örneğin siz, Cizre’de üç-beş gün sonra sokağa çıkma yasağını kaldırdığınızda, Kürt sorunu çözülmüş mü olacak? Sur’da şu anda sıkıştırmaya çalıştığınız 200’e yakın sivil, kadın, çoluk çocuk, direnişti, onları katlettiğinizde örneğin, Cizre’deki gibi yapıp, cenazelerine bile benzin döküp, “Aileleri tanıyamasın, cenaze törenleri bile yapılamasın” barbarlığıyla yaklaştığınız uygulamalarla sonuç aldığınızda Kürt sorunu çözülmüş mü olacak ?”)
In a speech on 26 March 2016 the applicant drew a distinction between war, which he described as illegitimate, and resistance, which in his view was a legitimate response to the fascist policies of those in power, who accused millions of people of being terrorists.
On 4 October 2016, at a meeting of his party’s group within the National Assembly, the applicant stated the following:
“I am issuing a further call. Taking to the streets is legitimate. Resistance to cruelty is legitimate, [it is a] right. It’s legitimate for you [Recep Tayyip Erdoğan], but it isn’t legitimate for us? It is legitimate for those who take to the streets to protest against the coup of 15 July, but it isn’t legitimate for those who take to the streets to protest against [the appointment of governors in place of elected mayors], against the pre-trial detention of a member of parliament? Everyone’s wishes deserve to be respected. The people have the right to express their democratic reaction peacefully anywhere and we will never give up. They will say [things like] ‘oh, but the streets are dangerous’; don’t believe them. The streets are one of the most legitimate areas of democracy.” (“Tekrar çağırıyorum. Sokak meşrudur. Zulme karşı direniş meşrudur, haktır. Sana meşrudur da, bize meşru değil mi? 15 Temmuz darbesine karşı sokağa çıkana meşrudur da, kayyuma karşı, vekil tutuklanırsa sokağa çıkacaklar gayrimeşru mudur? Herkesin iradesi saygındır. Halk demokratik tepkisini her yerde barışçıl çerçevede gösterme hakkını, hukukuna sahiptir ve asla vazgeçmeyeceğiz. Aman aman, bunlar, « efendim sokak tehlikelidir » falan filan diyecekler, kanmayın bunlara. Sokak demokrasinin en meşru alanlarından biridir.”)
On 16 March 2016 the President of Turkey gave a speech to village and neighbourhood mayors (muhtars) at the presidential complex. The relevant parts of the speech read as follows:
“We must immediately settle the issue of immunity. Parliament must move forward quickly. [We cannot discuss whether to lift the immunity of just] one or two people. We need to adopt a principle. What is this principle? Those who cause the death of fifty-two people by urging my Kurdish brothers to pour into the streets will show up in Parliament, those who say that the PKK, the PYD [Democratic Union Party] and the YPG are behind them will have clean hands, is that it? If Parliament does not take the necessary action, this nation and history will hold it accountable.” (“Dokunulmazlıklar meselesini süratle neticelendirmeliyiz. Parlamento adımını süratle atmalıdır. Bir kişi mi olsun, iki kişi mi ? Biz ortaya ilkeyi koymalıyız. Nedir bu ilke? Benim Kürt kardeşlerimi sokağa dökerek 52 kişinin ölümüne yol açan kişiler yargılanmayacak da parlamentoda boy gösterecek, arkasında PKK’nin, PYD’nin, YPG’nin olduğunu söyleyenler temiz olacak öyle mi? Parlamento gereğini yapmazsa, bu millet, tarih bu parlamentodan hesabını sorar.”)
On 20 May 2016 the National Assembly passed a constitutional amendment entailing the insertion of a provisional Article in the 1982 Constitution. Pursuant to the amendment, parliamentary immunity, as provided for in the second paragraph of Article 83 of the Constitution, was lifted in all cases where requests for the lifting of immunity had been transmitted to the National Assembly prior to the date of adoption of the amendment in question. The relevant parts of the explanatory memorandum on the constitutional amendment read as follows:
“At a time when Turkey is waging the strongest and most intensive campaign against terrorism in its history, certain members of parliament, whether before or after their election, have made speeches voicing moral support for terrorism, have provided de facto support and assistance to terrorism and terrorists [and] have called for violence; [these actions] have aroused public indignation. The Turkish public are of the view that members of parliament who support terrorism and the terrorist[s] and call for violence are abusing their [parliamentary] immunity, and they are urging the Turkish Grand National Assembly to ensure that anyone carrying out such activities can be brought to justice. In the face of such a demand, it is inconceivable that the Assembly should remain silent.” (“Türkiye, tarihinin en büyük ve en kapsamlı, terörle mücadelesini yürütürken, bazı milletvekillerinin seçilmeden önce ya da seçildikten sonra yapmış oldukları teröre manevi ve moral destek manasındaki açıklamaları, bazı milletvekillerinin teröre ve teröristlere fiili manada destek ve yardımları, bazı milletvekillerinin ise şiddet çağrıları kamuoyunda büyük infial meydana getirmektedir. Türkiye kamuoyu milletvekillerinden, her şeyden önce, terörü ve teröristi destekleyen, şiddete çağrı yapan milletvekillerinin dokunulmazlığı istismar ettiğini düşünmekte, bu tür fiilleri olanların yargılanmasına Meclis tarafından izin verilmesini talep etmektedir. Böyle bir talep karşısında, Meclis’in sessiz kalması düşünülemez.”)
The constitutional amendment affected a total of 154 of the 550 members of the National Assembly at that time, including fifty-nine from the CHP, fifty-five from the HDP, twenty-nine from the AKP and ten from the MHP. It also concerned one independent member of parliament.
On various dates, fourteen members of parliament from the HDP, including the applicant, and one from the CHP were placed in pre-trial detention as the subject of criminal investigations.
On an unknown date, seventy members of parliament applied to the Constitutional Court for a review of the constitutional amendment. Their main argument was that the amendment should be treated as a “parliamentary decision” under Article 83 of the Constitution lifting the immunity attaching to their status as members of parliament. They contended that the Constitutional Court should review the constitutionality of that “decision” in accordance with Article 85 of the Constitution.
In judgment no. 2016/117, delivered on 3 June 2016, the Constitutional Court unanimously rejected the application. It observed that the case before it concerned a constitutional amendment in the formal sense of the term, which could not be treated as a parliamentary decision to lift the members’ immunity. It further noted that the amendment in question could be reviewed in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 148 of the Constitution. However, under that procedure, only the President of Turkey or one-fifth of the 550 members of the National Assembly could apply for a review. Finding that this condition was not satisfied in the case before it, the Constitutional Court rejected the application by the members of parliament concerned.
On 8 June 2016 the constitutional amendment was published in the Official Gazette. It came into force on the same day.
During the applicant’s successive terms as a member of parliament, ninety-three investigation reports (fezleke) were drawn up in respect of him by the competent prosecuting authorities, the vast majority concerning terrorism-related offences. The prosecutors applied to the National Assembly to have the applicant’s parliamentary immunity lifted. Forty-five of these investigation reports were drawn up between 2007 and 2014. In 2015 and 2016, a total of forty-eight investigation reports were submitted to the National Assembly.
Following the entry into force of the constitutional amendment concerning the lifting of parliamentary immunity (see paragraph 56 above), the Diyarbakır public prosecutor (“the public prosecutor”) decided to join thirty-one separate criminal investigations in respect of the applicant together as a single case. There are currently seven other sets of criminal proceedings pending against the applicant in the national courts. However, as the investigations and proceedings concerned do not form part of the present application – since the applicant did not raise any complaints about them in his application form – all references below to “the criminal investigation” will relate to the investigation being conducted by the Diyarbakır public prosecutor’s office.
Between July and October 2016 the competent public prosecutors issued six separate summonses for the applicant to give evidence in connection with the criminal investigation in respect of him. However, the applicant did not appear before the investigating authorities, having stated in a speech at a meeting of his party’s parliamentary group in April 2016 that no HDP member of parliament would give evidence voluntarily.
On 9 September 2016 the Diyarbakır Magistrate’s Court ordered restrictions on the right of the applicant’s lawyers to inspect the contents of the investigation file or to obtain copies of documents in the file. On an unspecified date, the applicant lodged an objection against that decision, which was dismissed on 19 November 2016.
On 3 November 2016, at the public prosecutor’s request, the Diyarbakır Magistrate’s Court ordered a search of the applicant’s home.
Subsequently, on 4 November 2016 the security forces carried out operations against twelve HDP members of parliament, including the applicant, who were arrested and taken into police custody.
On the same day, the applicant, assisted by three lawyers, appeared before the Diyarbakır public prosecutor. He maintained that he had been arrested and taken into police custody on the orders of the President of Turkey because of his political activities and refused to answer any questions relating to the accusations against him.
Afterwards, the Diyarbakır public prosecutor asked the Diyarbakır 2nd Magistrate’s Court to place the applicant in pre-trial detention for membership of an armed terrorist organisation (Article 314 § 1 of the Criminal Code) and public incitement to commit an offence (Article 214 § 1 of the Criminal Code).
On the same day, the applicant was brought before the Diyarbakır 2nd Magistrate’s Court. His lawyer submitted, in particular, that his client could not be the subject of a criminal investigation and could therefore not be deprived of his liberty since he was entitled to immunity from criminal liability under the first paragraph of Article 83 of the Constitution. After hearing the submissions of the applicant’s lawyers, the magistrate ordered the applicant’s pre-trial detention. The following reasons were given for the decision:
“...
The suspect Selahattin Demirtaş appeared before [the] magistrate to be questioned in connection with [alleged] offences of public incitement to commit an offence and membership of an armed terrorist organisation; the suspect is still a member of parliament but is nevertheless not entitled to parliamentary immunity in relation to the offences [dating from] before 20 May 2016, on account of the amendment made to the second paragraph of Article 83 of the Constitution by Law no. 6718 of the same date; [as established below,] there is concrete evidence giving rise to a strong suspicion [that the suspect] committed offences:
(a)  On 5 October 2014 at 12.07 a.m., a tweet was posted from the ‘@murat_karayilan’ Twitter account, apparently belonging [to a] member of the ‘executive board’ of the PKK/KCK terrorist organisation; the tweet read as follows: ‘We call upon all the young people, women and everyone from 7 to 70 to stand up for Kobani, to protect our honour and dignity and to occupy the metropolitan areas.’ On 6 October 2014, the ‘firatnews.com’ website, which is reputed to publish information in favour of the PKK/KCK terrorist organisation, posted the following statement [on behalf of] the Komalen Ciwan coordination: ‘As we already know, for twenty-three days, Daesh fascism has been unfurling its barbarity in the centre of Kobani. Faced with this situation, Kurdistan’s bravest young [women and men] are resisting [and] we honour the memory of those who perished in this unique episode of resistance, which will be engraved in gold letters in history, [and] we want to say that we will pursue their struggle. In this connection, we call on the Kurdish youth to follow the path of Arin Mirkan [a YPJ (Women’s Protection Units) fighter who was blown up among Daesh members in the battle of Kobani] to the glory of the souls of our martyr comrades Jiyan, Gerilla and Militan’. Following that publication, at 10.20 a.m., the central executive board of the Peoples’ Democratic Party, the HDP (including the suspect, who was among the members [present at the meeting] of the executive board on 6 October 2014), posted the following tweet: ‘Urgent call to our people! Urgent call to our people from the HDP central executive board, currently in session! The situation in Kobani is extremely dangerous. We urge our people to join and support those protesting in the streets against Daesh attacks and the AKP government’s embargo over Kobani.’ At 10.51 a.m. the HDP Twitter account confirmed the post. A further tweet was then posted by the same account: ‘We call upon all our people, from 7 to 70, to [go out into] the streets, to [occupy] the streets and to take action against the attempted massacre in Kobani.’ In addition, [the following tweet was published]: ‘From now on, everywhere is Kobani. We call for permanent resistance until the end of the siege and brutal aggression in Kobani.’ Following the publication of those tweets, on 6, 7 and 8 October 2014, during incidents in sixteen towns in Turkey, the offences ... were committed. It was found that during the commission of the offences [in question], 50 people had died, including 12 in Diyarbakır, 678 people had been injured and 1,113 buildings (including hospitals, schools, banks and town halls) had been rendered unfit for use. The [above-mentioned] statements by the suspect give rise to suspicion on the basis of concrete indications that he committed, simultaneously with members of the PKK/KCK terrorist organisation, the offence of public incitement to commit an offence.
(b)  On 9 October 2014, in the presence of several television channels, the suspect gave a statement to the media in the HDP offices in Diyarbakır, [in which he stated] as follows:
‘We issued the calls in question [the tweets posted by the HDP Twitter account] because we had found out that Daesh had reached the border at Mürşitpınar’;
‘If no call had been issued, the events could not have been prevented in the region’;
‘People went out into the streets and there was no violence anywhere. We did not tell anyone to resort to violence’;
‘On 7 October 2014 a young man was murdered by the security forces in Varto (Muş)’;
‘In Batman, unidentified civilians opened fire on the demonstrators’;
‘People were not satisfied with [the pursuit of] the peace process, which was not leading to any conclusion; they were in a bad mood’;
‘There should be no acts of violence. There is no need for intervention in demonstrations [held] in support of Kobani ...’
On 13 September 2015 the suspect gave the following statement to the press in Lice about the declaration of a curfew in Sur by the Diyarbakır governor’s office: ‘Our people want self-governance, their own assemblies and municipalities where responsibility lies with elected officials rather than appointees. Our people have the power to resist against pressure and massacre policies everywhere. We have the power to protect ourselves against any attack. We will show that we are not despairing; we will resist together; we will achieve salvation without forgetting our motherland and history and by defending our rights.’
On 18 December 2015 the suspect gave a statement to the press with Kamuran Yüksek, Selma Irmak and Ertuğrul Kürkçü. [He stated the following:] ‘Everywhere you carry out [security] operations is filled with an atmosphere of enthusiasm rather than fear and panic. Do you know why? [Because] these people are absolutely certain that they will triumph from the very first day. They are the defenders of an honourable, noble and dignified cause. We will not let cruelty and fascism win any more; this resistance will triumph. Those who try to downplay it by calling it [resistance of] ditches and holes should look back at history. There are tens of millions of heroes and brave people resisting against this coup. You are waging a war against the people. The people are resisting and will resist everywhere. Next week, on 26 and 27 December, we will attend the extraordinary meeting of the Democratic Society Congress in Diyarbakır. We will have intensive discussions and take important decisions concerning the processes of self-governance and autonomy and their operation in the political arena. We will implement them all.’
On 26, 27 and 28 October 2007 the suspect took part, together with mayors and members of the DTP [Party for a Democratic Society, a left-wing pro-Kurdish political party] in the ‘First General Meeting’ of the DTK (Democratic Society Congress), which was founded and operates in accordance with the Third Part of the KCK Agreement.
On 26 December 2015 the suspect made the [following] statements to the DTK: ‘The barricades and trenches are not the result of the Kurdish people’s desire for self-governance; they were put up because the people who made plans for a massacre in Ankara began implementing those plans. What trench, what barricade? We can’t play down the question. The resistance in the trenches and barricades [is driven by the same motive as] the resistance against fascism and massacres: the right to an honourable life. If one day someone refuses to accept this and discuss it and says he will lock up and bring to their knees anyone who thinks in this way ... ‘Oh, they have put up barricades, but that’s not much – what else can they do?’ They criticise us because that’s what people say. If we, the politicians, NGOs, workers’ organisations, women’s organisations, youth organisations, local authorities, can support self-governance, if we can achieve it step by step, we will solve this historic problem. This resistance will lead to victory. My thanks go to all our friends [, who are not letting us down], who are resisting, who are not crumbling, [and] all our comrades who, despite everything, are remaining by the people’s side during this time. Once again, I repeat my promise of loyalty and affection towards our friends, their families and the martyrs from 7 to 70 who have put their lives at risk.’
On 26 March 2016, in the theatre hall at Yenişehir Municipality Building, the suspect gave a speech [in which he stated]: ‘Not claiming a corpse is dishonourable; leaving a corpse on the ground is dishonourable. We are looking at [what is happening] with shame; we are truly ashamed. [They are saying:] ‘Oh, you went to [express] your condolences’, ‘no, it was a member of parliament [from your party] who went’, ‘no, the other one went...’. Can there be fifteen million terrorists in a country? If you [accuse] everyone of terrorism, in particular if you [accuse] the Kurds, who are claiming [their] rights and freedoms, [and] if you say you are going to take the necessary action, [this] fifteen-million-strong people will resist against your fascist practices by all available means. [Against this background], resistance becomes legitimate. Otherwise, war is not legitimate, there is no legitimacy [in] war. Resistance is legitimate. The people will be obliged to pay a higher price, our young people will be obliged to pay a higher price [and] we, the politicians, can only look at what is happening with sorrow when our dearest [friends] are murdered before our eyes. Against this background, I trust that the Democratic Society Congress will revive the enthusiasm [from] the time of its creation.’
Furthermore, having regard to the decision by the Diyarbakır public prosecutor’s office to join the [following] investigation files to our [investigation] file: investigation no. 2016/29478 on the commission of offences on behalf of a terrorist organisation without being a member of it, investigation no. 2016/24008 on the commission of offences on behalf of a terrorist organisation without being a member of it, investigation no. 2016/29479 on the commission of offences on behalf of a terrorist organisation without being a member of it, investigation no. 2016/24950 on disseminating propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation and membership of a terrorist organisation, investigation no. 2016/29476 on the commission of offences on behalf of a terrorist organisation without being a member of it, investigation no. 2016/24946 on the commission of offences on behalf of a terrorist organisation without being a member of it, investigation no. 2016/35438 on public incitement to hatred and hostility, investigation no. 2016/35211 on organising, conducting and participating in unlawful public meetings and demonstrations, disseminating propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation and praising crime and criminals, investigation no. 2016/35237 on organising, conducting and participating in unlawful public meetings and demonstrations and disseminating propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation, investigation no. 2016/35447 on public incitement to hatred and hostility, praising crime and criminals and disseminating propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation, investigation no. 2016/23921 on disseminating propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation, investigation no. 2016/23920 on public incitement to hatred and hostility [and] disseminating propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation, investigation no. 2016/24617 on public incitement to commit an offence [and] disseminating propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation, investigation no. 2016/29488 on disseminating propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation, investigation no. 2016/29489 on disseminating propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation, investigation no. 2016/24542 on praising crime and criminals, and investigation no. 2016/35454 on organising, conducting and participating in unlawful public meetings and demonstrations [and] disseminating propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation,
it has been found that there is a suspicion, based on concrete evidence, that the suspect committed the offence of membership of a terrorist organisation.
(c)  There is ‘concrete evidence giving rise to a strong suspicion [as to the commission] of an offence’ referred to in Article 100 § 1 of the CCP (no. 5271) in respect of the suspect Selahattin Demirtaş, specific persuasive information and evidence for our court in view of the strong indications (suspicion) referred to in Article 19 § 3 of the Constitution, and a reasonable suspicion within the meaning of in Article 5 § 1 (c) of the [European] Convention [on Human Rights]. (It should be reiterated that, in accordance with Article 5 § 1 (c) of the Convention, a person may be detained only in the context of criminal proceedings, for the purpose of bringing him or her before the competent legal authority on reasonable suspicion of having committed an offence (see Jėčius v. Lithuania, no. 34578/97, § 50, ECHR 2000-IX; Włoch v. Poland, no. 27785/95, §108, ECHR 2000-XI; and Poyraz v. Turkey (dec.), no. 21235/11, § 53, 17 February 2015). The ‘reasonableness’ of the suspicion on which a detention order must be based forms an essential part of the safeguard laid down in Article 5 § 1 (c) of the Convention. Having a reasonable suspicion presupposes the existence of facts or information which would satisfy an objective observer that the person concerned may have committed the offence. What may be regarded as reasonable will, however, depend on all the circumstances (see Fox, Campbell and Hartley v. the United Kingdom, 30 August 1990, § 32, Series A no. 182; O’Hara v. the United Kingdom, no. 37555/97, § 34, ECHR 2001-X; Korkmaz and Others v. Turkey, no. 35979/97, § 24, 21 March 2006; Süleyman Erdem v. Turkey, no. 49574/99, § 37, 19 September 2006; and Çiçek v. Turkey (dec.), no. 72774/10, § 62, 3 March 2015).
Having regard to the nature of the suspect’s alleged offence of forming and leading an armed terrorist organisation, since it is among those listed in Article 100 § 3 (a) (11) of the CCP (no. 5271), and to the above-mentioned indications of the existence of concrete evidence giving rise to a strong suspicion, there is a strong suspicion [sic] of the commission of the offence in question, and therefore a ground for detention in accordance with Article 100 § 3 (a) (11) of the CCP.
As pointed out in the Constitutional Court’s decisions of 27 October 2011 (nos. E. 2010/71 and K. 2011/143) and 27 December 2012 (nos. E. 2012/35 and 2012/203), the proportionality principle comprises the principles of ‘appropriateness’, ‘necessity’ and ‘proportionality’ [sic]. In view of the nature of the suspect’s alleged offence, the lower and upper limit of the prison sentence prescribed by law, the importance of the case and the anticipated penalty and security measure, the pre-trial detention [of the suspect] is proportionate to the aim pursued. Certain grounds dictate that [the suspect] must be detained; consequently, [while there are risks linked to the suspects’ detention,] it has nevertheless been deemed necessary to impose the measure of detention. The aim cannot be achieved by applying judicial supervision measures; following an assessment of the provisions on judicial supervision measures, [they are] deemed insufficient. For these reasons, the detention order will satisfy the proportionality principle set forth in Article 13 of the Constitution and Article 100 § 1 of the CCP (no. 5271). In view of all the above considerations, judicial supervision measures are insufficient. There is concrete evidence giving rise to strong suspicion against the suspects. There is a ground for detention and [that measure] is proportionate. There are grounds for detention in the light of Article 19 of the Constitution, Article 5 of the [Convention] and Article 100 of the CCP (no. 5271). Furthermore, the deprivation of liberty is lawful for the purposes of Article 5 § 1 of the [Convention and] is compatible with the principle of the rule of law enshrined in the provisions of the [Convention] and Article 100 of the CCP. [Accordingly], the suspect’s pre-trial detention is ordered on the basis of Articles 100 et seq. of the CCP.
...”
On the same day, eight other HDP members of parliament were placed in pre-trial detention by the competent magistrates in various towns.
On 8 November 2016 the applicant lodged an objection against the order for his pre-trial detention.
In a decision of 11 November 2016 the Diyarbakır 3rd Magistrate’s Court dismissed the objection. The decision stated that the applicant was being detained for the following offences: membership of an armed terrorist organisation and public incitement to commit an offence.
On 1 December 2016 the Diyarbakır 2nd Magistrate’s Court examined the question of the applicant’s continued detention, of its own motion and on the sole basis of the case file. The magistrate ordered the applicant’s continued detention, finding that it was justified by: the nature of the alleged offences and the fact that they were among those listed in Article 100 § 3 of the CCP; the existence of a reasonable suspicion that the applicant had committed a criminal offence within the meaning of Article 5 of the Convention; the strong suspicion against the applicant for the purposes of Article 19 of the Constitution; and the factual evidence giving rise to a strong suspicion that he had committed an offence for the purposes of Article 100 of the CCP. Taking into account the severity of the sentences prescribed by law for the offences in question, the magistrate held that the applicant’s continued pre-trial detention was proportionate and that alternative measures to detention appeared insufficient.
On 5 December 2016 the applicant lodged an objection, seeking his release.
In a decision of 6 December 2016 the Diyarbakır 1st Magistrate’s Court dismissed the objection and specified that the applicant was being detained solely for membership of an armed terrorist organisation.
On 12 December 2016 the applicant lodged a further objection against his continued pre-trial detention. He submitted, inter alia, that under Article 83 of the Constitution, he enjoyed parliamentary immunity, meaning that he could not be held liable for any opinions he had expressed in the course of parliamentary proceedings. On an unknown date his objection was dismissed. The parties have not provided a copy of that decision.
On 11 January 2017 the public prosecutor filed a bill of indictment with the Diyarbakır Assize Court in respect of the applicant, running to 501 pages (not including the appendices). He charged the applicant with forming or leading an armed terrorist organisation (Article 314 § 1 of the Criminal Code), disseminating propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation (fifteen counts – section 7(2) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act), public incitement to commit an offence (Article 214 § 1 of the Criminal Code), praising crime and criminals (four counts – Article 215 § 1 of the Criminal Code), public incitement to hatred and hostility (two counts – Article 216 § 1 of the Criminal Code), incitement to disobey the law (Article 217 § 1 of the Criminal Code), organising and participating in unlawful meetings and demonstrations (three counts – section 28(1) of the Meetings and Demonstrations Act (Law no. 2911)), and not complying with orders by the security forces for the dispersal of an unlawful demonstration (section 32(1) of Law no. 2911). The public prosecutor sought a sentence of between forty-three and 142 years’ imprisonment for the applicant.
The charges brought against the applicant by the public prosecutor may be summarised as follows.
(i)  In a speech given in the BDP offices in Batman on 27 October 2012, the applicant had disseminated propaganda in favour of the PKK terrorist organisation by urging people to close their shops and not to send their children to school as a protest aimed at securing the release of the PKK leader.
(ii)  On 13 November 2012 two demonstrations had been held in Nusaybin and Kızıltepe in protest against the conditions of the PKK leader’s detention, and the applicant had made the following comments in Kızıltepe:
“They said you couldn’t put up the poster of Öcalan. Those who said it ... Let me speak clearly. We are going to put up a sculpture of President Apo. The Kurdish people have now risen up. With their leader, their party, their elected representatives, their children, their young and old, they are one of the greatest peoples of the Middle East.” (“Demişler ki Öcalan posteri asamazsınız. Onu diyenlere açıkça sesleniyorum... Biz başkan Apo’nun heykelini dikeceğiz heykelini. Kürt halkı artık ayağa kalkmış bir halktır. Önderiyle, partisiyle, seçilmişiyle, çocuğuyla, genciyle, yaşlısıyla Ortadoğu’nun en büyük halklarından biridir.”) According to the bill of indictment, these comments amounted to propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation.
(iii)  In a speech he had given in the BDP offices in Diyarbakır on 21 April 2013, the applicant had stated the following: “The Kurdish movement used to see the war as a legitimate war of self-defence. Nowadays, if you have enough experience to resist [and] prevail using non-violent methods, it is not morally [and] politically right to use weapons. Today, those who criticise us also say that the Kurdish people would not exist, at least in Turkish Kurdistan, without the PKK movement. You could not speak of the existence of Kurds in Turkish Kurdistan. Without the coup in 1984 [the year of the first PKK attacks], without the guerrillas, no one today could speak of the existence of the Kurdish people; the Kurds had no other choice. At the time of the initial resistance in Şemdinli [and] Eruh [the first terrorist attacks by the PKK, carried out in the Şemdinli district in Hakkari and the Eruh district in Siirt on 15 August 1984], no one was aware of what was happening but the resistance has today created [the] reality of the [Kurdish] people. We have gained our identity.” (“Kürt hareketi savaşı meşru müdafaa savaşı olarak ele aldı. Şimdi eğer elinizde silah dışında yöntemlerle güçle, mekanizmayla direnebilecek, başarabilecek yeteri kadar birikim varsa siz buna rağmen silahı kullanırsınız birincisi bu ahlaki olmaz ikincisi de siyasi olarak da doğru bir tercih olmaz. Kürt halkı evet bugün biz sadece söylemiyoruz, bizi eleştirenler de söylüyordu, PKK hareketi olmasaydı bugün Kürt halkı diye bir şey Türkiye Kürdistan’ı için en azından olmayacaktı. Türkiye Kürdistanı’nda Kürtlerin varlığından söz edilmeyecekti. 1984 hamlesi olmasaydı, gerilla savaşı olmasıydı, kimse bugün Kürt halkının varlığından söz edemezdi, çünkü Kürtlerin başka çaresi yoktu. ... Şemdinli’de Eruh’ta ilk direniş sergilendiğinde kimse ne olduğunun farkında değildi ama o direniş bugün büyük bir halk gerçeği yarattı. Kimliğimizi kazandık.”)
(iv)  Following the proclamations of self-governance and the operations conducted by the security forces, the applicant had stated on several occasions that the operations in question were massacres carried out by the national authorities and had described certain acts attributed to members of the PKK as acts of resistance.
(v)  The applicant had actively worked to set up the DTK organisation, founded according to the public prosecutor in order to raise public awareness of the PKK’s views, and had given speeches at meetings organised by the DTK.
(vi)  The applicant was in charge of the political wing of the KCK, an illegal organisation; in that connection, the public prosecutor presented evidence including the following:
–  two documents, entitled “documento” and “ikram ark”, discovered on a hard drive seized from the home of a certain A.D., who at the time had been the mayor of Sur, a district of Diyarbakır, and had been sentenced in 2017 to eighteen years’ imprisonment for leading a terrorist organisation; according to those documents, S.O., the presumed KCK leader in Turkey, had given instructions to several people, including the applicant, to visit the relatives of İ.E., who had been mistakenly murdered by the PKK;
–  the records of intercepted telephone conversations between S.O. and K.Y., who was co-chair of the Democratic Regions Party (a left-wing proKurdish political party) and had subsequently been sentenced to twenty-one years’ imprisonment for leading a terrorist organisation, and between K.Y. and the applicant. According to those records, S.O. had given instructions to several people, including the applicant, to take part in certain meetings abroad, including in Strasbourg.
A transcript of the relevant parts of the conversation on 4 December 2008 between the applicant and K.Y. reads as follows:
“K.Y.: Given the importance of the programme, he says that you and G. have to take part in the Council [of Europe] meeting, which will last two days. He thinks [it] is very important.
[The applicant]: That’s three or four times he has come calling.
Y.: Well, that’s where they have got to. I haven’t worried about it too much; I told [him] that our friends [were trying] to find a solution [but they have not managed]. Now he says that we absolutely have to, that there is no other solution and that it’s a difficult situation for [them]. On that subject, [he says that] he has explained things a bit but that it would be good for [you to go there]. As for the master, he [also] says it would be good for him to come.
[The applicant]: I’ll have a word.
Y.: He says there is a two-day programme, that you absolutely have to take part. As for the master, he [also] says it would be good for him to come, that there are things he needs to speak about with him.”
A transcript of the relevant parts of the conversation on 4 December 2008 between K.Y. and S.O. reads as follows:
“S.O.: They called F., my friend. They said they couldn’t come to Italy.
Y.: [They told me] we had said that S. and B. could be there, I’ve just had it confirmed now.
O.: But it’s not a visit to a neighbour, [it is] a meeting at the Council of Europe. It’s unbelievable – it’s just not serious. Why don’t you say [that]?
Y.: It’s not yet set in stone.
O.: But [how are we going to] arrange meetings, from now on, on behalf of the party?
Y.: Yes.
O.: Both of them will come, my friend. They will have to leave their work behind and [go there].
Y.: OK.
O.: Selahattin [the applicant] and G., both of them have absolutely got to come.
Y.: They said they had found a solution with F. [I said OK, if they have found a solution].
O.: There is no solution, my friend. F. has just told me so.
Y.: All right.”
Also on 4 December 2008 the applicant and K.Y. had a further telephone conversation, of which the following is a transcript of the relevant parts:
“K.Y.: Thank you, [tell me], after seeing F., you found a solution, didn’t you?
[The applicant]: I met F., and then passed [the matter] on to S., who was supposed to find and has found [a solution].
Y.: They found one?
[The applicant]: Yes.
Y.: It’s better for you to know I gave his name.
[The applicant]: OK, I’ll call [and] see. I’m working [on] it.
Y.: Yes, [it is on] the 11th, [I hope that’s right, but yes], it’s on 11 January.
[The applicant]: [In] Strasbourg, no?
Y.: Yes, Strasbourg.
[The applicant]: All right, I’ll [have a closer look] and get back to you tomorrow.
Y.: OK, I have given [his] name.”
(vii)  The applicant, through his speeches and statements (the relevant parts of which are summarised in paragraphs 26-27 above) had incited the acts of violence that had taken place between 6 and 8 October 2014.
On 1 February 2017 the applicant lodged a further objection against his continued detention and sought to be released. In that connection, he submitted in particular that in accordance with the first paragraph of Article 83, he was entitled to parliamentary non-liability, meaning that members of parliament could not be punished for opinions they expressed within the National Assembly and repeated outside. He maintained that the accusations brought against him, forming the basis for his pre-trial detention, were linked to his political speeches, the contents of which were protected by the first paragraph of Article 83 of the Constitution. On an unknown date, the objection was dismissed. The parties have not provided a copy of that decision.
On 2 February 2017 the Diyarbakır Assize Court accepted the bill of indictment filed by the public prosecutor. On the same day, it contacted the Ministry of Justice, asking it to take the necessary steps to transfer the venue of the applicant’s trial on public-safety grounds. Also on the same day, it ordered the continuation of the applicant’s pre-trial detention.
On 1 March 2017 the Diyarbakır Assize Court examined of its own motion the question of the applicant’s continued detention. Having regard to the number and nature of the charges against the applicant and the concrete evidence giving rise to a strong suspicion that he had committed an offence, and bearing in mind that he had yet to provide his defence submissions, that he had refused to appear before the investigating authorities during the investigation, that the alleged offences were among those listed in Article 100 § 3 of the CCP and that the grounds for keeping him in detention remained unchanged, the Diyarbakır Assize Court ordered his continued pre-trial detention. In view of the severity of the sentences prescribed by law for the offences in question, it held that the application of alternative measures to detention would be insufficient.
On an unspecified date the applicant lodged a further objection against the decision to continue his pre-trial detention. In a decision of 14 March 2017 the Diyarbakır Assize Court dismissed the objection on the basis of the nature of the alleged offences, the state of the evidence, the period that the applicant had spent in detention, the strong suspicion that he had committed the offences in question and his refusal to appear before the investigating authorities during the investigation.
On 22 March 2017, at the request of the Ministry of Justice, the Court of Cassation, finding that a change of venue for the applicant’s trial was appropriate in order to avoid threats to public safety, transferred the case to the Ankara Assize Court.
On 6 April 2017 the Diyarbakır Assize Court forwarded the file to the Ankara Assize Court.
On 22 June 2017 the Ankara 19th Assize Court, examining the matter of its own motion, ordered the applicant’s continued detention. In so doing, it had regard firstly to the existence of concrete evidence giving rise to a strong suspicion that he had committed the alleged offences, and to the upper and lower limits of the sentences prescribed for those offences. Next, it found that the prevention of disorder and of further offences constituted valid grounds for pre-trial detention in the light of Article 5 of the Convention and the Court’s case-law. Taking into account the period that the applicant had spent in pre-trial detention, it also held that there was a risk of his absconding and tampering with evidence. For the same reasons, it concluded that the application of alternative measures to pre-trial detention would be insufficient.
On 3 October 2017, 103 days after its previous decision, the Ankara 19th Assize Court again examined the question of the applicant’s continued pre-trial detention. Having regard to the number and nature of the charges against him, the existence of concrete evidence giving rise to a strong suspicion that he had committed the offences in question and the upper and lower limits of the sentences prescribed for those offences, and bearing in mind that he had yet to provide his defence submissions, that he had refused to appear before the investigating authorities and that the grounds for keeping him in detention remained unchanged, it ordered the extension of his pre-trial detention. It also noted that in view of the prospect of the applicant’s conviction for the alleged offences, the application of alternative measures to pre-trial detention would be insufficient.
On 16 November 2017 the applicant lodged a compensation claim with the Diyarbakır Assize Court under Article 141 of the CCP. In a judgment of 11 July 2018 the court found partly in his favour and awarded him 10,000 Turkish liras (TRY – approximately 1,890 euros (EUR)) in compensation on account of the fact that the courts had not examined of their own motion the question of the lawfulness of his detention between 21 July and 3 October 2017.
On 7 December 2017 the Ankara 19th Assize Court held its first hearing in the case.
During the trial, the applicant argued that he had been detained for expressing critical views about the policies pursued by the President of Turkey, and denied having committed any criminal offence. He maintained that his initial and continued pre-trial detention were unlawful. In particular, he asserted that the aim of depriving him of his liberty had been to silence members of the political opposition.
On 3 April 2018 the applicant filed a petition with the Ankara 19th Assize Court, in which he stated that he had been charged on the basis of speeches he had given between 2008 and 2016 while a member of parliament. He submitted that he could not be held liable for the speeches, given that Article 83 of the Constitution provided for parliamentary non-liability. On that account, he asked the Assize Court to examine the speeches he had given during parliamentary proceedings and to compare their content with that of the speeches in issue. He asked the court to instruct an expert to determine whether the speeches were protected in view of his parliamentary non-liability. It appears that the Ankara Assize Court did not accept that request.
During the investigation and the trial, the applicant lodged several objections against his continued pre-trial detention. Until 2 September 2019 the domestic courts on each occasion ordered his continued detention on the following grounds: the existence of concrete evidence giving rise to a strong suspicion that he had committed the offences of which he was accused; the number and nature of the alleged offences and the fact that they were among those listed in Article 100 § 3 of the CCP; the severity of the sentences prescribed by law for the offences concerned; the finding that alternative measures to detention appeared insufficient; the applicant’s refusal to appear before the investigating authorities; the fact that the applicant’s defence submissions had not yet been obtained; the state of the evidence; the period spent in detention; and the risk of absconding and of tampering with evidence.
On 2 September 2019, having regard to the fact that the applicant had finished filing his defence submissions, the Ankara Assize Court decided to release him from pre-trial detention on condition that he was not detained or convicted in separate proceedings. It also decided that he should be banned from travelling abroad.
On an unknown date, the Ankara public prosecutor lodged an objection against the decision to release the applicant. On an unspecified date, the Ankara Assize Court dismissed the objection.
The criminal proceedings are currently pending before the Ankara 19th Assize Court.
It appears from the case file that the applicant has lodged several applications with the Constitutional Court, one of which is currently pending. For the purposes of the present case, the application lodged on 17 November 2016 (no. 2016/25189), mainly concerning the applicant’s detention, is summarised below. The Constitutional Court gave its ruling in a judgment of 21 December 2017, declaring the application inadmissible.
The applicant complained that he had been arrested, taken into police custody and placed in pre-trial detention on account of political speeches he had given as a member of parliament and co-chair of a political party. He argued that the statements he had made should be examined from the standpoint of his right to freedom of expression. He further submitted that there had been no evidence giving rise to a reasonable suspicion that he had committed a criminal offence. In addition, he submitted that a person deprived of his liberty should be brought promptly before a judge and that the duration of the deprivation of liberty should not exceed a reasonable time. He also contended that the reasons given by the domestic courts to justify his detention had been insufficient. He further submitted that the severity of the potential sentence could not form a basis for establishing any risk of absconding. He complained that no alternative measure to detention had been applied in his case and that there had been no specific grounds justifying his detention. In addition, he alleged that he had had no access to the investigation file in order to challenge his pre-trial detention. Lastly, he maintained that in view of his status as a member of parliament, his pre-trial detention amounted to a violation of his right to free elections.
With regard to the complaint concerning the lawfulness of the applicant’s arrest and detention in police custody, the Constitutional Court held that he should have brought a compensation claim under Article 141 § 1 (a) of the CCP but had omitted to do so. Furthermore, it noted that he had not lodged an objection under Article 91 § 5 of the CCP against his detention in police custody. Accordingly, it declared the complaint inadmissible for failure to exhaust the appropriate remedies.
As regards the complaint about the lawfulness of his pre-trial detention, the applicant argued firstly that he still enjoyed parliamentary immunity and that his pre-trial detention was therefore in breach of the Constitution. The Constitutional Court observed, however, that the constitutional amendment of 20 May 2016 had made it possible to grant the requests for the lifting of the applicant’s parliamentary immunity that had been referred to the National Assembly before the adoption of the amendment. Accordingly, it dismissed the applicant’s argument that his initial and continued pre-trial detention had no basis in law.
Next, the Constitutional Court considered whether there had been a strong presumption that the applicant had committed an offence. In that context, it noted at the outset that, bearing in mind the number of deaths and injuries during the events of 6 to 8 October 2014, a causal link could be established between the calls issued by the HDP central executive board, which was co-chaired by the applicant, and the acts of violence in question. Furthermore, with regard to the “trench events”, the Constitutional Court held that, bearing in mind the statements made by the applicant, the places where he had made them and his position as co-chair of the HDP, his pre-trial detention in connection with a terrorism-related offence was not devoid of justification. In the same vein, having regard to the contents of the two speeches given by the applicant on 13 November 2012 and 21 April 2013 (see paragraph 79 above), it held that there was undeniably an indication that an offence had been committed. Lastly, taking into account the contents of the conversations among presumed senior officials of the PKK and between them and the applicant (see paragraph 79 above), it found that it had been legitimate to consider that the applicant might have acted in accordance with the instructions of the leaders of a terrorist organisation. It therefore held that these factors were sufficient grounds for a strong suspicion that the applicant had committed an offence.
The Constitutional Court then considered whether the applicant’s pre-trial detention had pursued a legitimate aim. It observed in that connection that, after establishing that there was a strong suspicion that the applicant had committed the alleged offences, the Diyarbakır 2nd Magistrate’s Court had ordered his pre-trial detention on the grounds that the offences in question were among those listed in Article 100 § 3 of the CCP and were punishable by heavy sentences. The Constitutional Court added that the severity of the potential sentence was a factor to consider when assessing the risk of absconding. It added that the applicant had refused to appear before the investigating authorities and had stated that no member of parliament from his party would give evidence voluntarily. Those aspects were sufficient in the court’s view to conclude that there was a flight risk. The Constitutional Court therefore found that the applicant’s pre-trial detention had pursued a legitimate aim.
The Constitutional Court then considered whether the applicant’s pre-trial detention was proportionate to the aim pursued. In that context, the applicant had alleged that his detention had prevented him from carrying out political activities. Referring to several Constitutional Court judgments concerning the pre-trial detention of members of parliament, he had argued that his detention was disproportionate to the aim pursued, in view of his status as a member of parliament. In that connection, the Constitutional Court stated firstly that, contrary to what the applicant had maintained, it had never given a judgment in which it had found that the pre-trial detention of a member of parliament whose immunity had been lifted amounted in itself to a breach of the Constitution. The Constitutional Court further noted that as the applicant had been placed in pre-trial detention a long time after the alleged offences had been committed, it had to examine whether or not his pre-trial detention could have been regarded as necessary. In that context, it pointed out that, in accordance with Article 83 of the Constitution, the applicant could not have been placed in pre-trial detention while he enjoyed parliamentary immunity. It observed that the investigation reports concerning him had been sent to the competent public prosecutors after the entry into force of the constitutional amendment introducing an exception to parliamentary immunity, and that he had been placed in pretrial detention some five months afterwards. It was therefore clear from the evidence in the case file that the investigating authorities had not remained inactive during that period. The Constitutional Court added that it was unable to conclude that the applicant’s pre-trial detention had been disproportionate and arbitrary, notably in view of the severity of the sentence prescribed for the offences in question. For those reasons, it declared this part of the application inadmissible as being manifestly ill-founded.
From the standpoint of Article 5 § 3 of the Convention, the Constitutional Court observed that in his application form, the applicant had not complained of the lack of relevant and sufficient reasons to justify his continued pre-trial detention (see paragraph 118 of the Constitutional Court’s judgment). It pointed out that he had first alleged such a violation when responding to the observations of the Ministry of Justice. Adding that the applicant could lodge a fresh individual application with it, the Constitutional Court thus decided not to examine this part of the application.
With regard to the complaint under Article 18 of the Convention, in view of its conclusion concerning the lawfulness of the applicant’s pre-trial detention, the Constitutional Court held that it was unnecessary to examine that complaint separately.
Concerning the applicant’s complaint that he had had no access to the investigation file, the Constitutional Court held that he had had sufficient means available to prepare his defence to the charges against him and to challenge his pre-trial detention, in view of the contents of the investigation reports submitted to the National Assembly by the public prosecutors. Accordingly, it declared this complaint inadmissible as being manifestly ill-founded.
Lastly, regarding the complaints relating to the right to freedom of expression and the right to be elected and to carry out political activities, the Constitutional Court, having regard to its conclusion in relation to the applicant’s complaint as to the lawfulness of his pre-trial detention, declared them inadmissible as being manifestly ill-founded.
In his dissenting opinion, Mr Engin Yıldırım, the judge in the minority, observed, like the majority, taking into account the evidence in the file, that there was a strong indication that the applicant had committed an offence; however, referring to the principles deriving from the Court’s case-law, in particular Buzadji v. the Republic of Moldova ([GC], no. 23755/07, 5 July 2016), he submitted that the applicant’s detention was not proportionate, in so far as it had not been shown that there were relevant and sufficient reasons to justify it. In his opinion, the reasons why the application of an alternative measure to detention would have been insufficient had not been explained by the judicial authorities. Turning to the risk of absconding, he noted firstly that two main reasons had been put forward to substantiate that risk, namely the severity of the sentences prescribed by law for the offences in question and the fact that the applicant had refused to appear before the investigating authorities. In the dissenting judge’s view, however, the severity of a sentence could not per se justify a person’s pre-trial detention. Similarly, it could not be concluded that the applicant’s refusal to appear before the investigating authorities could form a basis for establishing such a risk, since the applicant had continued to carry out his political activities without demonstrating the slightest intention of absconding. The dissenting judge added that between the entry into force of the amendment to the Constitution lifting the applicant’s parliamentary immunity and the date of his initial pre-trial detention, the applicant had travelled abroad more than ten times and had never attempted to flee. For these reasons, he was of the view that there had been a violation of Article 19 of the Constitution in the applicant’s case. Noting in addition that the applicant was a member of parliament and co-chair of a political party that had obtained more than five million votes, the dissenting judge considered that his pre-trial detention without relevant and sufficient reasons also amounted to a breach of the right to be elected and to carry out political activities as safeguarded by Article 67 of the Constitution.
On an unknown date, the Istanbul public prosecutor’s office opened a criminal investigation in respect of the applicant, who was accused of disseminating propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation.
At the end of those criminal proceedings, in a judgment of 7 September 2018 the Istanbul Assize Court sentenced the applicant to four years and eight months’ imprisonment for disseminating propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation, an offence provided for by section 7(2) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act, on account of a speech he had given at a rally in Istanbul on 17 March 2013.
In a judgment delivered on 4 December 2018, the Istanbul Court of Appeal upheld with final effect the first-instance judgment convicting the applicant.
On 7 December 2018 the applicant began serving his sentence of four years and eight months’ imprisonment.
On 24 October 2019 Law no. 7188 amending certain provisions of the CCP was published in the Official Gazette. Section 29 of the Law provided for the right to appeal on points of law in the case of a number of offences linked to freedom of expression, such as disseminating propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation as punishable under section 7 of the Prevention of Terrorism Act (Law no. 3713). Where convictions had already become final, the Law provided for the possibility of an appeal on points of law within fifteen days of its entry into force.
On 31 October 2019, further to a request by the applicant, the Istanbul Assize Court stayed the execution of his sentence of four years and eight months’ imprisonment and ordered his release on condition that he was not detained in separate proceedings.
Following the Ankara Assize Court’s decision of 2 September 2019 to release the applicant (see paragraph 93 above), his lawyers applied to the Istanbul Assize Court to have the days he had spent in pre-trial detention during the criminal proceedings in the Ankara Assize Court deducted from the final sentence imposed in the criminal proceedings in the Istanbul Assize Court.
On 20 September 2019, two days after the hearing before the Court in the present case, the Istanbul 26th Assize Court allowed the request.
On the same day, notwithstanding the criminal proceedings pending before the Ankara Assize Court, the Ankara public prosecutor’s office applied to the Ankara Magistrate’s Court to have the applicant and Ms Figen Yüksekdağ (former co-chair of the HDP) placed in pre-trial detention in the context of a separate criminal investigation initiated in 2014 (no. 2014/146757) in relation to the events of 6 to 8 October 2014, on suspicion of the following offences:
(i)  undermining the unity and territorial integrity of the State;
(ii)  incitement to commit murder in order to conceal an offence or evidence of another offence or to avoid arrest;
(iii)  incitement, together with more than one other person, to commit robbery at night in order to assist a criminal organisation;
(iv)  incitement to deprive another person of his liberty by means of threats, violence and deception; and
(v)  incitement to attempted murder in order to conceal an offence or evidence of another offence or to avoid arrest.
On 20 September 2019, on the basis of Article 100 of the CCP, the Ankara 1st Magistrate’s Court ordered the pre-trial detention of the applicant and Ms Figen Yüksekdağ, having regard to the following:
(a)  the nature of the offences of which they were accused;
(b)  the existence of evidence giving rise to a strong suspicion that the accused had committed the alleged offences;
(c)  the severity of the sentences prescribed by law for the offences in question;
(d)  the presence of the conditions for ordering the accused’s pre-trial detention under Article 19 of the Constitution and Article 5 of the Convention; and
(e)  the fact that alternative measures to detention appeared insufficient.
After the applicant’s return to pre-trial detention, the President of Turkey made the following statement to the press on 21 September 2019:
“If you are looking for a killer in this country, there is no need to search for the address. They have even infiltrated Parliament. This nation does not and will not forget those who called people out into the streets and then killed our fifty-three children in Diyarbakır. We are following this matter and we will follow it through to the end. We cannot let them [the applicant and Figen Yüksekdag] go. If we let [them] go, our martyrs will hold us to account in the eternal realm. These lands are not just any lands.” (“Bu ülkede katil aranıyorsa bunların adresini aramaya gerek yok. Bunlar, parlamentoya kadar sızmışlar. Sokağa insanları çağırıp ondan sonra Diyarbakır’da 53 evladımızı öldürenleri bu millet unutmuyor ve unutmayacaktır da. Sonuna kadar bu işin takipçisiyiz, takipçisi olacağız. Bunları bırakamayız. Eğer biz bırakırsak ebedi alemde şehitlerimiz bize bunun hesabını sorar. Bu topraklar rastgele topraklar değil.”)
Subsequently, on 23 September 2019, the following statement by Mr Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu, the leader of the CHP, the main opposition party, was published in the national press:
“Everybody knows that there is no justice in Turkey, that there is political pressure on judges. Selahattin Demirtaş should have been released, but his return to detention at the urging of the political authorities is actually a legal disaster.” (“Türkiye’de adaletin olmadığını, siyasal baskıların yargıçlar üzerinde de sürdürüldüğünü herkes biliyor. Selahattin Demirtaş’ın tahliye edilmesi gerekirken siyasal iktidarın talebi üzerine tekrar tutuklanması aslında bir hukuk faciasıdır.”)
On 26 November 2017 and 29 May, 18 June, 27 November and 11 December 2018 the applicant lodged five further individual applications with the Constitutional Court, which deemed it appropriate to examine the applications together as case no. 2017/38610 in view of their similar subject matter; it gave judgment on 9 June 2020. For practical reasons, the Court will refer to these five individual applications as “the second individual application”.
In its judgment the Constitutional Court held, unanimously, that there had been a violation of Article 19 § 7 of the Constitution (corresponding to Article 5 § 3 of the Convention) on account of the length of time the applicant had spent in pre-trial detention. In that connection, it stated firstly that the applicant had been kept in pre-trial detention for two years, one month and three days on a terrorism-related criminal charge. It noted that the question whether the length of pre-trial detention had exceeded a reasonable time could be determined primarily with reference to the reasons set out in the decision ordering the detention. The reasoning of such decisions had to demonstrate the existence of a strong indication of criminal guilt – a precondition for detention – as well as the grounds for detention and the proportionality of such a measure.
The Constitutional Court pointed out that it had already found in its decision of 21 December 2017 that there had been a “strong suspicion” that the applicant had committed an offence. Consequently, his initial detention had been in accordance with the Constitution. It then went on to examine the decisions ordering the applicant’s continued detention in terms of the grounds for the detention and its proportionality.
The Constitutional Court noted that it had already considered the matter of the excessive detention of applicants who were members of parliament. It held that it was appropriate to examine not only the restriction resulting from the measure of detention on the right to liberty and security of person as guaranteed by Article 19 of the Constitution, but also the impact of the detention, in the event of its extension, on the right to elect, stand for election and carry out political activities as guaranteed by Article 67 of the Constitution. In the Constitutional Court’s view, when ordering the continued detention of a member of parliament, the courts had to show, on the basis of concrete facts, that there was an interest prevailing over the interest in the exercise of the right to liberty and security of person and of the right to elect, stand for election and carry out political activities.
The Constitutional Court observed that the fact that the person whose detention had been ordered was a member of parliament did not automatically mean that detention was a disproportionate measure. In that connection, the extension of a member of parliament’s detention could be ordered as long as it could be shown that there were grounds necessitating continued detention during an investigation or criminal proceedings. When giving decisions on detention, the courts should demonstrate which public interest justified an extension of detention notwithstanding the impact of that measure on the right to liberty and security of person and the right to stand for election and carry out political activities, and how the extension of detention prevailed over the rights in question. In other words, the grounds set out in the decisions ordering continued detention should cover not only the objective aspects of the case but also the specific considerations relating to the position of the member of parliament being detained – that is, the grounds should be personalised.
Returning to the particular features of the case before it, the Constitutional Court held that the competent magistrates and assize courts had not assessed the applicant’s allegations that his continued detention was unreasonable on account of his status as a member of parliament, the cochair of a political party and a candidate in the presidential election, and that the measure in question had also imposed an excessive restriction on his right to stand for election and carry out political activities. It found that the applications for release which the applicant had lodged in the course of the proceedings had been rejected on the basis of formulaic reasons. On that account, it concluded that the decisions on his continued detention had not contained relevant and sufficient reasons. That being so, the Constitutional Court held that there had been a violation of the applicant’s right to liberty and security within the meaning of Article 19 § 7 of the Constitution.
The applicant’s other complaints were either declared inadmissible (in particular, those relating to Article 5 §§ 1 and 4 of the Convention), or the Constitutional Court held that there was no need to examine them separately (among other complaints, those relating to Article 18 of the Convention and Article 3 of Protocol No. 1).
Having regard to its finding of a violation, the Constitutional Court held that the applicant was to be awarded TRY 50,000 (approximately EUR 6,500) in respect of non-pecuniary damage and TRY 4,436.30 (approximately EUR 575) in respect of costs and expenses.
As regards the applicant’s current pre-trial detention, which began on 20 September 2019 (see paragraph 117 above), the Constitutional Court noted that on 7 November 2019 he had lodged a further individual application, which was still pending before it. Nevertheless, the Constitutional Court did not rule on that detention. Accordingly, the judgment of 9 June 2020 had no effect on the personal situation of the applicant, who remains in prison.
Article 14 of the Constitution reads as follows:
“None of the fundamental rights and freedoms set out in the Constitution shall be exercised with a view to undermining the territorial integrity of the State and the unity of the nation or abolishing the democratic and secular Republic founded on human rights.
No provision of this Constitution shall be interpreted in a manner that would grant the State or individuals the right to engage in activities intended to destroy the fundamental rights and freedoms embodied in the Constitution or to restrict them beyond what is permitted by the Constitution.
The penalties to which persons who engage in activities that contravene these provisions are liable shall be determined by law.”
The relevant parts of Article 19 of the Constitution read as follows:
“Everyone has the right to personal liberty and security.
...
Individuals against whom there are strong presumptions of guilt may be detained only by order of a judge and for the purposes of preventing their absconding or the destruction or alteration of evidence, or in any other circumstances provided for by law that also necessitate their detention. No one shall be arrested without an order by a judge except when caught in flagrante delicto or where a delay would have a harmful effect; the conditions for such action shall be determined by law.
...
A person who has been arrested or detained shall be brought before a judge within forty-eight hours at the latest or, in the case of offences committed jointly with others, within four days, not including the time required to convey the person to the nearest court to the place of detention. No one shall be deprived of his or her liberty after the expiry of the aforementioned periods except by order of a judge. These periods may be extended during a state of emergency or a state of siege or in time of war.
...
Anyone who has been detained shall be entitled to request a trial within a reasonable time and to apply for release during the course of the investigation or criminal proceedings. Release may be conditioned by a guarantee to ensure the person’s appearance throughout the trial, or the execution of the court sentence.
Everyone who is deprived of his or her liberty for any reason whatsoever shall be entitled to apply to a competent judicial authority for a speedy decision on his or her case and for his or her immediate release if the detention is not lawful.
...”
Article 26 of the Constitution provides:
“Everyone has the right to express and disseminate his or her thoughts and opinions by speech, in writing or in pictures or through other media, individually or collectively. This right includes the freedom to receive or impart information or ideas without interference by official authorities. This provision shall not preclude subjecting transmission by radio, television, cinema, or similar means to a system of licensing.
The exercise of these freedoms may be restricted for the purposes of national security, public order, public safety, safeguarding the basic characteristics of the Republic and the indivisible integrity of the State with its territory and nation, preventing crime, punishing offenders, withholding information duly classified as a State secret, protecting the reputation or rights and private and family life of others, or protecting professional secrets as prescribed by law, or ensuring the proper functioning of the judiciary.
Regulatory provisions concerning the use of means to disseminate information and thoughts shall not be deemed as the restriction of freedom of expression and dissemination of thoughts as long as the transmission of information and thoughts is not prevented.
The formalities, conditions and procedures to be applied in exercising the freedom of expression and dissemination of thought shall be prescribed by law.”
The relevant parts of Article 67 of the Constitution read as follows:
“Citizens shall have the right to vote, to stand for election, to engage in political activities independently or as members of a political party and to take part in referendums in accordance with the rules laid down by law.
...
The exercise of these rights shall be regulated by law.
...”
Article 80 of the Constitution provides:
“Members of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey shall not represent their own constituencies or constituents, but the nation as a whole.”
Article 83 of the Constitution, concerning parliamentary immunity, reads as follows:
“Members of the Turkish Grand National Assembly shall not be liable for their votes and statements in the course of the Assembly’s work, for the views they express before the Assembly or for repeating or disseminating such views outside the Assembly, unless the Assembly decides otherwise at a sitting held on a proposal by the Bureau.
A member who is alleged to have committed an offence before or after election shall not be arrested, questioned, detained or tried unless the Assembly decides otherwise. This provision shall not apply in cases where a member is caught in the act of committing a crime punishable by a heavy penalty and in cases falling under Article 14 of the Constitution, provided that an investigation has been initiated before the election. However, in such situations the competent authority shall notify the Turkish Grand National Assembly immediately and directly.
The execution of a criminal sentence imposed on a member of the Turkish Grand National Assembly either before or after his or her election shall be suspended until he or she ceases to be a member; the statute of limitations shall not apply during the term of office.
The investigation and prosecution of a re-elected member shall be subject to a fresh decision by the Assembly to lift immunity.
Political party groups in the Turkish Grand National Assembly shall not hold debates or take decisions regarding parliamentary immunity.”
Article 85 of the Constitution provides:
“If the parliamentary immunity of a member of parliament has been lifted ..., the member in question or another member may, within seven days from the date of the decision of the plenary National Assembly, apply to the Constitutional Court for the decision to be set aside on the grounds that it is contrary to the Constitution, the law or the rules or procedure [of the National Assembly]. The Constitutional Court shall decide on the application within fifteen days.”
Article 87 of the Constitution reads as follows:
“The duties and powers of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey are to enact, amend, and repeal laws; to debate and adopt the budget bills and final accounts bills; to decide to issue currency and declare war; to approve the ratification of international treaties, to decide with the majority of three-fifths of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey to proclaim amnesty and pardon; and to exercise the powers and carry out the duties envisaged in the other articles of the Constitution.”
Provisional Article 20 of the Constitution, as adopted by the National Assembly on 20 May 2016, reads as follows:
“On the date when this Article is adopted by the Grand National Assembly of Turkey, the provision of the first sentence of the second paragraph of Article 83 of the Constitution shall not be applied to members who are the subject of requests for the lifting of immunity which have been submitted by the authorities with the power to investigate or grant leave for an investigation or prosecution, the public prosecutor’s office or the courts to the Ministry of Justice, to the Prime Minister’s Office, to the Office of the President of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey and to the chair of the Joint Committee comprising the members of the Constitutional Committee and the Justice Committee.
Within fifteen days of the entry into force of this Article, any files with the chair of the Joint Committee comprising the members of the Constitutional Committee and the Justice Committee, the Office of the President of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey, the Prime Minister’s Office and the Ministry of Justice concerning the lifting of parliamentary immunity shall be returned to the competent authority so that it can take the necessary action.”
Article 214 § 1 of the Criminal Code is worded as follows:
“Anyone who publicly incites another to commit an offence shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of six months to five years.”
Article 215 § 1 of the same Code reads as follows:
“Anyone who publicly praises a crime that has been committed or a person for committing a crime shall, where a clear and present danger to public order arises on that account, be punishable by a sentence of up to two years’ imprisonment.”
Article 216 § 1 provides:
“Anyone who publicly provokes hatred or hostility in one section of the public against another section with different characteristics based on social class, race, religion, sect or regional origin, such as to create a clear and present danger to public safety, shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of one to three years.”
Article 217 § 1 is worded as follows:
“Anyone who publicly incites the population to disobey the law shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of six months to two years or a judicial fine, provided that such incitement is capable of posing a threat to public order.”
Article 220 of the Criminal Code provides:
“Anyone who forms or leads organisations established to carry out acts defined by law as criminal offences shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of four to eight years, provided that the structure of the organisation, the number of its members, and its tools and equipment are found to be appropriate for the commission of an offence. However, for an organisation to exist there must be at least three members.
Anyone who becomes a member of an organisation established for the purpose of committing a criminal offence shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of two to four years.
If the criminal organisation is armed, the sentence to be imposed in accordance with the above paragraphs shall be increased by between one-quarter and one-half.
Where an offence is committed in the course of an organisation’s activities, the perpetrator shall also be punished for the offence.
The leaders of the criminal organisation shall also be punished for any offences committed in the course of the organisation’s activities.
Anyone who commits an offence on behalf of a criminal organisation without being a member of it shall also be punished for being a member of the organisation. The sentence to be imposed for being a member of the organisation may be reduced by up to half. This paragraph shall be applicable only to armed organisations.
Anyone who knowingly and willingly provides assistance to a criminal organisation, while not being part of the organisation’s hierarchical structure, shall be punished as though he or she were a member of the organisation. The sentence to be imposed for membership of the organisation may be reduced by up to one-third depending on the nature of the assistance provided.
Anyone who disseminates propaganda by praising or legitimising the use of methods involving force, violence or threats by the criminal organisation, or by inciting the use of such methods, shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of one to three years. The sentence to be imposed shall be increased by half where this offence is committed by the press and broadcast media.”
Article 314 reads as follows:
“1.  Anyone who forms or leads an armed organisation with the purpose of committing the offences listed in the fourth and fifth parts of this chapter shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of ten to fifteen years.
Anyone who joins an organisation referred to in the first paragraph of this Article shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of five to ten years.
The other provisions governing the forming of an organisation for criminal purposes shall also apply in this context.”
Section 1 of the Prevention of Terrorism Act defines terrorism as follows:
“Terrorism denotes any act attempted by one or more persons belonging to an organisation with the aim of changing the characteristics of the Republic as defined in the Constitution, its political, legal, social, secular and economic system, undermining the territorial integrity of the State and the unity of the nation, endangering the existence of the Turkish State and Republic, weakening, destroying or usurping the authority of the State, eliminating fundamental rights and freedoms, or undermining the internal and external security of the State, public order or public health through the use of terror, force and violence by means of pressure, intimidation, oppression or threat.”
Section 2 of the Act is worded as follows:
“Any member of an organisation founded to attain the aims defined in section 1 who commits a crime in furtherance of these aims, individually or together with others, or any member of such an organisation, even if he or she does not commit such a crime, shall be deemed to be a terrorist offender.
Persons who are not members of a terrorist organisation, but commit a crime in the name of the organisation, shall also be deemed to be terrorist offenders.”
Section 3 of the Act reads as follows:
“The offences defined in Articles 302, 307, 309, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315 and 320 of the Turkish Criminal Code (no. 5237) are terrorist offences.”
Section 7(2) of the Act provides:
“Anyone who disseminates propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation by legitimising or condoning methods used by such organisations entailing coercion, violence or threats or incites others to use such methods shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of one to five years. ...”
Section 28(1) of the Meetings and Demonstrations Act (Law no. 2911) is worded as follows:
“Anyone who organises, leads or participates in unlawful demonstrations shall be punishable by a term of imprisonment of one year and six months to three years, unless the acts in question constitute an offence punishable by a heavier sentence.”
Section 32(1) of the same Act provides:
“Anyone who participates in an unlawful meeting or demonstration and anyone who persists in not complying with orders by the security forces to disperse shall be punishable by a term of imprisonment of six months to three years. If the offence is committed by the organisers of the meeting or demonstration, the sentence prescribed in this subsection shall be increased by half.”
Pre-trial detention is governed by Articles 100 et seq. of the CCP. Article 100 § 1 provides that a person may be placed in pre-trial detention where there is factual evidence giving rise to strong suspicion that the person has committed an offence and where the detention is justified on one of the grounds laid down in the Article in question.
Article 100 § 2 of the CCP reads as follows:
“In the cases specified below, grounds for detention may be deemed to exist:
(a)  if there are specific facts giving rise a suspicion of [a risk of] absconding ...;
(b)  if the conduct of the suspect or accused gives rise to a suspicion
(2)  of an attempt to put pressure on witnesses, victims or other individuals ...”
For certain offences listed in Article 100 § 3 of the CCP, there is a statutory presumption of the existence of grounds for detention. Article 100 § 3 of the CCP reads as follows:
“3.  If there are facts giving rise to a strong suspicion that offences listed below have been committed, it can be presumed that there are grounds for detention:
(a)  for the following crimes provided for in the Criminal Code (no. 5237 of 26 September 2004):
...
(11)  crimes against the constitutional order and against the functioning of the constitutional system (Articles 309, 310, 311, 313, 314 and 315);
...”
Article 101 of the CCP provides that pre-trial detention is ordered at the investigation stage by a magistrate at the request of the public prosecutor and at the trial stage by the competent court, whether of its own motion or at the prosecutor’s request. An objection may be lodged with another magistrate or another court against decisions ordering or extending pre-trial detention. Such decisions must include legal and factual reasons.
Pursuant to Article 108 of the CCP, during the investigation stage a magistrate must review a suspect’s pre-trial detention at regular intervals not exceeding thirty days. Within the same period, the detainee may lodge an application for release. During the trial stage, the question of the accused’s detention is reviewed by the competent court at the end of each hearing, and in any event at intervals of no more than thirty days.
Article 141 § 1 (a) and (d) of the CCP provides:
“1.  In the context of an investigation or a trial concerning a criminal offence, anyone:
(a)  who has been arrested or taken into or kept in detention under conditions or in circumstances not complying with the law;
...
(d)  who, even if he or she was detained lawfully during the investigation or trial, has not been brought before a judicial authority within a reasonable time and has not obtained a judgment on the merits within a reasonable time;
...
may claim compensation from the State for any pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage.”
Article 142 § 1 of the CCP reads as follows:
“The claim for compensation may be lodged within three months after the person concerned has been informed that the decision or judgment has become final, and in any event within one year after the decision or judgment has become final.”
According to the case-law of the Court of Cassation, it is not necessary to wait until the conclusion of the criminal proceedings before ruling on a compensation claim lodged under Article 141 of the CCP on account of the excessive length of pre-trial detention (decisions of 16 June 2015, E. 2014/21585 – K. 2015/10868 and E. 2014/6167 – K. 2015/10867).
In a judgment delivered on 4 December 2013 (no. 2012/1272) concerning the detention of a member of parliament, the Constitutional Court ruled on a complaint relating to the right to be elected in conjunction with a complaint concerning the length of pre-trial detention. The case concerned the pre-trial detention of Mr Balbay, who had been elected as a member of the National Assembly following the parliamentary elections held on 12 June 2011. On 5 August 2013, while his application was still pending before the Constitutional Court, Mr Balbay had been sentenced to sixteen years’ imprisonment. In its judgment, the Constitutional Court found not only a violation of the right to liberty, but also a violation of the right to be elected on account of the excessive duration of Mr Balbay’s pre-trial detention following his election (more than two years and one month, out of a total duration of four years and five months). The Constitutional Court held as follows:
“132.  In the present case, the criminal investigation in respect of the applicant had been initiated long before the parliamentary elections. While the applicant was in pre-trial detention, he was elected as a member of parliament in the parliamentary elections held on 12 June 2011. In that respect, neither the applicant’s prosecution nor his pre-trial detention constituted an obstacle to his election as a member of parliament ... Since he was not provisionally released after his election, the applicant was unable to take the oath or to sit in Parliament. It is beyond doubt that the detention in question, which made it impossible to perform his parliamentary duties, constituted an interference with [the applicant’s] right to be elected, because [the measure in issue] hindered all political activity and [the performance of his duties] as a member of parliament.
... [T]he applications for provisional release submitted by the applicant after his election were dismissed by the competent courts. [It should be reiterated that in the examination of the compatibility of the pre-trial detention with Article 19 of the Constitution, an equivalent provision to Article 5 of the Convention], it was concluded that the dismissal of the applications for provisional release submitted by the applicant after his election did not strike a fair balance between his right to be elected and the interest of society in the continued pre-trial detention of a person charged with a criminal offence. Having been unreasonably kept in pre-trial detention, the applicant was unable to take part in legislative activities. In view of the duration of the applicant’s pre-trial detention after his election, it cannot be concluded that this severe interference with the right to carry out political activities was proportionate and compatible with the requirements of a democratic society.”
In October 2012 the Office for Promotion of Parliamentary Democracy of the European Parliament published a study on parliamentary immunity, the relevant parts of which read:
“...
Non-liability
The scope of non-liability normally covers protection against all kinds of public penalties for acts committed in the performance of members’ duties or, more popularly formulated, deals with members’ freedom of speech. In general, parliamentarians are not liable in civil or criminal terms for the acts encompassed within this form of immunity. Non-liability is also referred to as ‘substantive immunity’, ‘absolute immunity’, or ‘parliamentary immunity’.
...
With regard to the acts covered by non-liability, these include votes cast and opinions expressed. ‘Substantive immunity extends to all the forms which parliamentary activity may take, whether in writing parliamentary documents, or in speeches and votes in all their forms, in parliamentary assemblies and committees.’
The scope of the protection afforded as regards ‘opinions’ stated is one of the most controversial aspects of non-liability. The majority of constitutional texts make use of the concept of opinions expressed ‘in the exercise of duties’. This permits a somewhat broad interpretation, so that it makes the protection applicable to certain statements made outside Parliament. ...
Unlike inviolability, non-liability has an absolute quality, in that the protection afforded is maintained even after the parliamentarian’s mandate has come to an end.
...
Inviolability
In general, this form of immunity is such that, unless parliament gives its authorisation, members may not be arrested or prosecuted for acts not carried out as part of their parliamentary functions.
The scope of inviolability varies according to the degree of protection afforded to parliamentarians. It may thus be the case that, unless the house concerned has given its prior authorisation, parliamentarians are protected only from arrest or, in addition, from enforcement of particular measures such as searches or, more widely still, from a court summons or indeed any form of criminal proceedings.
... [M]ost parliaments consider that, in the case of in flagrante delicto, inviolability must be waived. The term in flagrante delicto refers to cases where a person is caught in the very act of wrongdoing. Generally, it is for judges to determine whether an offence falls under the heading of in flagrante delicto. Still, according to some constitutions, in order to remove immunity without delay, it is not sufficient that in flagrante delicto be verified, the offence in question must also be a serious one.
As regards the duration of the inviolability, it can be seen that, while in some parliaments it has effect throughout the duration of the parliamentary term, in others it refers only to the periods during which parliament is in session.
...
Unlike non-liability, inviolability is effective only during the period of the parliamentary mandate and ceases to have effect after this has expired. Legal action is thus only postponed and not permanently prevented.
Waiving parliamentary immunity
...
How do Member State parliaments arrive at their decisions to grant or reject requests to waive parliamentary immunity? Among the guiding principles on which parliaments appear to base their decisions, we find in particular the following:
Verify the facts: a proper investigation may reveal the true purpose of the intended incrimination, namely to persecute unfairly the parliamentarian and to threaten their freedom and independence in carrying out their mandate;
Ascertain whether allegations made refer to criminal offences or appear to be of a more political nature;
Determine whether the alleged grounds for the accusation should be taken seriously or whether these are frivolous.
...”
On 11 and 12 March 2016, at its 106th plenary session, the Venice Commission adopted its opinion on Articles 216, 299, 301 and 314 of the Turkish Criminal Code. The relevant parts of the opinion reads as follows (footnotes omitted):
“...
Article 314 (armed organisation)
Article 314 of the [Criminal] Code criminalises the establishment and command of, as well as the membership in an armed organisation that engages in offences listed in parts four and five of Chapter IV of the [Criminal] Code (Offences against State and Nation).
...
Membership of an armed organisation (Article 314)
The [Criminal] Code does not contain a definition of an armed organisation or an armed group. In its judgment E. 2006/10-253 K. 2007/80 of 3 April 2007, the General Criminal Board of the Court of Cassation listed the main criteria that a criminal organisation – for the purposes of Article 220 of the [Criminal] Code – should display. The group has to have at least three members; there should be a tight or loose hierarchical connection between the members of the group and an ‘abstract link’ between the members is not sufficient; the members should have a common intention to commit crimes (even though no crime has yet been committed); the group has to present continuity in time; and the structure of the group, the number of its members, tools and equipment at the disposal of the group should be sufficient/appropriate for the commission of the envisaged crimes.
...
There is a rich case-law of the Court of Cassation in which the high court developed the criterion of ‘membership’ in an armed organisation. The Court of Cassation examined different acts of the suspect concerned, taking account of their ‘continuity, diversity and intensity’ in order to see whether those acts prove that the suspect has any ‘organic relationship’ with the organisation or whether his or her acts may be considered as committed knowingly and wilfully within the ‘hierarchical structure’ of the organisation. In case E. 2010/2839, K. 2012/1406 of 6 February 2012, the suspects who were constantly providing shelter to new candidates willing to become members of a terrorist organisation, providing them with falsified identity cards and introducing them to the organisation and looking for other new members for the organisation, were convicted for being members of an armed organisation. Acquiring a code name (within the organisation) in order to hide his/her real identity and hiding in his/her apartment a bomb delivered by the members of a terrorist organisation; giving courses on the aims and structure of the organisation to the new members, contacting again the organisation after having been released from prison and trying to collect money for the organisation and to find new members, delivering his/her ‘CV report’ to the organisation in order to become its member or driving new comers willing to become members of the organisation, to the camping place of the organisation, collecting money for the organisation under the guise of collecting tax for the organisation or organising the medical treatment of the new members before they were sent to the camping place of the organisation, etc. were all considered by the Court of Cassation as proving the membership of the defendant to an armed organisation under Article 314 of the [Criminal] Code, as the continuity, diversity and intensity of the acts attributed to the defendants showed that they were acting knowingly and willingly within the hierarchical structure of the armed organisation.
...
According to non-governmental sources, in the application of Article 314, the domestic courts, in many cases, decide on the membership of a person in an armed organisation on the basis of very weak evidence, which would raise questions as to the ‘foreseeability’ of the application of Article 314. Similarly, Freedom House in its 2015 Report on Freedom of Press in Turkey noted that ‘Article 314 of the [Criminal] Code, with its broad definition of ... membership in an armed organization, continued to be invoked against journalists, especially Kurds and those associated with the political left’. Also, Amnesty International, in its 2013 Report on Turkey, considered that conduct, which is not in itself criminal, as for instance an activity related to the exercise of the rights to freedom of assembly, association and expression, is considered as evidence of membership of the defendants in an armed organisation. The reason for this approach, according to the Report, is that the prosecution services perceive those activities as having the same overall objective as a terrorist group and as a result, ‘individuals have been prosecuted for membership of terrorist organisation on charges relating solely to their engagement in peaceful and, in themselves, lawful pro-Kurdish activities’. The examples of concrete cases provided by Amnesty International in which the evidence was considered to link the defendants to a terrorist organisation included, attendance at six different demonstrations allegedly organised by a terrorist organisation and a speech made at one of those demonstrations, or, in another case, the participation of the defendant in the ‘Political Academy’ organised by the Peace and Democracy Party (BDP – a recognised pro-Kurdish political party) and his diverse activities in the framework of this Academy.
...
In conclusion, the Venice Commission recommends, first, that the established criteria in the case law of the Court of Cassation that acts attributed to a defendant should show ‘in their continuity, diversity and intensity’, his/her ‘organic relationship’ to an organisation or they should prove that he/she acted knowingly and willingly within the ‘hierarchical structure’ of the organisation, should be applied strictly. The loose application of these criteria may give rise to issues concerning in particular the principle of legality within the meaning of Article 7 ECHR.
Second, the expression of an opinion in its different forms should not be the only evidence before the domestic courts to decide on the membership of the defendant in an armed organisation. Where the only evidence consists of forms of expression, the conviction for being a member of an armed organisation, would constitute an interference with the right of the defendants to freedom of expression, and that the necessity of this interference on the basis of the criteria as set forth in the case-law of the ECtHR, in particular the criteria of ‘incitement to violence’, should be examined in the concrete circumstances of each case.
...
The Venice Commission ... concludes that the progress made is clearly insufficient. All articles subject to the present opinion provide for excessive sanctions and have been applied too widely, penalising conduct protected under the ECHR, in particular its Article 10 and the related case-law as well as conduct protected under Article 19 ICCPR.
All four articles have to be applied in a radically different manner to bring their application fully in line with Article 10 ECHR and Article 19 ICCPR. The Commission underlines that prosecution of individuals and convictions in particular by lower courts, which have a chilling effect on the freedom of expression, must cease. This is not sufficient if individuals are in some cases finally acquitted by the Court of Cassation after having been subject of criminal prosecution for several years. Moreover, the Commission underlines the importance of States’ positive obligation to create a favourable environment where different and alternative ideas can flourish.
...
With respect to Article 314 (Membership [of] an armed organisation), the established criterion in the case law of the Court of Cassation that acts attributed to a defendant should show ‘in their continuity, diversity and intensity’ his/her ‘organic relationship’ to an armed organisation or whether his/her acts may be considered as committed knowingly and wilfully within the ‘hierarchical structure’ of the organisation, should have a strict application. ...”
On 14 and 15 October 2016, at its 108th plenary session, the Venice Commission adopted its opinion on the constitutional amendment by which the principle of parliamentary inviolability was not applicable to cases against members of parliament which were pending on the date when the amendment was adopted. The relevant passages of this opinion read as follows:
“48.  The General Preamble to the Amendment explains that its purpose is to address public indignation about ‘statements of certain deputies constituting emotional and moral support to terrorism, the de facto support and assistance of certain deputies to terrorists and the calls of violence of certain deputies’. Statements by Members of Parliament, which may be interpreted as supporting terrorism, may indeed be punishable under criminal law but such statements will normally have a political character and therefore the question whether they should be covered by parliamentary non-liability is particularly relevant.
...
The constitutional amendment of 12 April 2016 was an ad hoc, ‘one shot’ ad homines measure directed against 139 individual deputies for cases that were already pending before the Assembly. Acting as the constituent power, the Grand National Assembly maintained the regime of immunity as established in Articles 83 and 85 of the Constitution for the future but derogated from this regime for specific cases concerning identifiable individuals while using general language. This is a misuse of the constitutional amendment procedure.
The argument that dealing one by one with the cases against these deputies would have taken too long and would have unduly burdened the agenda of the Grand National Assembly is not convincing. Instead of simplifying the procedure of lifting immunity, the complex system was maintained but it was derogated for 139 deputies. The heavy workload of the Grand National Assembly does not justify singling out the cases relating to these deputies from all other cases brought before it before and after the adoption of the Amendment. This violates the principle of equality. In the opinion of the Commission, the system of parliamentary immunity in Turkey should not be weakened, but reinforced, in particular in order to ensure the freedom of speech of Members of Parliament.
...”
On 10 and 11 March 2017, at its 110th plenary session, the Venice Commission adopted its opinion on the draft legislation amending the Turkish Constitution, entailing a transition from a parliamentary to a presidential system. The relevant parts of the opinion reads as follows (footnotes omitted):
“21.  First, the debates took place in the absence of a significant number of deputies from the opposition. Indeed, following a constitutional amendment enacted on 20 May 2016, published in the Official [Gazette] on 8 June 2016 and entered into force the same day, the parliamentary immunity of several MPs was lifted. On 4 November 2016, the President of the second-largest opposition party HDP (Selahattin Demirtaş) and 8 other HDP MPs were taken into detention on remand. There are currently 13 members of HDP who are still in detention, despite the Venice Commission’s recommendation to restore parliamentary immunity in Turkey.
...
The Commission finds that the proposed composition of the CJP [Council of Judges and Prosecutors] is extremely problematic. Almost half of its members (4+2=6 out of 13) will be appointed by the President. It is important to stress once again in this respect that the President will no more be a pouvoir neutre, but will be engaged in party politics: his choice of the members of the CJP will not have to be politically neutral. The remaining 7 members would be appointed by the Grand National Assembly. If the party of the President has a three-fifths majority in the Assembly, it will be able to fill all positions in the Council. If it has, as is almost guaranteed under the system of simultaneous elections, at least two-fifths of the seats, it will be able to obtain several seats, forming a majority together with the presidential appointees. That would place the independence of the judiciary in serious jeopardy, because the CJP is the main self-governing body overseeing appointment, promotion, transfer, disciplining and dismissal of judges and public prosecutors. Getting control over this body thus means getting control over judges and public prosecutors, especially in a country where the dismissal of judges has become frequent and where transfers of judges are a common practice. In this context it seems significant that the draft amendments provide for elections to the CJP within 30 days following the entry into force of the amendments and that the political forces supporting the amendments control more than three-fifths of the seats in the TGNA, enabling them to fill all seats in the CJP.
...”
On 13 March 2017, at its 110th plenary session, the Venice Commission) published an opinion (no. 852/2016) on the duties, competences and functioning of the “criminal peace judgeships” (magistrates’ courts). The relevant parts of the opinion read as follows (footnotes omitted):
“76.  The length of pre-trial detention remains a serious problem in Turkey. The Ministry of Justice provided statistics showing that the rate of detained persons as compared to the number of convicted persons was reduced from 50 per cent to 14 per cent between 2007 and 2014, before the establishment of the peace judges. However, this rate remained stable until the coup. These statistics thus show that the establishment of peace judgeships and the system of horizontal appeals between peace judgeships of the same level has not succeeded in reducing the problem of the length of pre-trial detention.
... [D]etentions ordered by peace judgeships are problematic due to the system of horizontal appeals. Furthermore, for persons who remain under detention in the investigation phase and who have been detained by peace judgeships on the basis of insufficiently reasoned decisions ... [, the p]rosecution should request their release as soon as possible.
... [T]he way of establishment of the peace judgeships and the system of functioning examined above are conducive to insufficient motivation of their decisions. Individual examples are thus very likely to be indicative of a wider problem. The fact that the decisions of peace judgeships can be appealed to the Constitutional Court does not remedy this structural problem.
To sum up, there are numerous instances where peace judges did not – and probably were not even able to due to their workload – sufficiently reason decisions which have a drastic impact on human rights of individuals.”
On 15 February 2017 the Commissioner for Human Rights published a memorandum on freedom of expression and media freedom in Turkey. The relevant parts of the memorandum read as follows (footnotes omitted):
“Use of judicial harassment to restrict parliamentary debate
While critical journalists are the most obvious victims of this situation ..., many other sectors and groups were also directly targeted. A particularly disturbing manifestation of this situation is the lifting of the immunities of parliamentarians. In a move that the Venice Commission described as an ad hoc, ‘one shot’ and ‘ad homines’ measure, as well as a misuse of the constitutional amendment procedure, the majority in the Turkish Parliament lifted the immunities of 139 of its members who were subject to pending prosecution requests submitted to the Parliament. One of the most worrying aspects of this measure was the fact that the majority of impugned acts concerned statements made by these MPs, for example for insulting the President or other public officials, terrorist propaganda or incitement to hatred. The preamble of the constitutional amendment itself stated that its purpose was to address public indignation about, inter alia, ‘statements of certain deputies constituting emotional and moral support to terrorism’. As the Venice Commission highlighted, nearly all MPs of a particular opposition party, the HDP, were concerned by the measure. As a result of this measure, prosecutions are on-going against a large number of opposition MPs. Several members of HDP, including its co-Chairs, were arrested in November 2016. The Turkish authorities have stated that the reason of the arrests was the refusal of the MPs to comply with the order to personally appear before the prosecutor. However, even after having forcibly been made to give evidence, 11 MPs are still in prison and cannot carry out their parliamentary mandate at a crucial juncture.
The ECtHR made it very clear that ‘[w]hile freedom of expression is important for everybody, it is especially so for an elected representative of the people. He represents his electorate, draws attention to their preoccupations and defends their interests. Accordingly, interferences with the freedom of expression of an opposition member of parliament ... call for the closest scrutiny on the part of the Court.’ The Commissioner also recalls the ECtHR’s judgment concerning DTP, a precursor party of the HDP, which was unduly closed, mainly for statements of its members which were protected under Article 10. The Commissioner notes, in particular, that these statements were very similar to the statements which were used as justification for the lifting of the immunities in the present case.
The Commissioner draws the authorities’ attention particularly to the conclusion of the Court that the mere fact that there are parallels between the principles defended by the DTP and those of the PKK did not suffice to conclude that the party approved of the use of force in order to implement its policies. If a political group was considered to be supporting terrorism, merely by advocating those principles, that would reduce the possibility of dealing with relate[d] issues in the context of a democratic debate and would allow armed movements to monopolise support for the principles in question. In the current climate, the Commissioner considers that the lifting of the immunities of MPs and their subsequent arrest and detention not only disenfranchised millions of voters, but sent an extremely dangerous and chilling message to the entire Turkish population, and significantly reduced the scope of democratic debate, including on human rights.”
On 18 October 2017, at its 201st session in St Petersburg, the IPU Governing Council adopted its decision concerning fifty-six HDP members of parliament, including the applicant. It stated in particular:
“...
Recalls its long-standing concerns over freedom of expression and association related to anti-terrorist legislation and the offence of membership of a criminal organization and reiterates its prior recommendations to the Turkish authorities to urgently address these concerns in an appropriate manner; urges the Turkish authorities to share the information requested on the specific facts and evidence adduced to support the charges and convictions against the concerned parliamentarians, including relevant excerpts of all court decision; also wishes to be kept informed of new developments in the proceedings, particularly when verdicts are delivered;
Cautions that recent developments and the lack of progress towards resolution of the case seem to lend significant weight to fears that the ongoing proceedings may be aimed at depriving the People’s Democratic Party (HDP) of effective representation in parliament, at weakening the opposition parties in parliament and in the broader political arena, and therefore at silencing the populations they represent; reaffirms its concerns that the limited possibility of parliamentary representation for the populations affected may contribute to further deterioration of the political and security situation prevailing in south-eastern Turkey, as well as weaken the independence of the institution of parliament as a whole;
...”
The relevant parts concerning Turkey of Amnesty International’s 2017/18 annual report on the state of the world’s human rights read as follows:
“Turkey
...
An ongoing state of emergency set a backdrop for violations of human rights. Dissent was ruthlessly suppressed, with journalists, political activists and human rights defenders among those targeted. ...
Background
...
After having been remanded in prison detention in 2016, nine parliamentarians from the Kurdish-rooted leftist Peoples’ Democracy Party (HDP), including the party’s two leaders, remained in prison during the whole year. Sixty elected mayors of the Democratic Regions Party, the sister party of the HDP, representing constituencies in the predominantly Kurdish east and southeast of Turkey, also remained in prison. The unelected officials who replaced them continued in office throughout 2017. ...
Freedom of expression
Civil society representatives, as well as the general population, widely practised self-censorship, deleting social media posts and refraining from making public comments for fear of dismissal from their jobs, closure of their organizations or criminal prosecution. Thousands of criminal prosecutions were brought, including under laws prohibiting defamation and on trumped-up terrorism-related charges, based on peoples’ peaceful exercise of their right to freedom of expression. Arbitrary and punitive lengthy pre-trial detention was routinely imposed. Confidential details of investigations were frequently leaked to government-linked media and splashed across the front pages of newspapers, while government spokespeople made prejudicial statements regarding cases under investigation. Prosecutions of journalists and political activists continued, and prosecutions of human rights defenders sharply increased. International journalists and media were also targeted.
Criticism of the government in the broadcast and print media largely disappeared, with dissent mainly confined to internet-based media. The government continued to use administrative blocking orders, against which there was no effective appeal, routinely, to censor internet content. ...”
I respectfully disagree with the decision of the majority not to accept the Constitutional Court’s judgment of 9 June 2020 finding a violation of Article 19 § 7 of the Turkish Constitution on account of the length of the applicant’s pre-trial detention. In that judgment the Constitutional Court acknowledged in substance a violation of the applicant’s rights under Article 5 § 3 of the Convention. It held that the decisions on his continued detention had contained insufficient reasons. This is fully in line with the Court’s well-established case-law (see paragraph 218 of the judgment), according to which an applicant will be considered to have lost victim status where the national authorities have acknowledged that there has been a breach of the Convention, either expressly or in substance, and have provided the applicant with redress (see Eckle v. Germany, 15 July 1982, § 66, Series A no. 51).
However, it is obvious that a person will not lose victim status simply by reason of some acknowledgment by the respondent State that there has been a violation of the Convention. The second issue which falls under the Court’s scrutiny in the present case is whether the Constitutional Court’s judgment afforded the applicant appropriate and sufficient redress. Where the national authorities have awarded compensation to an applicant, according to the Court’s case-law, the Court should examine the amount of the award. That amount must not be manifestly inadequate in the circumstances of the case under examination (see Žúbor v. Slovakia, no. 7711/06, § 63, 6 December 2011). The sums which the applicant was awarded – 50,000 Turkish liras (TRY – approximately 6,500 euros) in respect of non-pecuniary damage and TRY 4,436.30 in respect of costs and expenses – cannot be regarded as disproportionate.
Two preconditions developed in the relevant case-law have been met in the present case. Why should the majority not accept this important finding of the national Constitutional Court, knowing that the Court consistently underlines in its case-law the principle of subsidiarity and the necessity of judicial dialogue with the national courts? What message is being sent to the national courts by ignoring the significant principle of international judicial cooperation? What more could the domestic courts have done in such a situation? The majority’s conclusion that there has been no acknowledgment by the Constitutional Court of the alleged violation of the right protected by Article 5 § 3 of the Convention (see paragraph 222 of the judgment) simply does not reflect reality. The national authorities’ obligation to afford redress for any violation of the Convention was fulfilled in respect of the applicant’s complaint under Article 5 § 3.
I am respectfully unable to agree with the majority concerning the applicant’s victim status under Article 5 § 3 of the Convention. In the present case, I am of the opinion that the applicant can no longer claim to be the victim of a violation of that provision.
The applicant argued before the Court that the judicial decisions ordering his initial and continued pre-trial detention had contained no reasons other than mere citation of the grounds for pre-trial detention provided for by law and had been worded in abstract, repetitive and formulaic terms. In its second judgment, on 9 June 2020, the Constitutional Court found a violation of Article 19 of the Turkish Constitution (equivalent provision to Article 5 § 3 of the Convention), holding that the national courts had failed to provide sufficient reasons in respect of their conclusion. The Constitutional Court also held that the domestic courts had failed to weigh up the competing interests involved, namely (i) the public interest in prolonging the applicant’s detention in the context of the criminal proceedings and (ii) his rights as a member of parliament and the co-chair of a political party, such as his right to take part in the legislative activities of the parliament. This balancing exercise between the applicant’s right to liberty and his rights as a politician formed part of the Constitutional Court’s assessment of the length of the applicant’s pre-trial detention.
One should bear in mind that the Constitutional Court had already adjudicated on the applicant’s initial detention in its first judgment and found it to be in conformity with the Constitution. In this regard, I would like to reiterate that the Chamber also arrived at the same conclusion in so far as the applicant’s complaint under Article 5 § 1 (c) of the Convention is concerned. In its second judgment, the Constitutional Court, which was not called upon to examine the applicant’s initial detention order again, examined the decisions prolonging his detention. In my view, the Constitutional Court’s second judgment, where it found a violation on the basis that the reasons given in the decisions extending the applicant’s detention had not been sufficient to justify its duration, demonstrates that there has been an acknowledgment, at least in substance, of a violation of the applicant’s rights under Article 5 § 3 of the Convention.
The Court therefore had to determine whether the Constitutional Court’s judgment afforded the applicant appropriate and sufficient redress. In that connection, it follows from the Court’s case-law that where the national authorities have awarded compensation to an applicant by way of redress for the violation found, the Court should examine the amount of the award (see Hebat Aslan and Firas Aslan v. Turkey, no. 15048/09, § 44, 28 October 2014). In doing so, the Court will have regard to its own practice in similar cases and will consider, on the basis of the material in its possession, what it would have awarded in a comparable situation, although this does not mean that the two amounts must necessarily correspond. It will also take into account the circumstances of the case as a whole, including the type of remedy chosen and the speed with which the national authorities have provided the redress in question, given that it is primarily for those authorities to secure the rights and freedoms set out in the Convention (see Vedat Doğru v. Turkey, no. 2469/10, § 40, 5 April 2016). Nevertheless, the amount awarded at national level must not be manifestly inadequate in the circumstances of the case under examination (see Žúbor v. Slovakia, no. 7711/06, § 63, 6 December 2011). In the present case, the Constitutional Court held, on the basis of its findings of a violation, that the applicant was to be awarded 50,000 Turkish liras (TRY – approximately 6,500 euros (EUR) at the material time) in respect of non-pecuniary damage and TRY 4,436.30 (approximately EUR 575 at the material time) in respect of costs and expenses. I consider that those amounts cannot be regarded as inadequate and disproportionate. As such, I find it difficult to argue that the Constitutional Court’s judgment of 9 June 2020 did not afford him appropriate and sufficient redress.
In the light of the foregoing and given the importance of the subsidiarity principle, which lies at the heart of the Convention, it is my belief that the applicant can no longer claim to be the victim of a violation of Article 5 § 3 of the Convention.
I note that the core reasoning under Article 46 of the Convention essentially amounts to an examination of both the factual and the legal grounds of the applicant’s second pre-trial detention, ordered on 20 September 2019, with the conclusion that the immediate release of the applicant should be secured. I am respectfully not able to agree with the majority and voted against the application of Article 46 of the Convention, where the majority invited the respondent State to secure the immediate release of the applicant on the basis of a rather unorthodox assessment based on a legal question that (i) is pending before the domestic courts, (ii) is disputed between the parties and (iii) does not fall within the scope of the case.
The question of the applicant’s second detention order is the subject of another individual application that is currently pending before the Constitutional Court (see paragraph 128 of the judgment). Therefore, the correct course of action would be to defer to the authority of the domestic courts in line with the principle of subsidiarity. The refusal to do so could risk, unfortunately, not only prejudicing the proceedings pending before the Constitutional Court but also placing the Court in the position of a prosecutor in ascertaining the factual basis of the second detention order. Such an approach should have been avoided.
It has not been established that both the initial and the present detention orders concern the same criminal proceedings against the applicant involving the same charges stemming from the same facts (see, by contrast, Ilgar Mammadov v. Azerbaijan (no. 2), no. 919/15, § 203, 16 November 2017). I cannot share the view of the majority in carrying out an assessment under Article 46 of the Convention based on the assumption that the facts underlying the two detention orders, that is to say the initial detention order giving rise to the present application and the second detention order issued on 20 September 2019, were the same. As can be seen from the judgment, the offences forming the subject of the two detention orders were in fact different (see paragraphs 70 and 116 of the judgment). The fact that there might be a certain overlap in the factual grounds, namely the incidents of 6-8 October 2014 underlying the two detention orders, is not sufficient to conclude that they were issued on account of the same facts. Indeed, this issue was highly disputed between the parties.
Moreover, I have strong hesitations in accepting that the applicant’s second detention forms part of the case before the Grand Chamber. To the best of my knowledge, this is the first Grand Chamber case in which an applicant’s release has been recommended not on the basis of a complaint in respect of which the Grand Chamber finds a violation, but on the basis of a factual issue taken into consideration together with other factual issues under Article 18 of the Convention. In other words, the majority’s conclusion under Article 46 of the Convention does not appear to have been aimed at putting an end to a violation that has been found to exist, given that the Grand Chamber was not called upon to examine the applicant’s second detention from the point of view of Article 5 of the Convention, a question that is, I repeat, pending before the Constitutional Court. Indeed, an examination of the Grand Chamber cases in which the Court has indicated under Article 46 of the Convention that an applicant should be released shows that in all those judgments, such as Del Río Prada v. Spain ([GC], no. 42750/09, §§ 138-39, ECHR 2013), Ilaşcu and Others v. Moldova and Russia ([GC], no. 48787/99, § 490, ECHR 2004-VII) and Assanidze v. Georgia ([GC], no. 71503/01, §§ 202-03, ECHR 2004II), the indication that the applicants were to be released was based on a complaint in respect of which the Court had found a violation (see also, in respect of Chamber judgments, Aleksanyan v. Russia, no. 46468/06, §§ 239-40, 22 December 2008, Fatullayev v. Azerbaijan, no. 40984/07, §§ 176-77, 22 April 2010, and Şahin Alpay v. Turkey, no. 16538/17, §§ 193-95, 20 March 2018). In the instant case, the applicant’s second detention ordered in September 2019 is not amongst the complaints in respect of which a violation has been found.
In view of the above, I voted against the application of Article 46 of the Convention in the present case.
I agree with the findings of the judgment in the present case in so far as they concern the applicant’s complaints under Article 5 § 4 of the Convention and Article 3 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention. However, I am unable to share the majority’s view that there have been violations of Article 5 §§ 1 and 3, Article 10, and Article 18 of the Convention.
That said, while I share the position of the majority with regard to their conclusion that Article 3 of Protocol No. 1 has been violated, I cannot subscribe to certain arguments they have advanced under that provision.
In the present case, in concluding that there has been a violation of Article 10 of the Convention, the Grand Chamber opted to examine the foreseeability of the constitutional amendment of 20 May 2016 concerning the lifting of parliamentary immunity and the lawfulness of Article 314 §§ 1 and 2 of the Criminal Code on directing and/or membership of an armed terrorist organisation, as applied in the particular circumstances of the applicant’s case. In the majority’s view, the interference with the applicant’s freedom of expression was not prescribed by law owing to the fact that the constitutional amendment and Article 314 §§ 1 and 2 of the Criminal Code as interpreted and applied did not comply with the requirement of the quality of law under Article 10 of the Convention. I respectfully disagree with the majority on this point, for the following reasons.
I believe that the interference observed in the present case was prescribed by law and thus satisfied the requirement of lawfulness (see my dissenting opinion in Ragıp Zarakolu v. Turkey, no. 15064/12, 15 September 2020, for the interplay between Articles 5 and 10 of the Convention as regards the issue of lawfulness). Therefore, the interference in the present case fell to be examined by applying the necessity test within the meaning of Article 10 of the Convention, for the reasons I will elaborate upon below (see, in this connection, Mehmet Hasan Altan v. Turkey, no. 13237/17, §§ 20214, 20 March 2018; Steel and Others v. the United Kingdom, 23 September 1998, § 110, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1998VII; and Kandzhov v. Bulgaria, no. 68294/01, § 73, 6 November 2008).
According to the Court’s well-established case-law, a rule is “foreseeable” when it affords a measure of protection against arbitrary interferences by the public authorities (see, among other authorities, Centro Europa 7 S.r.l. and Di Stefano v. Italy [GC], no. 38433/09, § 143, ECHR 2012). Furthermore, a norm must be formulated with sufficient precision in order to enable persons to regulate their conduct. In fact, individuals need to foresee, to a reasonable degree, the consequences which a given action may entail (see, among other authorities, Karácsony and Others v. Hungary [GC], nos. 42461/13 and 44357/13, § 124, 17 May 2016; Delfi AS v. Estonia [GC], no. 64569/09, § 121, ECHR 2015; and Centro Europa 7 S.r.l. and Di Stefano, cited above, § 141). Foreseeability does not require that all the procedures regarding the application of a norm should be laid down in the text of the norm itself (see Magyar Kétfarkú Kutya Párt v. Hungary [GC], no. 201/17, § 94, 20 January 2020).
It is of the utmost importance that in examining an individual application brought under Article 34 of the Convention, the task of the Court is not to review domestic law in the abstract, but to determine whether the way in which it was applied to the applicant gave rise to a breach of the Convention (ibid., § 96). In my view, although the Grand Chamber eloquently laid down the general principles concerning the “prescribed by law” requirement under Article 10 of the Convention, its assessment based on those principles appears to be an abstract review of the constitutional amendment and Article 314 §§ 1 and 2 of the Criminal Code and, as such, contrary to our established case-law.
In view of the above, I will address the following points: (i) the foreseeability of the constitutional amendment, (ii) the question whether Article 314 §§ 1 and 2 of the Criminal Code as interpreted and applied in the applicant’s case, satisfied the “quality of law” requirement, and (iii) the question whether the interference with the applicant’s rights under Article 10 of the Convention was justified.
(i)  As regards the constitutional amendment, I would reiterate at the outset that the Chamber in its judgment of 20 November 2018 has already examined, albeit under Article 5 § 1 of the Convention, the applicant’s complaint that the constitutional amendment did not satisfy the “quality of law” requirement and declared that complaint inadmissible as being manifestly ill-founded. I would furthermore like to underline that the constitutional amendment in question was adopted on the basis of a large consensus in Parliament, including members of parliament belonging to opposition parties. Without prejudging and entering into a discussion about the substance of the constitutional amendment, it could be argued that it was a legitimate constitutional amendment adopted pursuant to Article 175 of the Constitution, which emphasises the importance of constituent power. It does not appear that there were any judicial findings showing that the amendment had been carried out in breach of the relevant constitutional and parliamentary procedures.
The Grand Chamber’s examination regarding the constitutional amendment appears to be based on two pillars. Firstly, the majority held that the domestic courts had unjustifiably refused to examine whether the applicant’s speeches were covered by the first paragraph of Article 83 of the Constitution, that is to say, whether the domestic courts’ failure to examine whether the applicant’s statements fell within Article 83 § 1 of the Constitution was erroneous. Secondly, the majority came to the conclusion that the constitutional amendment itself had had the effect of depriving the applicant of the protection afforded to him by the second paragraph of Article 83.
As regards the first point, which I consider to be inextricably linked to the contents of the applicant’s speeches, I have to underline that the domestic judicial authorities, namely the public prosecutors and judges, implicitly considered that the applicant could not benefit from the protection of his parliamentary non-liability under Article 83 § 1 of the Constitution. In my view, there was no element capable of providing a basis for finding that the domestic courts disregarded Turkish law and practice.
As regards the second point, namely whether the constitutional amendment of 20 May 2016 had the effect of depriving the applicant of the protection afforded to him, I would like to underline that it did not narrow down or alter the definition and general concepts of non-liability or inviolability. The constitutional amendment only amended the procedure governing the lifting of the immunities of members of parliament in respect of whom investigation reports had already been submitted to Parliament by the date of its adoption (see paragraph 137 of the judgment). Thus, it effectively entailed a change in the scope of the procedural safeguards regarding the lifting of immunities of members of parliament. While that fact was acknowledged by the majority, paragraph 268 of the judgment relies on it in order to conclude that “the amendment created a situation that was not foreseeable for the members of parliament concerned”. I respectfully do not share the majority’s approach in addressing the applicant’s inability to benefit from certain procedural safeguards from the perspective of the foreseeability of the constitutional amendment. A distinction should have been made between the conformity of these safeguards with the Convention and the foreseeability of the constitutional amendment.
The majority do not appear to have sufficiently considered the issue as to whether the applicant could still have been prosecuted in accordance with Article 83 of the Constitution even in the absence of the constitutional amendment. In fact, the provisions concerning the non-liability and inviolability of members of parliament are still in force.
Although I have deep hesitations as to whether the foreseeability of a constitutional amendment can be considered in the same way as that of ordinary law, to my understanding it is difficult, if not impossible, to speak of the foreseeability of constitutional amendments without duly taking into account the case-law criteria referred to above. In that connection, it is equally difficult to discern a causal link between the alleged failure of the domestic courts to examine whether the applicant’s speeches were protected under the first paragraph of Article 83 of the Constitution and the foreseeability of the constitutional amendment. I cannot agree that a development – that is to say, the domestic courts’ alleged failure to examine the applicant’s claims under Article 83 § 1 of the Constitution – which took place after the constitutional amendment could have had an effect on its foreseeability.
Under these circumstances, I am respectfully unable to agree with the majority’s line of reasoning, which, in my opinion, has lowered the Court’s threshold in its examinations concerning the foreseeability of constitutional amendments.
(ii)  As regards the question whether the interpretation and application in the applicant’s case of the provisions governing terrorism-related offences satisfied the “quality of law” requirement, it transpires from the case file that the applicant did not explicitly maintain before the Grand Chamber his complaint regarding this point under Article 10. Therefore, I do not consider that the separate examination of this question was warranted by the applicant’s submissions.
It is true that the majority stressed in paragraph 275 of the judgment that they were “mindful of the difficulties linked to preventing terrorism and formulating anti-terrorism criminal laws. The member States inevitably have recourse to somewhat general wording, the application of which depends on its practical interpretation by the judicial authorities.” However, I am not sure whether the majority’s conclusion in the present application could easily be regarded as being mindful of the difficulties linked to terrorism. The finding that the interpretation and application of terrorism-related offences were not prescribed by law is a profoundly serious one which must be supported by equally serious and convincing reasons, as well as an explicit claim from the applicant, which, in my view, was not the case in the present application.
I respectfully disagree with the majority’s conclusion that “the interpretation and application in the applicant’s case of the provisions governing terrorism-related offences” posed a problem in respect of the quality of the law in question. I believe that it should have been necessary to ascertain the scope of the examination of legality carried out by our Court as referred to above. That brings me to the last part of my examination under Article 10.
(iii)  As I explained above, I would prefer to have examined the question whether the interference in the present case was necessary in a democratic society. In that connection, I am prepared to accept that the legitimate aims pursued by the interference were those of combating terrorism and protecting national security and public safety, in pursuance of Article 10. As for necessity, it is true that there is little scope under Article 10 § 2 of the Convention for restrictions on political speech or on debate of questions of public interest. In fact, interferences with the freedom of expression of an opposition member of parliament call for the closest scrutiny on the part of the Court (see Castells v. Spain, 23 April 1992, § 42, Series A no. 236). However, I harbour doubts that the applicant’s impugned speeches cannot be viewed as glorifying and praising the use of violence and can be seen as entirely peaceful and as contributing to a debate in the public interest, regard being had in particular to the tense situation prevailing in the region at the time as a result of the armed clashes between the Turkish security forces and the PKK (see Sürek v. Turkey (no. 1) [GC], no. 26682/95, § 62, ECHR 1999IV). At this juncture, I would also like to point out that the criminal proceedings against the applicant are still pending before the domestic courts and, in accordance with the principle of presumption of innocence, I shall exercise caution so as not to prejudice their outcome in any way.
In view of the above, I conclude that the interference with the applicant’s rights was prescribed by law, as being both foreseeable and compliant with the “quality of law” requirement, and was necessary in a democratic society as corresponding to a pressing social need and proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued.
The applicant complained of the lack of reasonable suspicion against him, both during the initial period immediately after his arrest and during the subsequent periods when his pre-trial detention had been authorised and extended by the judicial authorities. On this point, I am respectfully not able to follow the majority’s conclusion regarding the alleged lack of reasonable suspicion under Article 5 § 1 (c) of the Convention. I see no reason requiring the Grand Chamber to depart from the Chamber’s decision on this issue, which was based on the Court’s well-established case-law (see, among many other authorities, Fox, Campbell and Hartley v. the United Kingdom, 30 August 1990, Series A no. 182; O’Hara v. the United Kingdom, no. 37555/97, ECHR 2001-X; and Çiçek v. Turkey (dec.), no. 72774/10, § 62, 3 March 2015). I specifically refer to the Court’s case-law to the effect that Article 5 § 1 (c) of the Convention does not presuppose that the investigating authorities have obtained sufficient evidence to bring charges at the time of arrest. Thus, facts which raise a suspicion need not be of the same level as those necessary to justify a conviction or even the bringing of a charge, which comes at the next stage of the process of criminal investigation (see Murray v. the United Kingdom, 28 October 1994, § 55, Series A no. 300-A, and Yüksel and Others v. Turkey, nos. 55835/09 and 2 others, § 52, 31 May 2016). In this context, the Court must examine, as the Constitutional Court and the Chamber did, all the relevant evidence in the criminal case file that may confirm or dispel the concrete suspicion grounding the initial detention, and it cannot be bound only by the evidence adduced at first instance (see, mutatis mutandis, Yüksel and Others, cited above, §§ 51-59, Tekin v. Turkey (dec.), no. 3501/09, §§ 5562, 18 November 2014; and Metin v. Turkey (dec.), no. 77479/11, §§ 5364, 3 March 2015).
As to the substance of the complaint under Article 5 § 1 of the Convention, I fully endorse the Chamber’s findings in its judgment of 20 November 2018. In this regard, I would like to note three items of evidence in particular, as can be seen from the file: the applicant’s statements at a demonstration that they would put up a sculpture of the leader of the PKK and his speech at the offices of a political party on 21 April 2013 in which he referred, inter alia, to the first terrorist attacks by the PKK as the “coup in 1984” and the “resistance in Şemdinli [and] Eruh” (see paragraph 79 of the judgment); the transcripts of conversations among leading members of the PKK and between them and the applicant (paragraph 79 of the judgment); and the tweets published from the official HDP Twitter account on 6 October 2014 (see paragraph 20 of the judgment). In the light of the evidence, the facts, and the requirements of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention as to the level of factual justification needed at the stage of suspicion, I consider that the applicant can be said to have been arrested and detained on “reasonable suspicion” of having committed a criminal offence.
In the light of the foregoing, I believe that the national authorities had sufficient grounds to conclude that there was a reasonable suspicion that the applicant had committed an offence. Accordingly, I am of the opinion that there has been no violation of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention.
As I am of the opinion that the applicant could no longer claim to be the victim of a violation of Article 5 § 3, I voted against the findings of the majority in relation to the merits of the complaint under that provision.
Regarding the applicant’s complaint under Article 3 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention, I concur with the finding that, in the particular circumstances of the present case, there has been a violation of that provision in so far as the competent magistrates and assize courts did not assess the applicant’s allegations that his continued detention was unreasonable on account of his status as a member of parliament and the co-chair of a political party. On this point, I agree with the conclusions of the majority, which were also taken into consideration, albeit under Article 5 § 3, by the Constitutional Court in its second judgment.
Nevertheless, I respectfully dissociate myself from certain parts of the reasoning, which concern the references made to the findings of violations of Article 10 and Article 5 § 1 of the Convention in the majority’s assessment under Article 3 of Protocol No. 1 (see, in particular, paragraph 394 of the judgment).
I voted against the finding of a violation of Article 18 in conjunction with Article 5 of the Convention because I have serious doubts as to whether such a finding is compatible with the Court’s case-law (see, in particular, Merabishvili v. Georgia [GC], no. 72508/13, 28 November 2017), considering the circumstances of the present case.
It appears from the Court’s case-law that in cases where there is a complaint under Article 18 in conjunction with Article 5, the Court first examines whether the deprivation of liberty of the applicant pursued an aim that is compatible with the Convention (see Rasul Jafarov v. Azerbaijan, no. 69981/14, §§ 153-63, 17 March 2016, and Khodorkovskiy v. Russia, no. 5829/04, §§ 254-61, 31 May 2011). Second, the Court examines whether there is proof that the authorities’ actions were actually driven by improper reasons and it must base its decision on “evidence in the legal sense” in accordance with the criteria laid down by it in the Merabishvili judgment (cited above, §§ 309-17), and its own assessment of the specific relevant facts (see my dissenting opinion in Kavala v. Turkey, no. , 10 December 2019).
As regards the first limb, for the reasons set out above, I am of the opinion that the applicant could be said to have been detained on “reasonable suspicion” of having committed a criminal offence. In other words, the applicant was deprived of his liberty for a purpose prescribed by Article 5 § 1 (c) of the Convention. Therefore, I cannot share the majority’s view that “the purposes put forward by the authorities for the applicant’s pre-trial detention were merely cover for an ulterior political purpose”. In that connection, I would first point out that Turkish law has a higher standard of protection concerning the “reasonable suspicion” criterion under Article 5 § 1. In the present case, the national courts, including the Constitutional Court, examined the applicant’s detention and held that there were sufficient grounds for a strong suspicion that he had committed an offence. In other words, they ascertained the existence of a higher level of suspicion than that of “reasonable suspicion” required under Article 5 § 1 (c). Secondly, the fact that the majority have reached the aforementioned view after meticulously subjecting the grounds of the applicant’s detention to scrutiny implies that those grounds were not devoid of any basis or otherwise fabricated. I would like to point out that the Chamber also carried out an examination of the applicant’s detention and concluded that “... there was sufficient information in the criminal case file to satisfy an objective observer that the applicant might have committed at least some of the offences for which he had been prosecuted” (see paragraph 169 of the Chamber judgment). Having regard to these factors, I am not entirely convinced that cogent reasons were put forward to justify a departure from the domestic courts’ and Chamber’s conclusions as regards the “reasonable suspicion” requirement under Article 5 § 1 (c). These circumstances have led me to conclude that the applicant’s detention was in pursuance of a legitimate aim that was prescribed by the Convention. It is thus difficult for me to accept the majority’s view that the applicant’s detention was a mere cover for an ulterior purpose.
As regards the second limb, I consider that improper reasons were not present in the instant case, in view of the following factors.
Firstly, the applicant’s main complaint is that he and other persons from his party were specifically targeted because of their position in the Turkish political scene. However, it transpires from the materials submitted by the parties that there were members of parliament from other political parties who were also subject to criminal proceedings (see paragraphs 57 and 58 of the judgment). Therefore, it cannot easily be said that the domestic judicial authorities specifically targeted certain members of parliament.
Secondly, it primarily falls within the authority of the national judiciary to ensure that, in any given case, the pre-trial detention of an accused person is imposed with the utmost care and in accordance with the requirements of the Convention and the Court’s relevant case-law. In this connection, it appears from the case file that the applicant’s pre-trial detention was examined on several occasions by the domestic judges, either of their own motion or at the request of the applicant. In fact, the domestic courts examined the question of the applicant’s detention regularly and in a speedy manner from 4 November 2016 onwards. Furthermore, in a judgment of 9 June 2020, the Constitutional Court unanimously held that there had been a violation of Article 19 of the Constitution, finding that in extending the applicant’s pre-trial detention, the national judicial authorities had failed to put forward relevant and sufficient reasons in respect of his arguments concerning his right to stand for election and to carry out political activities. Nevertheless, the fact that certain aspects of the judicial review of the applicant’s detention were found to have disclosed a breach of Article 19 of the Constitution is not sufficient in itself to warrant the conclusion that the applicant was detained for purposes other than those provided for by the Convention. Moreover, in a judgment of 11 July 2018, the applicant was awarded compensation under Article 141 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Accordingly, I am unable to conclude that the judicial authorities acted improperly and in blatant disregard of the Convention.
Furthermore, I respectfully disagree with the majority when it comes to certain passages in their reasoning under Article 18 of the Convention.
Firstly, I must point out that the structure of the Supreme Council of Judges and Prosecutors is irrelevant for the purposes of the Grand Chamber’s examination under Article 18 of the Convention (see paragraph 434 of the judgment). In fact, the majority criticise the changes to the structure of that body which were brought about by a referendum which was accepted by a sovereign nation, and they fail to assess how those changes had any bearing on the applicant in the present case or to explain the relevance of this point. In the absence of a causal link between the new structure and the purported ulterior purpose, this point amounts to an in abstracto examination of the constitutional amendments laid down in the referendum. Thus, I am not sure whether, in the present case, there was any call for the Grand Chamber to delve into this matter of its own motion.
Secondly, whilst the Grand Chamber acknowledged that it did not have access to the content of the criminal proceedings against the other detained members of parliament, it held, in the light of the reports and opinions of international observers, that the main reason for depriving them of their liberty lay in their political speeches, concluding in that respect that the applicant’s detention was not an isolated case (see paragraph 428 of the judgment). At this junction, I must underline that the cases of some of those members of parliament are currently pending before our Court. Thus, the line of reasoning accepted by the majority goes, in my humble opinion, beyond the legal questions the Grand Chamber was called upon to examine.
In view of the foregoing considerations, I believe that there is no sufficient evidence that is capable of supporting the applicant’s allegation that the entire judicial mechanism of Turkey acted in line with the political agenda by instituting criminal investigations in respect of him. Inasmuch as the majority’s line of reasoning hinges on the applicant’s second detention, which was, in their view, based on “the same factual context”, namely the 68 October events that had also formed part of the factual grounds for his first detention, I would like to make the following observations (see paragraphs 432-33 and 440-42 of the judgment).
Although I have addressed certain aspects of this issue in my separate opinion under Article 46 of the Convention, its importance merits a reiteration of part of that analysis. Firstly, I must point out again that the legal and factual questions regarding the applicant’s second detention are the subject of an individual application he lodged with the Constitutional Court; hence this issue is currently pending before the domestic authorities. Secondly, in the present case, the majority assessed the complaint under Article 18 in conjunction with Article 5 of the Convention. However, under Article 5 of the Convention, the subject of the Grand Chamber’s examination was the applicant’s first detention, from 4 November 2016 to 7 December 2018, and not his second detention, which was ordered on 20 September 2019 and is still ongoing. Whilst the majority’s approach might arguably imply that the applicant’s second detention is in effect the continuation of his first detention, given that both detention orders were purportedly based on the same factual context, I am unable to agree with that view for the reasons that I indicated in my separate opinion under Article 46 of the Convention, and also for the following reasons. It is true that circumstantial evidence which is information about the primary facts, or contextual facts or sequences of events, may be taken into account in assessing the general and wider context when the Court examines complaints under Article 18 (see Merabishvili, cited above, § 317). However, where the circumstantial evidence takes the form of legal questions relating to the applicant, the Court’s approach may be different. Indeed, in Navalnyy v. Russia ([GC], nos. 29580/12 and 4 others, § 171, 15 November 2018), the Court took into account the two sets of criminal proceedings contemporaneous to the criminal proceedings against the applicant in its assessment under Article 18 (regarding the general context of the case) by referring to previous judgments in which it had established the relevant facts and determined the legal questions raised in those two sets of proceedings (reference was made to Navalnyy and Ofitserov v. Russia, nos. 46632/13 and 28671/14, §§ 116-19, 23 February 2016, and to Navalnyye v. Russia, no. 101/15, §§ 83-84, 17 October 2017).
In the light of the above, the applicant’s second detention in the present case is not, from my perspective, merely circumstantial evidence; it is a legal question pending before the domestic courts and does not form part of the Court’s examination under Article 5, in conjunction with which the complaint under Article 18 was examined. Under these circumstances, the majority’s approach may risk widening the scope of the case before the Grand Chamber in an unprecedented way and I am hesitant to accept that position. In addition to such a novel approach, the majority also went on to examine the grounds of the applicant’s second detention not under Article 5 (owing to the fact that the second detention was not included in the scope of its examination under that Article), but under Article 18 of the Convention, only to conclude that “... the domestic authorities do not appear to be particularly interested in the applicant’s suspected involvement in an offence allegedly committed between 6 and 8 October 2014, some five years previously, but rather in keeping him detained, thereby preventing him from carrying out his political activities” (see paragraph 433 of the judgment). With all due respect, I remain sceptical as to whether such finding, stemming from a legal problem that is pending before the domestic courts and not covered by the complaint under Article 5, is in conformity with the principle that the Court must base its decision on evidence in the legal sense. Therefore, I can neither accept the majority’s approach nor their conclusion.
For the reasons set out above, I believe that Article 18 of the Convention in conjunction with Article 5 has not been violated in the present case.