The case originated in an application (no. 27510/08) against the Swiss Confederation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Doğu Perinçek (“the applicant”), on 10 June 2008.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his criminal conviction and sentence in Switzerland on account of public statements that he had made there in 2005 had been in breach of his right to freedom of expression and of his right not to be punished without law.
The application was allocated to the Second Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). On 12 November 2013 a Chamber of this Section, composed of Guido Raimondi, President, Peer Lorenzen, Dragoljub Popović, András Sajó, Nebojša Vučinić, Paulo Pinto de Albuquerque and Helen Keller, judges, and Stanley Naismith, Section Registrar, declared the application partly admissible and partly inadmissible, found that there had been a breach of Article 10 of the Convention, and held that it was not necessary to examine separately the admissibility or merits of the applicant’s complaint under Article 7 of the Convention. A concurring opinion by Judges Raimondi and Sajó and a partly dissenting opinion by Judges Vučinić and Pinto de Albuquerque were annexed to the Chamber judgment, delivered on 17 December 2013.
On 17 March 2014 the Swiss Government requested that the case be referred to the Grand Chamber, in accordance with Article 43 of the Convention. This request was accepted by a panel of the Grand Chamber on 2 June 2014.
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined according to the provisions of Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24. On 15 October 2014 the Armenian Government, who had been granted leave to intervene (see paragraph 7 below), asked Judge Keller to withdraw from the case, citing her having taken part in the Chamber which had examined it. On 16 October 2014 Judge Keller refused to do so. On 22 December 2014 the Armenian Government asked the President of the Grand Chamber to have Judge Keller removed from the case, again citing her having taken part in the Chamber which had examined it. On 7 January 2015, having regard to the terms of Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24 § 2 (d), the President rejected that request. On 28 May 2015 Judge Silvis, substitute, replaced Judge Lazarova Trajkovska, who was unable to take part in the further consideration of the case (Rule 24 § 3).
On 3 June 2014 the Swiss Government requested that the Grand Chamber either not hold a hearing in the case or hold it in camera (Article 40 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 63 §§ 1 and 2). On 10 June 2014 the Court decided, under Rule 71 § 2 read in conjunction with Rule 59 § 3, to reject the Swiss Government’s request not to hold a hearing. On 15 January 2015 the Court rejected their request to hold the hearing in camera as well.
The applicant and the Swiss Government each filed observations (Rules 59 § 1 and 71 § 1). In addition, third-party comments were received from the Turkish Government, who had exercised their right to intervene in the case (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 (b)). Third-party comments were also received from the Armenian and French Governments, who had been given leave to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3), as well as from the following non-governmental organisations and persons, which had likewise been granted such leave: (a) the Switzerland-Armenia Association; (b) the Federation of Turkish Associations of French-speaking Switzerland; (c) the Coordinating Council of the Armenian Organisations in France; (d) the Turkish Human Rights Association, the Truth Justice Memory Centre and the International Institute for Genocide and Human Rights Studies; (e) the International Federation for Human Rights; (f) the International League against Racism and Anti-Semitism; (g) the Centre for International Protection; and (h) a group of French and Belgian academics. The parties replied to these comments in the course of their oral submissions at the hearing (Rule 44 § 6).
The Armenian Government were in addition given leave to take part in the hearing (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3).
The hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 28 January 2015 (Rules 59 § 3 and 71 § 2).
There appeared before the Court:
The applicant was also present. The Court heard addresses by the applicant, Mr Cengiz, Prof Pech, Mr Schürmann, Prof Thürer, Prof Talmon, Mr Kostanyan, Mr Robertson QC and Ms Clooney.
The applicant was born in 1942 and lives in Ankara.
He is a doctor of laws and Chairman of the Turkish Workers’ Party.
In 2005 the applicant took part in three public events in Switzerland.
The first was a press conference held in front of the Château d’Ouchy in Lausanne (Canton of Vaud) on 7 May 2005. In the course of that press conference, he made the following statement in Turkish.
[Translation by the Registry]
“Let me say to European public opinion from Berne and Lausanne: the allegations of the ‘Armenian genocide’ are an international lie. Can an international lie exist? Yes, once Hitler was the master of such lies; now it’s the imperialists of the USA and EU! Documents from not only Turkish but also Russian archives refute these international liars. The documents show that imperialists from the West and from Tsarist Russia were responsible for the situation boiling over between Muslims and Armenians. The Great Powers, which wanted to divide the Ottoman Empire, provoked a section of the Armenians, with whom we had lived in peace for centuries, and incited them to violence. The Turks and Kurds defended their homeland from these attacks. It should not be forgotten that Hitler used the same methods – that is to say, exploiting ethnic groups and communities – to divide up countries for his own imperialistic designs, with peoples killing one another. The lie of the ‘Armenian genocide’ was first invented in 1915 by the imperialists of England, France and Tsarist Russia, who wanted to divide the Ottoman Empire during the First World War. As Chamberlain later admitted, this was war propaganda. ... The USA occupied and divided Iraq with the Gulf Wars between 1991 and 2003, creating a puppet State in the north. They then added the oilfields of Kirkuk to this State. Today, Turkey is required to act as the guardian of this puppet State. We are faced with imperialist encirclement. The lies about the ‘Armenian genocide’ and the pressure linked to the Aegean and Cyprus are interdependent and designed to divide us and take us hostage ... The fact that successive decisions have been taken that even refer to our liberation war as a ‘crime of humanity’ shows that the USA and EU have included the Armenian question among their strategies for Asia and the Middle East ... For their campaign of lies about the ‘Armenian genocide’, the USA and EU have manipulated people with Turkish identity cards. In particular, certain historians have been bought and journalists hired by the American and German secret services to be transported from one conference to another ... Don’t believe the Hitler-style lies such as that of the ‘Armenian genocide’. Seek the truth like Galileo, and stand up for it.”
The second event was a conference held in the Hilton hotel in Opfikon (Canton of Zürich) on 22 July 2005 to commemorate the 1923 Treaty of Lausanne (Treaty of Peace, signed at Lausanne on 24 July 1923 between the British Empire, France, Italy, Japan, Greece, Romania and the Serb-Croat-Slovene State, on the one hand, and Turkey, on the other, League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. 28, no. 701). In the course of that conference, the applicant spoke first in Turkish and then in German, and said the following:
[Translation by the Registry]
“The Kurdish problem and the Armenian problem were therefore, above all, not a problem and, above all, did not even exist ...”
After that, the applicant handed out copies of a tract he had written, entitled “The Great Powers and the Armenian question”, in which he denied that the events of 1915 and the following years had constituted genocide.
The third event was a rally of the Turkish Workers’ Party held in Köniz (Canton of Berne) on 18 September 2005. In the course of that rally, the applicant made the following statement in German.
[Translation by the Registry]
“ ... even Lenin, Stalin and other leaders of the Soviet revolution wrote about the Armenian question. They said in their reports that no genocide of the Armenian people had been carried out by the Turkish authorities. This statement was not intended as propaganda at the time. In secret reports the Soviet leaders said – this is very important – and the Soviet archives confirm that at that time there were occurrences of ethnic conflict, slaughter and massacres between Armenians and Muslims. But Turkey was on the side of those defending their homeland and the Armenians were on the side of the imperialist powers and their instruments ... and we call on Berne, the Swiss National Council and all parties of Switzerland: Please take an interest in the truth and leave these prejudices behind. That is my observation, and I have read every article about the Armenian question and these are merely prejudices. Please leave these prejudices behind and join (??), what he said about these prejudices, and this is the truth: there was no genocide of the Armenians in 1915. It was a battle between peoples and we suffered many casualties ... the Russian officers at the time were very disappointed because the Armenian troops carried out massacres of the Turks and Muslims. These truths were told by a Russian commander ...”
On 15 July 2005 the Switzerland-Armenia Association lodged a criminal complaint against the applicant on account of the first of the above-mentioned statements. The investigation was then expanded to cover the other two oral statements as well. On 23 July 2005 the applicant was interviewed by the Winterthur public prosecutor in relation to the statement that he had made at the Hilton hotel in Opfikon. On 20 September 2005 he was interviewed by a cantonal investigating judge in the Canton of Vaud.
On 27 April 2006, considering that the three statements made by the applicant fell within the ambit of Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 32 below), the competent cantonal investigating judge of the Canton of Vaud decided to commit the applicant for trial.
The trial took place before the Lausanne District Police Court (“the Police Court”) on 6 and 8 March 2007.
On 6 March 2007 the court heard the applicant, the public prosecutor, and the Switzerland-Armenia Association, which had been constituted civil party. The court then went on to hear six professional historians – one American, three French, one German and one British – and one sociologist that the parties had called to give evidence.
On 8 March 2007 counsel for the applicant asked the court to gather further evidence in relation to the events of 1915 and the following years. The court rejected the request, holding that it was dilatory and would lead to an adjournment of the proceedings. More importantly, it was not necessary to take more evidence on this point, given that these events had been analysed by “hundreds of historians for decades” and had been the “object of innumerable publications”. The court had already heard such evidence by the historians called by the applicant and the civil party, which they regarded as the most competent in relation to this topic. It would therefore be superfluous to take further evidence in relation to it.
On 9 March 2007 the Police Court found the applicant guilty of the offence under Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 32 below) and ordered him to pay ninety day-fines of 100 Swiss francs ((CHF) – 62 euros (EUR) at that time) per day, suspended for two years, a fine of CHF 3,000 (EUR 1,859 at that time), which could be replaced by thirty days’ imprisonment, and the sum of CHF 1,000 (EUR 620 at that time) in compensation to the Switzerland-Armenia Association for non-pecuniary damage. The court held as follows.
“I.  The defendant
Doğu Perinçek was born in Gaziantep, Turkey on 17 June 1942. He is a Turkish politician resident in that country. After some ten months’ manual employment in Germany, between 1962 and 1963, he studied law at the University of Ankara and was awarded his doctorate in 1968. He is the founder of an extreme left-wing journal. In 1969, he founded the Revolutionary Worker-Peasant Party of Turkey. Doğu Perinçek can be defined as a left-wing extremist and a follower of Lenin or Mao. He spent several years in prison in the 1980s on account of his political views. He is currently the General Chairman of the Turkish Workers’ Party, which represents 0.5% of the Turkish electorate. Doğu Perinçek describes himself as a cultivated person with a very good knowledge of history. He speaks fluent German.
In his personal life, the defendant is married and the father of four children, three of whom are adults. He states that he earns about CHF 3,000.00 per month. Part of his income comes from royalties and an old-age pension. He also benefits from his wife’s income. He states that his financial situation is healthy. He has never had a criminal conviction in Switzerland. No account will be taken of his criminal convictions in Turkey because, to the Court’s knowledge, they relate to political offences. It may also be noted that the European Court of Human Rights has found against Turkey on two occasions in cases concerning the defendant. He will therefore be treated as a person being prosecuted for the first time.
The facts and the law
This case does not, in itself, present any factual problems. To simplify matters, a copy of the committal order made by the cantonal investigating judge on 27 April 2006, which specifies that Doğu Perinçek was committed for trial in this court following an adversarial hearing, and not in absentia, as the indictment indicates, can be appended to this judgment.
On 7 May 2005 in Lausanne, then on 18 September 2005 in Köniz, BE, Doğu Perinçek stated publicly that the Armenian genocide was an international lie. The defendant also acknowledges that on 22 July 2005 he stated in connection with the Armenian genocide that the problem of the Armenians, like that of the Kurds, had never been a problem and that it (the genocide) had never existed (paragraph 2 of the committal order).
There is no dispute as to the facts since Doğu Perinçek admits to denying the Armenian genocide. He therefore comes within the scope of Article 261 bis of the Criminal Code, under which he is charged. Doğu Perinçek acknowledges that massacres took place but justifies them in the name of the laws of war and maintains that the massacres were perpetrated by the Armenian as well as by the Turkish side. He also acknowledges that the Turkish Ottoman Empire moved thousands of Armenians from the borders of Russia towards what are now Syria and Iraq, but denies totally the genocidal nature of these deportations. He maintains that at most these deportations reflected security needs. He has even claimed that the Ottoman troops were acting to protect the Armenians in the conflict between the Ottoman Empire and Russia. Moreover, he has often stated in public that the Armenians, or at least some of them, were traitors, as they were allied to the Russians against the troops of the Empire. The defendant has received varying degrees of support for his opinions from the historians whom he called to give evidence to the court. The historians called by the civil party have disagreed totally with him. In this context, it should be noted that in response to Doğu Perinçek’s comments, the Switzerland-Armenia Association filed a complaint against him on 15 July 2005. The association’s civil-party claims will be considered later.
Like the parties, the Court recognises that denying the existence of a massacre as such, however large-scale, is not in itself covered by Article 261 bis of the Criminal Code. As the law clearly states, it has to concern a genocide as defined by, for example, the International Convention of 9 December 1948 on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide and Article 6 of the Rome Statute. In its submissions, the defence maintained that when it drew up Article 261 bis of the Criminal Code, Parliament only had in mind the genocide of the Jews in the Second World War. The defence also argued that to be entitled to the protection of Article 261 bis, a genocide must necessarily be recognised as such by an international court of justice. It stressed that the Armenian genocide had not been universally recognised, in particular not by Turkey, and that certain historians shared Doğu Perinçek’s opinions. It concluded, firstly, that as the situation was unclear and, secondly and above all, that as the genocide of the Armenians had not been recognised by an international court of justice, Doğu Perinçek’s denial of the Armenian genocide could not come within the scope of Article 261 bis of the Criminal Code. It told the Court that the latter could not act as historian and noted in that particular regard that it had made an interlocutory application during the hearing for the Court to establish a neutral committee of historians to investigate whether or not the 1915-17 massacres had constituted a genocide.
The civil party and the prosecution contend that it is a sufficient and necessary condition that a genocide be widely recognised and that it is for the Court to take formal note of this international recognition. It does not have to transform itself into a self-taught historian. The courts rule on the facts and the law. The civil party and the prosecution consider that the Armenian genocide is a well-known fact, whether or not it has been recognised by an international court of justice. The opposing parties at least agree on one point, namely that it is not for the Court to write history. The Court is of the same opinion as all the parties. There will not therefore be any gaps in this judgment if it does not refer to the views of the historians who have given evidence to the Court or to the exhibits produced by the civil party or the defence.
The first question that has to be asked is therefore whether the genocides acknowledged by Swiss criminal law are confined to those recognised by an international court of justice. The Court has several means at its disposal for answering this question. From the standpoint of a literal interpretation, Article 261 bis of the Criminal Code refers only to genocide. It does not, for example, refer to ‘a genocide recognised by an international court of justice’. Nor does it specify ‘the genocide of the Jews, to the exclusion of the genocide of the Armenians’. Is this an omission of Parliament?
The historical interpretation that is also available to the Court provides the answer. According to the Official Gazette of the National Council, the legislators referred explicitly to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide of 9 December 1948 and quoted, by way of example, the genocide of the Kurds and the Armenians (BO/CN [Official Gazette/National Council] 1993, p. 1076). From a historical standpoint, therefore, it can be inferred that Parliament took the Armenian genocide as an example when drafting Article 261 bis of the Criminal Code (Comby report). It must therefore be recognised that the legislators did not simply have the genocide of the Jews in mind when they drew up Article 261 bis.
By referring explicitly to the genocide of the Armenians and the Kurds, Parliament also wished to show that it was not necessary for the genocide to be recognised by an international court of justice. As noted, there was an explicit reference to the Convention against Genocide of 9 December 1948. Legal theorists support this view. For example, according to Corboz (Bernard Corboz, Les infractions en droit Suisse, vol. II, p. 304), the genocide must be established. It can be inferred from this statement that it is necessary and sufficient for the genocide to be recognised, without necessarily having been granted recognition by an international court or any other supranational body likely to be binding on the courts (an example might be a commission of historians with internationally acknowledged expertise). According to Trechsel (Stefan Trechsel, Kurzkommentar, ad Article 261 bis no. 35), in the context of genocide denial, German legal theory openly acknowledges the ‘Auschwitz lie’, but the denial of another genocide is also covered by Article 261 bis of the Criminal Code.
In his thesis, Guyaz reaches the same conclusion (Alexandre Guyaz, L’incrimination de la discrimination raciale, thesis, Lausanne, 1996, p. 300). The following extract may be cited:
It is therefore both necessary and sufficient for a genocide to have taken place. But this genocide must be known and recognised: Corboz refers to an established genocide (Corboz, op. cit.).
What then of the situation in our country?
With regard to Switzerland, the Court notes that the National Council has approved a non-binding parliamentary motion [postulat] recognising the genocide (the de Buman motion). The motion was approved on 16 December 2003. As noted earlier, the Armenian genocide served as a basis for the drafting of Article 261 bis of the Criminal Code (Comby report). The parliamentary motion was approved against the advice of the Federal Council, which apparently considered that the matter should be the preserve of historians. Yet it was this same Federal Council that expressly cited the Armenian genocide in its dispatch of 31 March 1999 on the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, which was to serve as the basis of the current Article 264 of the Criminal Code criminalising genocide (Feuille fédérale [FF – Federal Gazette], 1999, pp. 4911 et seq.). The University of Lausanne has used the Armenian genocide as an example in a published work on humanitarian law. School history textbooks deal with the genocide of the Armenians. It may also be pointed out that the governments of Vaud and Geneva have recognised the Armenian genocide: on 5 July 2005 for the Canton of Vaud and on 25 June 1998 for the Republic and Canton of Geneva, whose President was Micheline Calmy-Rey, our current Minister for Foreign Affairs. This rapid overview enables the Court to conclude that the Armenian genocide is an established historical fact according to Swiss public opinion. The current position of the Federal Council, characterised by extreme caution when it is not inconsistent, changes absolutely nothing. It is easy to understand why a government prefers not to become involved in particularly sensitive issues. The international repercussions which this case has had are noteworthy.
Looking beyond our frontiers, several countries, including France, have recognised the Armenian genocide. To take just the example of France, according to Yves Ternon, the Law of 29 January 2001 was based on the opinion of a group of some one hundred historians. In item 15 of the defence’s list no. I, Jean-Baptiste Racine, in his book on the Armenian genocide, says that States’ recognition has often been in response to initiatives taken by the academic community. These decisions are not, therefore, taken lightly, particularly since recognition of the Armenian genocide can adversely affect an individual country’s relations with Turkey.
The Armenian genocide has also been recognised by international bodies. Admittedly, it has received very little prominence in the United Nations. The only really significant reference to the event is in the Whitaker report (Jean-Baptiste Racine, op cit., p. 73, item 96). The European Parliament, on the other hand, first started to consider the Armenian issue in 1981. The relevant committee rapporteur, whose report, according to Jean-Baptiste Racine, was meticulously argued and documented, said that:
On 18 June 1987, the European Parliament finally adopted a resolution recognising the Armenian genocide.
This genocide has also been recognised by the Council of Europe. For information, the Council of Europe has some fifty member States. It is dedicated to defending the values of democracy and human rights. Its headquarters in Strasbourg is also the seat of the European Court of Human Rights, which is responsible for applying the 1950 Convention of the same name (on all these matters, see Jean-Baptiste Racine, op. cit. pp. 66 et seq.).
It must therefore be acknowledged that the Armenian genocide is an established historical fact.
It then has to be asked whether Doğu Perinçek acted intentionally. This amounts to asking whether he could have believed, in good faith, that he was not acting wrongfully, in other words that he was not denying the obvious when stating, on no fewer than three occasions, that the Armenian genocide had not existed, and that it was an ‘international lie’.
Doğu Perinçek has acknowledged during the investigation and at the trial that he knew that Switzerland, like many other countries, recognised the Armenian genocide. Moreover, he would never have described it as an ‘international lie’ if he had not known that the international community did indeed consider these events to be a genocide. He even stated that he considered the Swiss law to be unconstitutional.
The defendant is a doctor of laws. He is a politician. He describes himself as a writer and historian. He is aware of the arguments of those who disagree with him. He has quite simply chosen to ignore them and proclaim that the Armenian genocide never took place. Doğu Perinçek cannot therefore claim, or believe, that the genocide did not exist. Moreover, as the Public Prosecutor stated in his address, Doğu Perinçek has formally stated that he would never change his position, even if a neutral panel should one day conclude that the Armenian genocide did indeed take place. It can be concluded, without question, that for the defendant genocide denial is, if not an article of faith, at least a political slogan with distinct nationalist overtones.
Legal theory is unanimous in considering that there has to be a racist motive. It is clear that Doğu Perinçek’s motives appear to be racist and nationalistic. This is a very long way from historical debate. As noted by the prosecution, Doğu Perinçek speaks of an imperialist plot to undermine Turkey’s greatness. To justify the massacres, he resorts to the laws of war. He has described the Armenians as being the aggressors of the Turkish people. He is a follower of Talaat Pasha – the defendant is a member of the eponymous committee – who, together with his two brothers, was historically the initiator, instigator and driving force of the Armenian genocide.
Doğu Perinçek meets all the subjective and objective conditions required by Article 261 bis of the Criminal Code.
He must be found guilty of racial discrimination.
The penalty
Doğu Perinçek appears to be an intelligent and cultivated person, which makes his stubbornness all the less understandable. He is a provocateur. He has displayed a certain arrogance towards the Court in particular, and towards Swiss laws in general. He is unable to adduce any attenuating circumstances. There are multiple offences because the defendant has discriminated against the Armenian people, by denying their tragic history, on three occasions in three different places. His mode of action amounts to that of an agitator. The terms used, such as ‘international lie’, are particularly virulent. Under these circumstances, the Court agrees with the prosecution that a sentence of ninety days is an appropriate penalty for the conduct of the defendant.
In his address, the Public Prosecutor proposed that the day-fine be set at CHF 100.00. It was noted in the section on personal information that Doğu Perinçek’s financial situation was healthy. CHF 3,000.00 is undoubtedly a good salary in Turkey. The defendant was able to entrust his defence to counsel of his choice. He travelled from Turkey to Switzerland and during the several days of the trial stayed in the Beau-Rivage Palace (p. 61). All this reveals a certain measure of affluence and the proposed sum of CHF 100.00 is far from excessive.
Under the law as it formerly stood, the Court would have been unable to make a favourable assessment of Doğu Perinçek’s future conduct. Nowadays, suspended terms of imprisonment are the norm, in the absence of any particularly unfavourable circumstances, which is not the case here. Doğu Perinçek is a foreigner in our country. He will return to his own land. He was formally warned by the Court that if he persisted in denying the Armenian genocide he could be liable to another criminal investigation and risk a further conviction with the possibility, crucially, of the suspension of his sentence being revoked. It considers that this threat should alone be sufficient to deter the defendant from reoffending, so the fine that it orders to be paid will be accompanied by a suspended term of imprisonment. He will be given a substitute fine of CHF 3,000.00 as a significant immediate penalty, the equivalent of thirty days’ imprisonment.
Civil law claims and costs
The Switzerland-Armenia Association, through its counsel, seeks CHF 10,000.00 in compensation for non-pecuniary damage and the same sum for costs incurred in the criminal proceedings. In accordance with its articles of association and the law (Article 49 of the Code of Obligations) the Switzerland-Armenia Association is entitled to claim compensation for non-pecuniary damage. It is difficult to award an association compensation of this sort because, by definition, legal entities are devoid of feelings. The Court will therefore confine itself to awarding a token sum of CHF 1,000.00 as compensation.
The case was sufficiently complex to justify the involvement of counsel. In view of the amount of work performed by this professional officer, the Court will award a sum of CHF 10,000.00 to the civil party as a contribution to its counsel’s fees. It is not appropriate to award these sums personally to Sarkis Shahinian, who is the association’s representative.
Doğu Perinçek will meet all the costs of the case.”
The applicant appealed against that judgment, seeking to have it set aside and additional investigative measures taken to establish the state of research and the position of historians on the events of 1915 and the following years. The Switzerland-Armenia Association also appealed, but later withdrew its appeal.
On 13 June 2007 the Criminal Cassation Division of the Vaud Cantonal Court dismissed the appeal in the following terms.
“C.  Doğu Perinçek has duly appealed against the original judgment. As his main submission, he has appealed on grounds of nullity and applied to have additional investigative measures taken with a view to establishing the current state of research and the position of historians on the Armenian question. In the alternative, he has lodged an ordinary appeal, seeking to have the judgment varied so as to clear him of the charge of racial discrimination under Article 261 bis § 4, second sentence, of the Criminal Code, exempt him from paying costs and discharge him of any obligation to pay the complainant and the civil party compensation or criminal costs.
The Switzerland-Armenia Association, which had also appealed, has withdrawn its appeal and has now filed a memorial.
The law
Since the appellant’s submissions include both an appeal on grounds of nullity and an ordinary appeal, the Court of Cassation must determine the order in which the grounds relied on should be examined, according to their particular nature and the issues raised (Bersier, “Le recours à la Cour de cassation pénale du Tribunal cantonal en procédure vaudoise”, in JT 1996 III 66, pp. et seq., esp. pp. 106 et seq. and the references cited; Besse-Matile and Abravanel, “Aperçu de jurisprudence sur les voies de recours à la Cour de cassation pénale du Tribunal cantonal Vaudois”, in JT 1989 III, pp. 98 et seq., esp. p. 99 and the references cited).
In support of his grounds of nullity, the appellant alleges a violation of Article 411, letters (f), (g), (h) and (i) of the Code of Criminal Procedure. These provisions concern grounds of nullity that justify setting the decision aside only if the irregularity found has influenced or could influence the judgment (Bersier, op. cit., p. 78). Normal practice is for the ordinary grounds of appeal to be examined before the related grounds of nullity (Bovay, Dupuis, Moreillon, Piguet, Procédure pénale vaudoise, Code annoté, Lausanne, 2004, no. 1.4. ad Article 411).
The grounds of nullity raised by the appellant mainly concern factual matters that must only be considered if they are relevant to the legal outcome. In this particular case, the Court should first consider the ordinary grounds of appeal, namely the meaning and scope of Article 261 bis of the Criminal Code, and determine whether, in this particular context, the lower court may, exceptionally, make a historical judgment (see Chaix and Bertossa, “La répression de la discrimination raciale: Loi d’exception?” in SJ 2002, p. 177, esp. p. 184).
Ordinary appeal
(a)  The appellant objects to the first-instance court’s application of Article 261 bis of the Criminal Code. He submits, firstly, that it is for the courts to perform the task of a historian and as such to determine whether an Armenian genocide took place before applying Article 261 bis. In his view such a genocide has not been established. He therefore considers that the Court has misinterpreted the notion of genocide and the scope of Article 261 bis in this regard.
(b)  According to Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code, an offence is committed by any person who publicly denigrates or discriminates against a person or group of persons on the grounds of their race, ethnic origin or religion in a manner that violates human dignity, whether through words, written material, images, gestures, acts of aggression or other means, or any person who on the same grounds denies, grossly trivialises or seeks to justify a genocide or other crimes against humanity.
Article 261 bis of the Criminal Code enshrines in domestic law the undertakings entered into by Switzerland when it signed the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination of 21 December 1965 (CERD), which came into force on 29 December 1994 (RS [Recueil systématique – Compendium of Federal Law] 0.104; Favre, Pellet, Stoudmann, Code pénal annoté, 2nd edition, Lausanne, 2004, no. 1.1. ad Article 261 bis of the Criminal Code). The fact that Article 261 bis of the Criminal Code is based on a convention reflects the current trend to incorporate the provisions of international treaties into domestic law. However, what sets the anti-racist legislation apart is the fact that the national parliament decided that, in the case of genocide and other crimes against humanity, the law should go beyond the minimum standards set by the CERD (Chaix and Bertossa, op. cit., esp. p. 179).
(c)  The notion of genocide is now defined by Article 264 of the Criminal Code. Courts responsible for applying Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code must be guided by this definition, derived from the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide of 9 December 1948. However, their task is to punish not the genocide in question but persons who deny its existence (Chaix et Bertossa, op. cit., esp. p. 183).
In connection with the scope of the notion of genocide, several writers note that the Federal Council’s memorandum only refers to the genocide of the Jews during the Second World War (FF 1992 III 308; Chaix and Bertossa, op. cit., esp. p. 183). However, Parliament has clearly incorporated a broader concept of revisionism into Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code that is not confined to the denial of crimes against humanity committed by the National Socialist regime. This extended scope was unequivocally confirmed by the National Council, which, on second reading, corrected the French text by replacing the words ‘the genocide’ with ‘a genocide’ (Guyaz, L’incrimination de la discrimination raciale, thesis, Lausanne, 1996, p. 300). Parliament justified this change by arguing that the legislation must apply to all cases of genocide that might unfortunately take place, and citing as an example the massacre of the Armenians (BO/CN 1993, p. 1076).
Historically, therefore, Parliament did not intend to restrict the application of Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code to the genocide of the Jews. By accepting the change to the wording, it indicated that it should apply to all genocides, in particular that of the Armenians.
In the case of the Armenian genocide, therefore, the courts are not required to rely on the work of historians to acknowledge its existence, since this particular case is specifically covered by the legislation and the intentions of those who enacted it, on the same basis as the genocide of the Jews in the Second World War. It must therefore be recognised that the Armenian genocide is deemed to be an established fact.
(d)  In this case, the lower court stated explicitly that it did not intend to act as a historian, even though it did wander into this territory by attempting to assess the general opinion of institutions in Switzerland and abroad on this subject. It was unnecessary for it to do so since all that counts is the will of Parliament, which stated clearly in the preparatory debates that the wording of Article 261 bis of the Criminal Code covered the Armenian genocide. It is therefore wrong for the appellant to state, with reference to the Federal Council’s memorandum (FF 1992 III 308), that it is not established that the wording of Article 261 bis of the Criminal Code was such as to include the Armenian genocide. Nor is the case-law of the Federal Court decisive since every case so far where the subject has arisen has concerned the Jews of the Second World War and associated revisionism.
In the final analysis, since the Armenian genocide is acknowledged by Parliament itself to be an established fact, there is nothing exceptional about this case that would call for additional investigative measures and a historical approach to assess whether a genocide had taken place.
The ground of appeal based on the meaning and scope of the notion of genocide must be dismissed as ill-founded.
(a)  To be an offence, the conduct criminalised in Article 261 bis of the Criminal Code must be intentional and motivated by hatred or racial discrimination; it is sufficient to have behaved recklessly (ATF [arrêts du tribunal fédéral – Judgments of the Swiss Federal Court] 124 IV 125 point 2b, 123 IV 210 point 4c). According to Corboz, the discrimination requirement has to be interpreted strictly: the act must mainly reflect the state of mind of the perpetrator, who hates or despises the members of another race, ethnic group or religion. Article 261 bis must not be applied in the case of objective academic research or serious political debates that are devoid of animosity or racial prejudice (Corboz, Les infractions en droit suisse, Volume II, Berne 2002, note 37 on Article 261 bis of the Criminal Code).
(b)  In this case, the appellant tries to explain the positions he holds in terms of the debate between historians, which necessitates respect for freedom of expression. He also maintains that he has simply denied that the events in question constituted genocide, without ever disputing the existence of massacres and deportations of Armenians, which he justifies by the laws of war.
This argument relates to the subjective aspect of the offence, but is vitiated by the fact that he coupled the term genocide with that of ‘international lie’, which the lower court described as particularly virulent. It should be noted in this regard that the statements in question were made at public meetings with strong nationalist overtones that bore little relation to serious historical debates devoid of racist prejudices. On these occasions, the accused, who describes himself as a writer and historian, quite simply dismissed his opponents’ arguments and announced that the Armenian genocide had never existed. The appellant, who is aware of the widespread acceptance of this proposition, was merely seeking to make a political rather than a historical point, as he claimed, and it was not by chance that these statements were made at meetings to commemorate the 1923 Treaty of Lausanne. This Court must therefore agree with the lower court’s finding that the motives of the accused were racist and nationalistic.
In the final analysis, the objection is not just to his rejection of the use of the term genocide but also to the way it was expressed and the associated texts cited, all of which mean that Doğu Perinçek explicitly and intentionally denied a historical fact regarded as established, namely the Armenian genocide, and did so on several occasions without displaying any inclination to alter his point of view.
This ground must be dismissed as ill-founded.
(a)  The appellant asks to be exempted from any obligations to pay compensation for non-pecuniary damage.
(b)  Under Article 49 § 1 of the Code of Obligations, any person whose personality rights have been illegally violated can claim financial compensation for non-pecuniary damage, if this is justified by the severity of the violation and the perpetrator has not provided an alternative form of satisfaction. Pursuant to this Article, the violation must be in excess of what a person should normally bear, from the standpoint of the length or the intensity of the suffering caused (Bucher, Personnes physiques et protection de la personnalité, 4th edition, Basel, Geneva, Munich 1999, no. 603, p. 141; Tercier. op. cit., nos. 2047 et seq., pp. 270 et seq.; Deschenaux and Tercier, op. cit., nos. 24 et seq., p. 93). The amount of the compensation depends mainly on the severity of the violation – or, more specifically, on the severity of the physical or psychological suffering caused by the violation – and the likelihood that the payment of a sum of money will significantly reduce the resulting non-pecuniary damage (ATF 125 III 269, point 2a; ATF 118 II 410, point 2a).
The courts have discretion to determine the level of compensation. By its very nature, compensation for non-pecuniary injury, to which a simple monetary value can only be ascribed with great difficulty, cannot be determined by reference to mathematical criteria, to ensure that the assessed amount does not exceed a certain level; however, the compensation awarded must be equitable. The relevant court will therefore ensure that the amount reflects the severity of the damage suffered and that the sum awarded does not appear derisory to the victim (ATF 125 III 269, cited above; ATF 118 II 410, cited above).
The level of compensation for non-pecuniary damage is a matter for federal law, and one which this Court is therefore free to examine (Article 415 §§ 1 and 3 and Article 447 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure). Since the outcome is to a large extent dependent on an assessment of the circumstances, the appeal court must only intervene with restraint, in particular when the lower court has misused its discretion by basing its decision on considerations that are unrelated to the applicable provision, by failing to take account of relevant information or by setting a level of compensation that is inequitable because it is manifestly too low or too high (ATF 125 III 269, cited above; ATF 118 II 410, cited above). However, since this is a question of equity – and not one of exercise of discretion in the strict sense of the term, which would limit its power of review to abuse or excess of discretion – the appeal court is free to decide whether the sum awarded takes sufficient account of the severity of the violation or whether it is disproportionate to the intensity of the non-pecuniary damage suffered by the victim (ATF 125 III 269, cited above; ATF 123 III 10, point 4c/aa; ATF 118 II 410, cited above).
(c)  In this case, the appellant was found guilty of racial discrimination, for which he therefore incurs civil liability.
The lower court considered that it was difficult to award an association compensation of the order of CHF 10,000 for non-pecuniary damage because, by definition, legal entities are devoid of feelings. It therefore reduced the complainant’s claim and awarded it a symbolic sum of CHF 1,000 in compensation. This assessment is not arbitrary and the sum awarded is appropriate.
This ground, and the entire ordinary appeal, must be dismissed as ill-founded.
(a)  The appellant seeks to be exempted from any obligations to pay criminal costs.
(b)  The complainant is a civil party as a matter of law (Article 94 of the Code of Criminal Procedure). The costs which civil parties may claim under Article 97 of the Code of Criminal Procedure are awarded according to the principle laid down in Article 163 § 2 of the [Code], which provides that the rules relating to expenses are applicable by analogy.
The right to costs is enshrined in the cantonal procedural legislation. According to the case-law, civil parties are, in principle, only eligible for costs if the accused has received a sentence or been ordered to pay damages (JT 1961 III 9). The lower court has discretion to set the level of the costs payable to the civil party, and the Court of Cassation only intervenes in this decision in the event of a manifestly incorrect application of the law or a misuse of discretion, particularly regarding the level of the costs awarded (JT 1965 III 81).
(c)  In this particular case, an examination of the case file shows that all the necessary conditions were met for the award of costs for criminal expenses incurred. The lower court noted that the case was sufficiently complex to justify the presence of a lawyer and awarded the Switzerland-Armenia Association CHF 10,000 towards its criminal costs. In view of the amount of work performed by the lawyer, the court did not exceed its discretion.
This ground, and the entire appeal on points of law, must be dismissed as ill-founded.
Appeal on grounds of nullity
Alleging a violation of Article 411, letters (f), (g), (h) and (i) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the appellant submits that the judgment has an inadequate factual basis because the court failed to take account of the documents produced and the evidence of certain historians. He also maintains that there were doubts about the facts of the case, or indeed an arbitrary assessment of the evidence in connection with the citing of certain historical works on the massacre of the Armenians. Finally, he bases his appeal on grounds of nullity on the fact that the court dismissed an interlocutory application for additional investigative measures to obtain documents and information aimed at clarifying the Armenian situation in 1915 and determining whether or not the term genocide could be used.
These grounds must be dismissed since they are solely concerned with questions of fact whose resolution would not be likely to influence the judgment (Bersier, op. cit., p. 78). It is not necessary for the courts to act as historians on the question of the Armenian genocide, since the parliamentary debates show that its existence is considered to be established (see point 2 (c) above).
The appeal on grounds of nullity must be dismissed as ill-founded.
In the final analysis, the appeal is ill-founded, both on grounds of nullity and as an ordinary appeal. It must therefore be dismissed in its entirety.
Given the outcome of the appeal, the appellant shall pay the costs at second instance.”
The applicant appealed against that judgment to the Swiss Federal Court, seeking to have the judgment set aside so that he would be cleared of all criminal charges and civil liability. In substance, he argued that, for the purposes of applying Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code and examining the alleged violation of his fundamental rights, the cantonal courts had not carried out a sufficient examination of whether the factual circumstances had been such as to warrant classifying the events of 1915 and the following years as genocide.
In a judgment of 12 December 2007 (6B_398/2007), the Swiss Federal Court dismissed the appeal in the following terms.
“3.1.  Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code punishes conduct on the part of anyone who publicly denigrates or discriminates against a person or group of persons on the grounds of their race, ethnic origin or religion in a manner that violates human dignity, whether through words, written material, images, gestures, acts of aggression or any other means, or who on the same grounds denies, grossly trivialises or seeks to justify a genocide or other crimes against humanity. An initial literal and grammatical approach shows that the wording of the law (through the use of the indefinite article ‘a genocide’) makes no explicit reference to any specific historical event. The law therefore does not preclude punishment of the denial of genocides other than that perpetrated by the Nazi regime; nor does it explicitly classify denial of the Armenian genocide as an act of racial discrimination under criminal law.
2.  Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code was enacted when Switzerland acceded to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination of 21 December 1965 (RS 0.104). The wording initially proposed in the Bill tabled by the Federal Council did not refer specifically to genocide denial (see FF 1992 III 326). The offence of revisionism, or Holocaust denial, was intended to be included within the constituent element of dishonouring the memory of a deceased person, appearing in the fourth paragraph of the draft Article 261 bis of the Criminal Code (Memorandum by the Federal Council of 2 March 1992 concerning Switzerland’s accession to the 1965 International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the corresponding revision of criminal law; FF 1992 III 265 et seq., esp. 308 et seq.). The memorandum does not contain any specific reference to the events of 1915.
During the parliamentary debates, the National Council’s Legal Affairs Committee proposed inserting the following wording in Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code: ‘[...] or who on the same grounds grossly trivialises or seeks to excuse genocide or other crimes against humanity’ ... The Committee’s French-language rapporteur, National Councillor Comby, explained that there was a discrepancy between the German and French versions, pointing out that the wording was obviously referring to any genocide and not only the Holocaust (BO/CN 1992 II 2675 et seq.). The National Council nevertheless adopted the Committee’s proposal as it stood (BO/CN 1992 II 2676). Before the Council of States, the proposal by the latter’s Legal Affairs Committee to maintain the wording of Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code approved by the National Council was set against a proposal by Mr Küchler, which did not, however, call into question the phrase ‘or who on the same grounds denies, grossly trivialises or seeks to justify genocide or other crimes against humanity’ (BO/CE [Official Gazette/Council of States] 1993 96; as to the scope of this proposal, see ATF 123 IV 202, point 3c, p. 208, and Poncet, ibid.). That proposal was adopted without any more detailed reference being made to denial of the Armenian genocide during the debate. During the elimination of divergences, the National Council’s Legal Affairs Committee proposed, through Mr Comby, that the amendments inserted by the Council of States be adopted, with the exception of the fourth paragraph, where the Committee proposed the wording ‘a genocide’, by way of reference to any that might occur. The French-language rapporteur observed that some people had mentioned massacres of Kurds or other populations, for example Armenians, and that all these genocides should be covered (BO/CN 1993 I 1075 et seq.). Further brief comments were made in relation to the definition of genocide and how a Turkish citizen might refer to the Armenian tragedy, and it was also observed that the Committee did not intend the provision to apply to one particular genocide alone but to all genocides, for example in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BO/CN 1993 I 1077; statement by Ms Grendelmeier). The National Council ultimately adopted the following wording of paragraph 4: ‘[...] or any other means, violates the human dignity of a person or group of persons on the grounds of their race, ethnic origin or religion, or who on the same grounds denies, grossly trivialises or seeks to justify a genocide’ (BO/CN 1993 I 1080). In the subsequent parliamentary proceedings, the Council of States maintained its position, adopting the wording ‘a genocide’ as a simple editorial amendment in the French version, and the National Council eventually endorsed the Council of States’ decision, without any further reference being made to denial of the Armenian genocide (BO/CN 1993 I 1300, 1451; BO/CE 1993 452, 579).
It is therefore clear from the above-mentioned parliamentary proceedings that Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code does not apply exclusively to denial of Nazi crimes but also to other genocides.
...
4.  However, these parliamentary proceedings cannot be interpreted as meaning that the criminal-law provision in question applies to certain specific genocides which the legislature had in mind at the time of enacting it, as is suggested by the judgment appealed against.
4.1.  The desire to combat negationist and revisionist opinions in relation to the Holocaust was, admittedly, a central factor in the drafting of Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code. In its case-law, however, the Federal Court has held that Holocaust denial objectively constitutes the factual element of the offence provided for in Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code since it concerns a historical fact that is generally acknowledged as established (... ATF 129 IV 95, point 3.4.4, pp. 104 et seq.), although the judgment in question makes no reference to the historical intention of the legislature. Similarly, many authors have viewed the Holocaust as a matter of common knowledge for the criminal courts (Vest, Delikte gegen den öffentlichen Frieden, note 93, p. 157), as an indisputable historical fact (Rom, op. cit., p. 140), or as a classification (‘genocide’) that is beyond doubt (Niggli, Discrimination raciale, note 972, p. 259, who simply notes that this genocide was what prompted the introduction of the provision in question; to similar effect, see Guyaz, op. cit., p. 305). Only a few voices have referred to the intention of the legislature to recognise it as a historical fact (see, for example, Weder, Schweizerisches Strafgesetzbuch, Kommentar (ed. Donatsch), Zürich, 2006, Article 261 bis § 4, p. 327; Chaix and Bertossa, op. cit., p. 184).
4.2.  The process of ascertaining what genocides the legislature had in mind when formulating the provision is, moreover, thwarted by a literal interpretation (see point 3.1 above), which clearly shows the legislature’s intention to favour an open-ended wording of the law in this regard, as opposed to the technique of ‘memorial’ laws such as those passed in France (Law no. 90-615 of 13 July 1990, known as the ‘Gayssot Act’; Law no. 2001-434 of 21 May 2001 on recognition of trafficking and slavery as a crime against humanity, known as the ‘Taubira Act’; Law no. 2001-70 of 29 January 2001 on recognition of the 1915 Armenian genocide). The fact that Holocaust denial constitutes a criminal offence under Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code therefore stems less from the legislature’s specific intention to outlaw negationism and revisionism when it formulated this rule of criminal law than from the observation that there is a very general consensus on this matter, to which the legislature undoubtedly had regard. Nor is there, accordingly, any reason to determine whether the legislature was guided by any such intention regarding the Armenian genocide (contrast Niggli, Rassendiskriminierung, 2nd ed., Zürich, 2007, notes 1445 et seq., pp. 447 et seq.). Indeed, it should be noted in this connection that, while certain aspects of the wording prompted fierce discussion among the members of parliament, the categorisation of the events of 1915 did not give rise to any debate in this context, and was ultimately mentioned by only two speakers in justifying the adoption of a French version of Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code that did not allow an excessively restrictive interpretation of the text, which did not follow from the German version.
4.3.  Legal writers and the courts have, moreover, inferred from the well-known, undeniable or indisputable character of the Holocaust that proof of it is no longer required in criminal proceedings (Vest, ibid.; Schleiminger, op. cit., Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code, note 60). Hence there is no need for the courts to have recourse to the work of historians on this matter (Chaix and Bertossa, ibid.; unreported judgment 6S.698/2001, point 2.1). As a further consequence, the basis thus determined for the criminalisation of Holocaust denial dictates the method which the courts must adopt in considering the denial of other genocides. The first question arising is therefore whether there is a comparable consensus regarding the events denied by the appellant.
The question thus raised relates to findings of fact. It is less directly concerned with the assessment of whether the massacres and deportations attributed to the Ottoman Empire are to be characterised as genocide than with the general assessment of this characterisation, both among the public and within the community of historians. This is how we are to understand the approach adopted by the Police Court, which emphasised that its task was not to write history but to determine whether the genocide in question was ‘known and acknowledged’ or indeed ‘proved’ (see the judgment, point II, p. 14) before forming its opinion on this latter factual issue (judgment, point II, p. 17), which forms an integral part of the Cantonal Court’s judgment (Cantonal Court judgment, point B, p. 2).
1.  A factual finding of this nature is binding on the Federal Court ...
2.  As regards the decisive factual issue, the Police Court not only based its opinion on the existence of political declarations of recognition, but it also pointed out that the opinion of the authorities issuing such declarations had been formed on the basis of expert opinion (for example, a panel of approximately one hundred historians in the case of the French National Assembly when it passed the Law of 29 January 2001) or reports described as cogently argued and substantiated (European Parliament). Thus, as well as relying on the existence of political recognition, this line of argument notes the existence in practice of a broad consensus within the community, which is reflected in the political declarations and is itself based on a wide academic consensus as to the classification of the events of 1915 as genocide. It may also be noted, in the same vein, that during the debate leading to the official recognition of the Armenian genocide by the National Council, reference was made to the international research published under the title Der Völkermord an den Armeniern und die Shoah (BO/CN 2003 2017; statement by Mr Lang). Lastly, the Armenian genocide is portrayed as one of the ‘classic’ examples in general literature on international criminal law, or on genocide research (see Niggli, Rassendiskriminierung, notes 1418 et seq., p. 440, and the numerous references cited therein; see also note 1441, p. 446, and references).
3.  To the extent that the appellant’s submissions seek to deny the existence of a genocide or the legal characterisation of the events of 1915 as genocide – in particular by pointing to the lack of a judgment from an international court or specialist commission, or the lack of irrefutable evidence proving that the facts correspond to the objective and subjective requirements laid down in Article 264 of the Criminal Code or in the 1948 UN Convention, and by arguing that to date, there have been only three internationally recognised genocides – they are irrelevant to the determination of the case, seeing that it is necessary in the first place to establish whether there is enough of a general consensus, especially among historians, to exclude the underlying historical debate as to the classification of the events of 1915 as genocide from the criminal proceedings concerning the application of Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code. The same applies in so far as the appellant is accusing the Cantonal Court of having acted arbitrarily by not examining the pleas of nullity raised in the cantonal appeal in relation to the same facts and the investigative measures he had sought. It is therefore unnecessary to examine his submissions except to the extent that they relate specifically to the establishment of such a consensus.
4.  The appellant observes that he has sought further investigative measures to ascertain the current state of research and the current position of historians worldwide on the Armenian question. His submissions also appear at times to suggest that he believes there to be no unanimity or consensus among either States or historians as to the classification of the events of 1915 as genocide. However, his arguments are limited to setting his own opinion against that of the cantonal authority. In particular, he does not cite any specific evidence showing that the consensus found by the Police Court does not exist, let alone that that court’s finding is arbitrary.
Admittedly, the appellant does mention that a number of States have refused to recognise the existence of an Armenian genocide. It should be pointed out in this connection, however, that even the UN’s Resolution 61/L.53 condemning Holocaust denial, adopted in January 2007, received only 103 votes from among the 192 member States. The mere observation that certain States refuse to declare in the international arena that they condemn Holocaust denial is manifestly insufficient to cast doubt on the existence of a very general consensus that the acts in question amount to genocide. Consensus does not mean unanimity. The choice of certain States to refrain from publicly condemning the existence of a genocide or from voting for a resolution condemning the denial of a genocide may be dictated by political considerations that are not directly linked to those States’ actual evaluation of the way in which historical events should be categorised, and in particular cannot cast doubt on the existence of a consensus on this matter, especially within the academic community.
5.  The appellant also argues that it would be contradictory for Switzerland to acknowledge the existence of the Armenian genocide while supporting the establishment of a panel of historians in the context of its relations with Turkey. This, in his submission, shows that the existence of genocide is not established.
However, it cannot be inferred either from the Federal Council’s repeated refusal to acknowledge the existence of an Armenian genocide by means of an official declaration or from the approach chosen – namely recommending to the Turkish authorities that an international panel of experts be set up – that the conclusion that there is a general consensus as to the characterisation of the events in question as genocide is arbitrary. In accordance with the clearly expressed wish of the Federal Council, its approach is guided by the concern to prompt Turkey to engage in collective remembrance of its past (BO/CN 2001 168: response by Federal Councillor Deiss to the non-binding motion by Mr Zisyadis; BO/CN 2003 2021 et seq.: response by Federal Councillor Calmy-Rey to the non-binding motion by Mr Vaudroz on recognition of the 1915 Armenian genocide). This attitude of openness to dialogue cannot be construed as denial of the existence of a genocide and there is nothing to suggest that the support expressed by the Federal Council in 2001 for the setting up of an international commission of inquiry did not stem from the same approach. It cannot be inferred in general that there is sufficient doubt within the community, particularly among academics, as to the classification of the events of 1915 as genocide to render the finding of such a consensus arbitrary.
6.  That being so, the appellant has not shown how the Police Court acted arbitrarily in finding that there was a general consensus, particularly among academics, as to the classification of the events of 1915 as genocide. It follows that the cantonal authorities were correct in refusing to allow the appellant’s attempt to open a historical and legal debate on this issue.
As to the subjective element, the offence provided for in Article 261 bis §§ 1 and 4 of the Criminal Code requires intentional conduct. In judgments ATF 123 IV 202, point 4c, p. 210, and 124 IV 121, point 2b, p. 125, the Federal Court held that such intentional conduct had to be guided by motives of racial discrimination. This question, which has prompted debate among legal writers, was subsequently left open in judgments ATF 126 IV 20, point 1d, in particular p. 26, and 127 IV 203, point 3, p. 206. It can likewise be left open in the instant case, as will be shown below.
1.  With regard to intent, the Criminal Court found that [the appellant], a doctor of laws, politician and self-styled writer and historian, had acted in full knowledge of the consequences, stating that he would never change his position, even if a neutral panel should one day conclude that the Armenian genocide did indeed take place. These findings as to the appellant’s internal volition to deny a genocide relate to matters of fact (see ATF 110 IV 22, point 2, 77, point 1c, 109 IV 47, point 1, 104 IV 36, point 1 and citations), with the result that the Federal Court is bound by them (section 105(1) of the Federal Court Act). Moreover, the appellant has not submitted any complaints on that issue. He has not sought to demonstrate that these findings of fact are arbitrary or the result of a violation of his rights under the Constitution or the Convention, so there is no need to consider this question (section 106(2) of the Federal Court Act). It is unclear in any event how the cantonal authorities, which inferred the appellant’s intention from external considerations (cf. ATF 130 IV 58, point 8.4, p. 62), could have disregarded the very concept of intention under federal law in relation to this issue.
2.  As to the appellant’s motives, the Criminal Court found that they appeared to be of a racist and nationalistic nature and did not contribute to the historical debate, noting in particular that he had described the Armenians as aggressors of the Turkish people and that he claimed to be a follower of Talaat Pasha, who together with his two brothers was historically the initiator, the instigator and the driving force of the Armenian genocide (Criminal Court judgment, point II, pp. 17 et seq.).
It has not been disputed in the instant case that the Armenian community constitutes a people, or at the very least an ethnic group (as to this concept, see Niggli, Rassendiskriminierung, 2nd ed., note 653, p. 208), which identifies itself in particular through its history, marked by the events of 1915. It follows that denial of the Armenian genocide – or the representation of the Armenian people as the aggressor, as put forward by the appellant – in itself constitutes a threat to the identity of the members of this community (Schleiminger, op. cit., Article 261 bis of the Criminal Code, note 65 and reference to Niggli). The Criminal Court, which found that there had been motives linked to racism, likewise ruled out that the approach pursued by the appellant pertained to historical debate. These findings of fact, about which the appellant raised no complaint (section 106(2) of the Federal Court Act), are binding on the Federal Court (section 105(1) of the Federal Court Act). They provide sufficient evidence of the existence of motives which, above and beyond nationalism, can only be viewed as racial, or ethnic, discrimination. It is consequently unnecessary in the present case to settle the debate among legal writers mentioned in point 6 above. In any event, the appellant has not raised any complaints concerning the application of federal law in relation to this matter.
The appellant further relies on the freedom of expression enshrined in Article 10 of the ECHR, in connection with the cantonal authorities’ interpretation of Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code.
However, it appears from the records of the questioning of the appellant by the Winterthur/Unterland public prosecutor’s office (23 July 2005) that in making public statements, particularly in Glattbrugg, the appellant was intending to ‘help the Swiss people and the National Council to rectify the error’ (that is to say, recognition of the Armenian genocide). Furthermore, he was aware that genocide denial was a criminal offence and stated that he would never change his position, even if a neutral panel should one day conclude that the Armenian genocide did indeed take place (Criminal Court judgment, point II, p. 17). It can be inferred from these aspects that the appellant was not unaware that by describing the Armenian genocide as an ‘international lie’ and by explicitly denying that the events of 1915 amounted to genocide, he was liable to face a criminal penalty in Switzerland. The appellant cannot therefore draw any favourable inferences from the lack of foreseeability of the law he cites. These considerations, moreover, support the conclusion that the appellant is in essence seeking, by means of provocation, to have his assertions confirmed by the Swiss judicial authorities, to the detriment of the members of the Armenian community, for whom this question plays a central role in their identity. The applicant’s conviction is thus intended to protect the human dignity of members of the Armenian community, who identify themselves through the memory of the 1915 genocide. Criminalisation of genocide denial is, lastly, a means of preventing genocides for the purposes of Article I of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, opened for signature in New York on 9 December 1948 and approved by the Federal Assembly on 9 March 2000 (RS 0.311.11).
It should be noted, moreover, that the appellant has not denied the existence either of massacres or of deportations (see point A above), which cannot be categorised, even if one exercises restraint, as anything other than crimes against humanity (Niggli, Discrimination raciale, note 976, p. 262). Justification of such crimes, even with reference to the law of war or alleged security considerations, will in itself fall foul of Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code, so that even from this perspective, regardless of whether these same acts are characterised as genocide, the appellant’s conviction on the basis of Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code does not appear arbitrary in its outcome, any more than it breaches federal law.”
In 2008 the applicant was arrested and charged in connection with the so-called Ergenekon proceedings (of which short descriptions may be found in Nedim Şener v. Turkey, no. 38270/11, § 6, 8 July 2014; Şık v. Turkey, no. 53413/11, § 10, 8 July 2014; Tekin v. Turkey (dec.), no. 3501/09, §§ 3-16, 18 November 2014; and Karadağ v. Turkey (dec.), no. 36588/09, §§ 3-16, 18 November 2014). On 5 August 2013 the Istanbul Assize Court convicted him, alongside many others, and sentenced him to life imprisonment. That judgment was appealed against, and the proceedings are now pending before the Turkish Court of Cassation (see Tekin, § 17, and Karadağ, § 17, both cited above, as well as Yıldırım v. Turkey (dec.), no. 50693/10, § 14, 17 March 2015). He was released from pre-trial detention in March 2014.
In their third-party submissions the Turkish Human Rights Association, the Truth Justice Memory Centre and the International Institute for Genocide and Human Rights Studies referred to the online versions of two articles in Turkish newspapers. The first, published in the daily Vatan on 26 July 2007, reported that after the assassination of Hrant Dink the applicant had sent an open letter to the Armenian Patriarch of Istanbul. In that letter he had denounced the assassination as a provocation by the United States of America against Turkey, and had invited the Patriarch to state openly that it had been instigated by the United States of America and thus, as a leader of the Armenians in Turkey, set an example to those defending the unity of the Turkish nation. The second article, published in the daily Milliyet on 19 May 2007, did not mention the applicant. It described anonymous threats sent to Armenian schools in Istanbul in connection with the Armenian position in relation to the events of 1915 and the following years. It added that in reaction to those threats, the provincial director of education had sought to reassure the Armenians and had asked the authorities to take precautionary measures.
Article 7 of the Constitution of the Swiss Confederation of 1999, which superseded the Constitution of 1874, is entitled “Human dignity”. It provides:
“Human dignity must be respected and protected.”
Article 16 of the Constitution, entitled “Freedom of expression and of information”, provides, in so far as relevant:
“1.  Freedom of expression and of information is guaranteed.
Every person has the right freely to form, express, and impart their opinions. ...”
Article 36 of the Constitution, entitled “Restrictions on fundamental rights”, provides:
“1.  Restrictions on fundamental rights must have a legal basis. Significant restrictions must have their basis in a federal act. The foregoing does not apply in cases of serious and immediate danger where no other course of action is possible.
Restrictions on fundamental rights must be justified in the public interest or for the protection of the fundamental rights of others.
Any restrictions on fundamental rights must be proportionate.
The essence of fundamental rights is sacrosanct.”
Article 261 bis of the Swiss Criminal Code, entitled “Racial discrimination”, was enacted on 18 June 1993. It is in the chapter of the Code that deals with offences against public peace (paix publique). It came into force on 1 January 1995 and reads:
“Any person who publicly stirs up hatred or discrimination against a person or group of persons on the grounds of their race, ethnic origin or religion;
any person who publicly disseminates an ideology aimed at systematic denigration or defamation of the members of a race, ethnic group or religion;
any person who with the same objective organises, encourages or participates in propaganda campaigns;
any person who publicly denigrates or discriminates against a person or group of persons on the grounds of their race, ethnic origin or religion in a manner that violates human dignity, whether through words, written material, images, gestures, acts of aggression or other means, or any person who on the same grounds denies, grossly trivialises or seeks to justify a genocide or other crimes against humanity;
any person who refuses to provide a service to a person or group of persons on the grounds of their race, ethnic origin or religion when that service is intended to be provided to the general public;
shall be punishable by a custodial sentence of up to three years or a fine.”
The initiative to enact that Article came up in the context of Switzerland’s accession to the 1965 International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (“the CERD” – see paragraph 62 below). In a memorandum of 2 March 1992, published in FF 1992 III 265-340, on Switzerland’s accession to this Convention and the consequent need to revise its criminal law, the Swiss Government considered the requirements arising from, in particular, Article 4 the CERD (see paragraph 62 below) and opined, at p. 297, that with the exception of the prohibition of discrimination by the authorities (prohibited under Article 4 (c) of the CERD), which was covered by Article 4 of the Swiss Constitution of 1874, then in force, Switzerland’s laws failed to meet, or did so only partially, CERD’s requirements.
The Swiss Government referred, at pp. 298-301, to the potential conflict between, on the one hand, the imposition of criminal penalties for racist propaganda and ideologies intended to defame or discredit parts of the population and, on the other, the constitutional rights to freedom of opinion and association. It noted that the CERD sought to resolve this conflict through the clause “with due regard to the principles embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights” in its Article 4. The Swiss doctrine was largely of the view that these rights were of equal value and merited equal protection. The solution therefore lay in balancing them. Racial discrimination, being an attack on human dignity, violated the constitutional rights to personal liberty and equality before the law, and was prohibited under public international law. On the other hand, the rights to freedom of opinion and association were important for political debate in a democratic society and were not to be underestimated. While the essence of these rights were not affected by the proposed criminalisation of racial discrimination, they precluded the criminalisation of all types of speech envisaged by Article 4 of the CERD. In some cases this could lead to, for instance, unjustified restrictions on sociological or ethnological studies. The emphasis was therefore to be put on incitement to racial hatred and discrimination, and contempt and denigration, which were the main and truly blameworthy element of racial superiority theories that led to racial hatred and xenophobia. This Article made it possible to take account of fundamental freedoms when putting in place criminal law rules designed to ensure compliance with the CERD. The special place occupied by the rights to freedom of opinion and association in Western democracies in general and in Swiss semi-direct democracy in particular made resort to this possibility largely justified. It was therefore necessary to enter a reservation to Article 4 of the CERD (see paragraph 63 below).
The proposed wording of what subsequently became Article 261 bis § 4 thus read (ibid., p. 304):
“[A]ny person who publicly violates the human dignity of another person or a group of persons on the grounds of their race, ethnic origin or religion, whether through words, written material, images, gestures, acts of aggression or other means, or any person who on the same grounds dishonours the memory of a deceased person ... shall be punishable by a term of imprisonment or a fine.”
According to the Swiss Government’s memorandum (at pp. 308-09):
“[D]ishonouring the memory of a deceased person has been included in the definition of the offence as a means of countering the historical falsifications of revisionists whose pseudo-scientific works disseminate theories known as ‘the Auschwitz lie’, which claims that the Holocaust never took place and the gas chambers did not exist. It maintains that far fewer than six million Jews were killed and that, besides, the Jews draw economic and financial benefits from the Holocaust. This falsification of history cannot be considered a mere quarrel between historians. It often conceals a form of racist propaganda that is particularly dangerous when aimed at young persons during their education.”
In the ensuing debates in the Swiss Federal Parliament, a member of the National Council emphasised that neither the CERD nor the new provision were limited to the Holocaust, but were concerned with combating xenophobia, racism, intolerance and anti-Semitism in general BO/CN 1992 VI 2650-79, at p. 2654). The rapporteur of the parliamentary committee concerned referred to a discrepancy between the German and French versions of the text and made it clear, at the National Council sitting of 17 December 1992, that the idea was to refer to “all forms of genocide while alluding to the main example of it, namely the Jewish Holocaust, but it is clear that all crimes of this nature have to be condemned. For this reason, the term ‘any genocide’ (tout génocide) should be used rather than ‘genocide’ (le génocide)” (ibid., at p. 2675). In the subsequent debates in the Parliament, on 8 June 1993 the rapporteur of the National Council committee concerned clarified the scope of what has since become Article 261 bis § 4 of the Criminal Code, as follows (BO/CN 1993 III 107580, at pp. 1075-76):
“The committee has considered the various points of difference between the Council of States and the National Council and has finally proposed that you ... adopt the amendments put forward by the Council of States, with the exception of the fourth paragraph, concerning genocide, where the committee proposes using the term ‘a genocide’, by way of reference to any genocide that might unfortunately take place. Several speakers have referred to the massacres of Kurds [specifically, those committed by the former Iraqi regime] or other groups of the population, such as the Armenians. All these examples of genocide have to be covered.
As regards the criteria to be taken into account, ... there exists the United Nations Convention for the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. It is necessary to refer to this international convention for the definition of the notion of genocide.”
This approach was confirmed by the national councillor Ms Grendelmeier in these terms (ibid., at p. 1077):
“The issue of what constitutes genocide was also discussed. It was stated that a Turkish citizen would probably not use the term genocide to define the dramatic events concerning the Armenian people. The committee considered that by using the general term ‘genocide’, genocide as a whole, rather than ‘the’ or ‘a’ particular genocide, has to become punishable everywhere, for example also in Bosnia and Herzegovina. When a people is not only denied its right to exist but is also effectively driven towards extinction, this constitutes genocide and has to be a criminal offence.”
Article 261 bis § 4 was enacted by both chambers of the Swiss Federal Parliament on 18 June 1993, by 114 votes to 13 in the National Council and by 34 votes to nil in the Council of States. However, having been challenged, it could only enter into force after the Swiss people had confirmed it in a referendum (FF 1993 II 868-69). The referendum took place on 25 September 1994. The turnout was 45.9%. 54.7% of the votes were in favour of the Article, with 1,132,662 people voting for and 939,975 people voting against (Office fédéral de la statistique, Miroir statistique de la Suisse, 1996, pp. 378 et seq.).
Since the enactment of Article 261 bis of the Criminal Code, there have been sixteen proposals for its repeal or a restriction of its ambit. All of these have been turned down by the Swiss Parliament.
Following two petitions to the Swiss Parliament to recognise, respectively refuse to recognise, the events of 1915 and the following years as genocide, made respectively by Armenians and Turks in September 1995 and January 1996, in April 1997 the Switzerland-Armenia Association brought a private prosecution under Article 261 bis § 4 against some of the persons who had signed the Turkish petition.
On 16 July 1998 the Bern-Laupen District Court dismissed the proceedings, finding that an association, as opposed to an individual, could not be the victim of acts contrary to Article 261 bis § 4. On an appeal by the Switzerland-Armenia Association, on 10 February 1999 the Supreme Court of the Canton of Bern upheld that decision.
In reaction to this ruling, on 18 April 2000 two Swiss nationals of Armenian ethnic origin brought a private prosecution under Article 261 bis § 4 against twelve persons who had signed the Turkish petition.
In a judgment of 14 September 2001 the Bern-Laupen District Court acquitted the defendants. It noted, inter alia, that unlike the Austrian and French Holocaust denial laws, which only concerned the Holocaust, Article 261 bis § 4 was not limited to a specific historic event. However, having reviewed at some length the position in relation to the events of 1915 and the following years, the court decided to leave open the question whether they qualified as “a genocide” within the meaning of that Article, as it found that the defendants had to be acquitted in any event, as they lacked the requisite mens rea: having grown up and received their education in Turkey, they had denied that the events of 1915 and the following years had constituted genocide under the influence of the Turkish educational system, and had therefore not acted with a racist motive.
The two persons who had brought the proceedings appealed to the Supreme Court of the Canton of Bern. In a judgment of 16 April 2002 it dismissed their appeal, holding that proceedings under Article 261 bis § 4 could not be brought by a private prosecutor as it only protected public peace, not individual legal interests, since genocide denial could not in itself harm an individual, regardless of his or her personal history.
The further appeal to the Swiss Federal Court was dismissed in a judgment of 7 November 2002 (ATF 129 IV 95). The court held, inter alia, that the offence under Article 261 bis § 4 was a public order one and that individual rights were only indirectly protected under that provision. Individual victims could not therefore take part in the proceedings against the alleged perpetrator. Furthermore, the mere denial, gross minimisation or attempted justification of a genocide within the meaning of Article 261 bis § 4 were not acts of racial discrimination in the strict sense of the term. While such utterances could affect individuals, the harm, even if serious, remained indirect.
Article 264 of the Swiss Criminal Code, entitled “Genocide”, defines this offence in the following terms:
“Anyone who commits any of the following acts with the intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, racial, religious or ethnic group shall be punishable by life imprisonment or a custodial sentence of not less than ten years:
(a)  killing members of the group or causing them serious bodily or mental harm;
(b)  inflicting on members of the group living conditions calculated to bring about its physical destruction in whole or in part;
(c)  ordering or taking measures intended to prevent births within the group;
(d)  forcibly transferring or arranging for the transfer of children of the group to another group.”
On 18 March 2002 the National councillor Mr Jean-Claude Vaudroz tabled before the National Council a non-binding motion (postulat) intended to recognise the events of 1915 and the following years as genocide. Following the expiry of Mr Vaudroz’s term of office, on 8 December 2003 the proposal was taken up by Mr Dominique de Buman. In support of the proposal, it was said that the extermination of Armenians in the Ottoman Empire during the First World War had served as a reference point in the coining of the word “genocide” by Raphael Lemkin, and that the rules laid down in the ensuing convention clearly corresponded to the process of destruction suffered by the Armenian people. By recognising it as genocide, Switzerland would render justice to the victims and the survivors and their descendants, prevent the commission of other crimes against humanity, and show its commitment to human rights, respect for minorities and international criminal justice. Reference was made to other bodies that had recognised these events as genocide, and the hope was expressed that the motion’s adoption would contribute for the establishment of a durable peace between Turks and Armenians, which could only be based on a common vision that corresponded to the historical truth.
On 15 May 2002 the Swiss Government expressed its opposition to the proposal, saying that while it had on several occasions voiced regrets in relation to the tragic massacres and mass deportations that had resulted in very many victims among the Armenian population of the Ottoman Empire, it was of the view that this question concerned historical research. It went on to say that, since this matter touched upon a painful historical episode, the efforts to come to terms with it had to be made chiefly by the countries concerned. Swiss foreign policy sought to achieve reconciliation between Turkey and Armenia through political dialogue, which had been established in 2000 and concerned in particular human rights. The motion’s adoption risked prejudicing the regular official dialogue that had been established. The motion’s sponsors intended that it would contribute to a durable peace between Turkey and Armenia by addressing a message of justice to the Armenian victims, but its acceptance could well have the opposite result and add to the emotional baggage that weighed down relations between those two countries.
On 16 December 2003, following a plenary debate, the National Council passed the motion by 107 votes to 67, with 11 abstentions. It was given the number 02.3069 and reads:
“The National Council recognises the Armenian genocide of 1915. It asks the Federal Council to take note thereof and to convey its position by the usual diplomatic channels.”
Section 106(2) of the Swiss Federal Court Act 2005 provides that the Federal Court does not examine whether there has been a breach of fundamental rights or cantonal or inter-cantonal law unless the appellant has properly raised and pleaded the point.
The Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Genocide Convention) (78 United Nations Treaty Series (UNTS) 277) was adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations (“the UN”) on 9 December 1948 and entered into force on 12 January 1951. Switzerland acceded to it on 7 September 2000 with effect from 6 December 2000 (2121 UNTS 282). Its relevant provisions read:
“The Contracting Parties confirm that genocide, whether committed in time of peace or in time of war, is a crime under international law which they undertake to prevent and to punish.”
“In the present Convention, genocide means any of the following acts committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial or religious group, as such:
“The following acts shall be punishable:
“The Contracting Parties undertake to enact, in accordance with their respective Constitutions, the necessary legislation to give effect to the provisions of the present Convention, and, in particular, to provide effective penalties for persons guilty of genocide or any of the other acts enumerated in article III.”
“Persons charged with genocide or any of the other acts enumerated in article III shall be tried by a competent tribunal of the State in the territory of which the act was committed, or by such international penal tribunal as may have jurisdiction with respect to those Contracting Parties which shall have accepted its jurisdiction.”
...
“Disputes between the Contracting Parties relating to the interpretation, application or fulfilment of the present Convention, including those relating to the responsibility of a State for genocide or for any of the other acts enumerated in article III, shall be submitted to the International Court of Justice at the request of any of the parties to the dispute.”
Article 6 of the Charter of the International Military Tribunal, annexed to the Agreement for the prosecution and punishment of the major war criminals of the European Axis (“the London Agreement”) of 8 August 1945 (82 UNTS 279), concerned crimes against peace, war crimes and crimes against humanity. It provided, in so far as relevant:
 “...
The following acts, or any of them, are crimes coming within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal for which there shall be individual responsibility:
The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (“the Rome Statute” and “the ICC”) (2187 UNTS 3) was adopted on 17 July 1998 and ratified by Switzerland on 12 October 2001 (2187 UNTS 6). It entered into force on 1 July 2002. Its relevant provisions read:
“1.  The jurisdiction of the Court shall be limited to the most serious crimes of concern to the international community as a whole. The Court has jurisdiction in accordance with this Statute with respect to the following crimes:
(a)  The crime of genocide;
(b)  Crimes against humanity;
(c)  War crimes;
(d)  The crime of aggression.
...”
“For the purpose of this Statute, ‘genocide’ means any of the following acts committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial or religious group, as such:
“1.  For the purpose of this Statute, ‘crime against humanity’ means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:
...”
In its judgment of 2 September 1998 in The Prosecutor v. Akayesu (no. ICTR-96-4-T), Trial Chamber I of the International Tribunal for the prosecution of persons responsible for genocide and other serious violations of international humanitarian law committed in the territory of Rwanda and Rwandan citizens responsible for genocide and other such violations committed in the territory of neighbouring States, between 1 January and 31 December 1994 (“the ICTR”) highlighted the distinguishing feature of the crime of genocide:
“498.  Genocide is distinct from other crimes inasmuch as it embodies a special intent or dolus specialis. Special intent of a crime is the specific intention, required as a constitutive element of the crime, which demands that the perpetrator clearly seeks to produce the act charged. Thus, the special intent in the crime of genocide lies in ‘the intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial or religious group, as such’.”
The Tribunal also elaborated on the crime of genocide in relation to the other crimes provided for by its Statute (cumulative charges):
“469.  Having regard to its Statute, the Chamber believes that the offences under the Statute – genocide, crimes against humanity, and violations of article 3 common to the Geneva Conventions and of Additional Protocol II – have different elements and, moreover, are intended to protect different interests. ... Thus it is legitimate to charge these crimes in relation to the same set of facts. It may, additionally, depending on the case, be necessary to record a conviction for more than one of these offences in order to reflect what crimes an accused committed. If, for example, a general ordered that all prisoners of war belonging to a particular ethnic group should be killed, with the intent thereby to eliminate the group, this would be both genocide and a violation of common article 3, although not necessarily a crime against humanity. Convictions for genocide and violations of common article 3 would accurately reflect the accused general’s course of conduct.
Conversely, the Chamber does not consider that any [act] of genocide, crimes against humanity, and violations of article 3 common to the Geneva Conventions and of Additional Protocol II are lesser included forms of each other. The ICTR Statute does not establish a hierarchy of norms, but rather all three offences are presented on an equal footing. While genocide may be considered the gravest crime, there is no justification in the Statute for finding that crimes against humanity or violations of common article 3 and additional protocol II are in all circumstances alternative charges to genocide and thus lesser included offences. As stated, and it is a related point, these offences have different constituent elements. Again, this consideration renders multiple convictions for these offences in relation to the same set of facts permissible.”
The Tribunal held the following with respect to the crime of direct and public incitement to commit genocide (footnotes omitted):
“557.  The ‘direct’ element of incitement implies that the incitement assume a direct form and specifically provoke another to engage in a criminal act, and that more than mere vague or indirect suggestion goes to constitute direct incitement. Under Civil law systems, provocation, the equivalent of incitement, is regarded as being direct where it is aimed at causing a specific offence to be committed. The prosecution must prove a definite causation between the act characterized as incitement, or provocation in this case, and a specific offence. However, the Chamber is of the opinion that the direct element of incitement should be viewed in the light of its cultural and linguistic content. Indeed, a particular speech may be perceived as ‘direct’ in one country, and not so in another, depending on the audience. The Chamber further recalls that incitement may be direct, and nonetheless implicit. Thus, at the time the Convention on Genocide was being drafted, the Polish delegate observed that it was sufficient to play skilfully on mob psychology by casting suspicion on certain groups, by insinuating that they were responsible for economic or other difficulties in order to create an atmosphere favourable to the perpetration of the crime.
The Chamber will therefore consider on a case-by-case basis whether, in light of the culture of Rwanda and the specific circumstances of the instant case, acts of incitement can be viewed as direct or not, by focusing mainly on the issue of whether the persons for whom the message was intended immediately grasped the implication thereof.
In light of the foregoing, it can be noted in the final analysis that whatever the legal system, direct and public incitement must be defined ... as directly provoking the perpetrator(s) to commit genocide, whether through speeches, shouting or threats uttered in public places or at public gatherings, or through the sale or dissemination, offer for sale or display of written material or printed matter in public places or at public gatherings, or through the public display of placards or posters, or through any other means of audiovisual communication.”
In its judgment of 28 November 2007 in Nahimana et al. v. the Prosecutor (no. ICTR-99-52-A), the Appeals Chamber of the ICTR said the following with respect to the crime of incitement to commit genocide (footnotes omitted):
“692.  The Appeals Chamber considers that there is a difference between hate speech in general (or inciting discrimination or violence) and direct and public incitement to commit genocide. Direct incitement to commit genocide assumes that the speech is a direct appeal to commit an act [of genocide]; it has to be more than a mere vague or indirect suggestion. In most cases, direct and public incitement to commit genocide can be preceded or accompanied by hate speech, but only direct and public incitement to commit genocide is prohibited [as constituting direct and public incitement to commit genocide]. This conclusion is corroborated by the travaux préparatoires to the Genocide Convention.
The Appeals Chamber therefore concludes that when a defendant is indicted [of direct and public incitement to commit genocide], he cannot be held accountable for hate speech that does not directly call for the commission of genocide. The Appeals Chamber is also of the opinion that, to the extent that not all hate speeches constitute direct incitement to commit genocide, the jurisprudence on incitement to hatred, discrimination and violence is not directly applicable in determining what constitutes direct incitement to commit genocide. ...”
In its judgment of 26 February 2007 (Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2007, p. 43), the International Court of Justice (“the ICJ”) noted the following:
“(8)  The Question of Intent to Commit Genocide
The Court notes that genocide as defined in Article II of the Convention comprises ‘acts’ and an ‘intent’. It is well established that the acts –
themselves include mental elements. ‘Killing’ must be intentional, as must ‘causing serious bodily or mental harm’. Mental elements are made explicit in paragraphs (c) and (d) of Article II by the words ‘deliberately’ and ‘intended’, quite apart from the implications of the words ‘inflicting’ and ‘imposing’; and forcible transfer too requires deliberate intentional acts. The acts, in the words of the ILC, are by their very nature conscious, intentional or volitional acts (Commentary on Article 17 of the 1996 Draft Code of Crimes against the Peace and Security of Mankind, ILC Report 1996, Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 1996, Vol. II, Part Two, p. 44, para. 5).
In addition to those mental elements, Article II requires a further mental element. It requires the establishment of the ‘intent to destroy, in whole or in part, ... [the protected] group, as such’. It is not enough to establish, for instance in terms of paragraph (a), that deliberate unlawful killings of members of the group have occurred. The additional intent must also be established, and is defined very precisely. It is often referred to as a special or specific intent or dolus specialis; in the present Judgment it will usually be referred to as the ‘specific intent (dolus specialis)’. It is not enough that the members of the group are targeted because they belong to that group, that is because the perpetrator has a discriminatory intent. Something more is required. The acts listed in Article II must be done with intent to destroy the group as such in whole or in part. The words ‘as such’ emphasize that intent to destroy the protected group.
The specificity of the intent and its particular requirements are highlighted when genocide is placed in the context of other related criminal acts, notably crimes against humanity and persecution, as the Trial Chamber of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (hereinafter ‘ICT’ or ‘the Tribunal’) did in the Kupreškić et al. case:
In the same judgment, the ICJ based the findings of fact that led it to conclude that the Srebrenica massacre had constituted a genocide chiefly on those of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 (“the ICTY”), in spite of the plethora of other material that had been placed before it (paragraphs 212-24 and 278-97 of the judgment).
In its judgment of 3 February 2015 (Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Croatia v. Serbia) (http://www.icj-cij.org/docket/files/118/18422.pdf, last accessed on 5 June 2015), the ICJ, having examined the numerous pieces of written and oral evidence placed before it by the parties, and taking in particular into account the findings of fact of the ICTY, found that there had been a “pattern of conduct” on the part of the Yugoslav People’s Army and the Serb forces in their actions against the Croats (paragraphs 407-16 of the judgment). However, taking into account the context and the opportunity for these forces to engage in acts of violence, the court was ultimately not satisfied that the only reasonable inference that could be drawn from this pattern of conduct was the intent to destroy, in whole or in part, the Croat group, and that the acts constituting the actus reus of genocide within the meaning of Article II (a) and (b) of the Genocide Convention (see paragraph 52 above) had not been committed by the Yugoslav National Army and the Serb forces with the specific intent required for them to be characterised as acts of genocide. On this basis, the court concluded that Croatia had failed to substantiate its allegation that genocide had been committed (paragraphs 417-41 of the judgment). The court came to the same conclusion with respect to Serbia’s counter-claim that the acts perpetrated by Croatia against the Serb population of the Krajina had constituted genocide: it did not find it established that there had been a special genocidal intent (dolus specialis) (paragraphs 500-15 of the judgment).
The International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (“the CERD”) (660 UNTS 195) was adopted by the UN General Assembly on 21 December 1965 and opened for signature on 7 March 1966. It entered into force on 4 January 1969. Switzerland acceded to it on 29 November 1994 with effect from 29 December 1994 (1841 UNTS 337). Its relevant provisions read:
“1.  In this Convention, the term ‘racial discrimination’ shall mean any distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference based on race, colour, descent, or national or ethnic origin which has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal footing, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural or any other field of public life.
...”
“1.  States Parties condemn racial discrimination and undertake to pursue by all appropriate means and without delay a policy of eliminating racial discrimination in all its forms and promoting understanding among all races, and, to this end:
...
(d)  Each State Party shall prohibit and bring to an end, by all appropriate means, including legislation as required by circumstances, racial discrimination by any persons, group or organization;
...”
“States Parties condemn all propaganda and all organizations which are based on ideas or theories of superiority of one race or group of persons of one colour or ethnic origin, or which attempt to justify or promote racial hatred and discrimination in any form, and undertake to adopt immediate and positive measures designed to eradicate all incitement to, or acts of, such discrimination and, to this end, with due regard to the principles embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the rights expressly set forth in article 5 of this Convention, inter alia :
(a)  Shall declare an offence punishable by law all dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred, incitement to racial discrimination, as well as all acts of violence or incitement to such acts against any race or group of persons of another colour or ethnic origin, and also the provision of any assistance to racist activities, including the financing thereof;
(b)  Shall declare illegal and prohibit organizations, and also organized and all other propaganda activities, which promote and incite racial discrimination, and shall recognize participation in such organizations or activities as an offence punishable by law;
...”
“In compliance with the fundamental obligations laid down in article 2 of this Convention, States Parties undertake to prohibit and to eliminate racial discrimination in all its forms and to guarantee the right of everyone, without distinction as to race, colour, or national or ethnic origin, to equality before the law, notably in the enjoyment of the following rights:
...
(d)  Other civil rights, in particular:
...
(viii)  The right to freedom of opinion and expression;
...”
“States Parties shall assure to everyone within their jurisdiction effective protection and remedies, through the competent national tribunals and other State institutions, against any acts of racial discrimination which violate his human rights and fundamental freedoms contrary to this Convention, as well as the right to seek from such tribunals just and adequate reparation or satisfaction for any damage suffered as a result of such discrimination.”
When acceding to the CERD, Switzerland made the following reservation concerning Article 4 (1841 UNTS 337):
“Switzerland reserves the right to take the legislative measures necessary for the implementation of article 4, taking due account of freedom of opinion and freedom of association, provided for inter alia in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.”
In its initial report under the CERD (UN Doc. CERD/C/270/Add.1), published on 14 March 1997, Switzerland said, in paragraph 71, that it considered that the public interest in the exercise of freedom of expression had to give way before the greater interest of victims of discrimination, who had a right to the protection of their personality. For this reason, Article 261 bis § 4 of the Swiss Criminal Code (see paragraph 32 above) made such acts of discrimination punishable, even though the CERD did not expressly prohibit them. The same applied to the prohibition of the denial of or attempts to justify the crimes committed by the Nazi regime, and to the denial or minimisation of genocide more generally.
In its third periodic period reports under the CERD (UN Doc. CERD/C/351/Add.2), published on 22 May 2001, Switzerland said, in paragraphs 102 and 109, that in its first judgment under Article 261 bis § 4 of the Swiss Criminal Code (ATF 123 IV 202), the Swiss Federal Court had held that this provision protected not only public order but also the dignity of the individual. It was however essential that public order was protected only indirectly, as a consequence of the protection accorded to human dignity.
The UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination – the body of independent experts that monitors the implementation of the CERD – while in 1997 criticising Germany and Belgium for not broadening their Holocaust denial laws to cover all genocides (UN Doc. A/52/18(Supp), §§ 217 and 226), said the following in paragraphs 14 and 15 of its General Recommendation No. 35 of 26 September 2013 on combating racist hate speech (UN Doc. CERD/C/GC/35), that (footnotes omitted):
“[P]ublic denials or attempts to justify crimes of genocide and crimes against humanity, as defined by international law, should be declared as offences punishable by law, provided that they clearly constitute incitement to racial violence or hatred. The Committee also underlines that ‘the expression of opinions about historical facts’ should not be prohibited or punished.
While [A]rticle 4 [of the CERD] requires that certain forms of conduct be declared offences punishable by law, it does not supply detailed guidance for the qualification of forms of conduct as criminal offences. On the qualification of dissemination and incitement as offences punishable by law, the Committee considers that the following contextual factors should be taken into account:
–  The content and form of speech: whether the speech is provocative and direct, in what form it is constructed and disseminated, and the style in which it is delivered.
–  The economic, social and political climate prevalent at the time the speech was made and disseminated, including the existence of patterns of discrimination against ethnic and other groups, including indigenous peoples. Discourses which in one context are innocuous or neutral may take on a dangerous significance in another: in its indicators on genocide the Committee emphasized the relevance of locality in appraising the meaning and potential effects of racist hate speech.
–  The position or status of the speaker in society and the audience to which the speech is directed. The Committee consistently draws attention to the role of politicians and other public opinion-formers in contributing to the creation of a negative climate towards groups protected by the Convention, and has encouraged such persons and bodies to adopt positive approaches directed to the promotion of intercultural understanding and harmony. The Committee is aware of the special importance of freedom of speech in political matters and also that its exercise carries with it special duties and responsibilities.
–  The reach of the speech, including the nature of the audience and the means of transmission: whether the speech was disseminated through mainstream media or the Internet, and the frequency and extent of the communication, in particular when repetition suggests the existence of a deliberate strategy to engender hostility towards ethnic and racial groups.
–  The objectives of the speech: speech protecting or defending the human rights of individuals and groups should not be subject to criminal or other sanctions.”
The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (“the ICCPR”) (999 UNTS 171) was adopted on 16 December 1966 and opened for signature on 19 December 1966. Its substantive provisions entered into force on 23 March 1976. Switzerland acceded to it on 18 June 1992 with effect from 18 September 1992 (1678 UNTS 394). Its relevant provisions read:
“1.  Everyone shall have the right to hold opinions without interference.
Everyone shall have the right to freedom of expression; this right shall include freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or through any other media of his choice.
The exercise of the rights provided for in paragraph 2 of this article carries with it special duties and responsibilities. It may therefore be subject to certain restrictions, but these shall only be such as are provided by law and are necessary:
“1.  Any propaganda for war shall be prohibited by law.
Any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence shall be prohibited by law.”
In connection with Switzerland’s accession to the ICCPR in 1992, the Swiss Government noted that the Swiss Criminal Code, as then in force, only covered some aspects of Article 20 § 2 of the Covenant, and that Switzerland would thus need to enter a reservation to that Article. However, it went on to note that a new criminal law provision was envisaged in connection with Switzerland’s impending accession to the CERD (see paragraph 62 above), and that after the entry into force of 261 bis of the Swiss Criminal Code (see paragraph 32 above) the reservation would be withdrawn (FF 1991 I 1129-85, at pp. 1139-40).
The reservation read (1678 UNTS 395):
“Switzerland reserves the right to adopt a criminal provision which will take into account the requirements of article 20, paragraph 2, on the occasion of its forthcoming accession to the 1966 International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.”
It was withdrawn on 16 October 1995 with immediate effect (1891 UNTS 393).
At its 102nd session (2011) the UN Human Rights Committee – the body of independent experts that monitors the implementation of the ICCPR – adopted General Comment no. 34 concerning Article 19 of the Covenant (CCPR/C/GC/34). This Comment reads, in so far as relevant (footnotes omitted):
“Freedom of opinion
Paragraph 1 of article 19 requires protection of the right to hold opinions without interference. This is a right to which the Covenant permits no exception or restriction. Freedom of opinion extends to the right to change an opinion whenever and for whatever reason a person so freely chooses. No person may be subject to the impairment of any rights under the Covenant on the basis of his or her actual, perceived or supposed opinions. All forms of opinion are protected, including opinions of a political, scientific, historic, moral or religious nature. It is incompatible with paragraph 1 to criminalize the holding of an opinion. The harassment, intimidation or stigmatization of a person, including arrest, detention, trial or imprisonment for reasons of the opinions they may hold, constitutes a violation of article 19, paragraph 1.
Any form of effort to coerce the holding or not holding of any opinion is prohibited. Freedom to express one’s opinion necessarily includes freedom not to express one’s opinion.
Freedom of expression
Paragraph 2 requires States parties to guarantee the right to freedom of expression, including the right to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds regardless of frontiers. This right includes the expression and receipt of communications of every form of idea and opinion capable of transmission to others, subject to the provisions in article 19, paragraph 3, and article 20. It includes political discourse, commentary on one’s own and on public affairs, canvassing, discussion of human rights, journalism, cultural and artistic expression, teaching, and religious discourse. It may also include commercial advertising. The scope of paragraph 2 embraces even expression that may be regarded as deeply offensive, although such expression may be restricted in accordance with the provisions of article 19, paragraph 3 and article 20.
...
The application of article 19 (3)
...
The first of the legitimate grounds for restriction listed in paragraph 3 is that of respect for the rights or reputations of others. The term ‘rights’ includes human rights as recognized in the Covenant and more generally in international human rights law. For example, it may be legitimate to restrict freedom of expression in order to protect the right to vote under article 25, as well as rights article under 17 (see para. 37). Such restrictions must be constructed with care: while it may be permissible to protect voters from forms of expression that constitute intimidation or coercion, such restrictions must not impede political debate, including, for example, calls for the boycotting of a non-compulsory vote. The term ‘others’ relates to other persons individually or as members of a community. Thus, it may, for instance, refer to individual members of a community defined by its religious faith or ethnicity.
The second legitimate ground is that of protection of national security or of public order (ordre public), or of public health or morals.
...
When a State party invokes a legitimate ground for restriction of freedom of expression, it must demonstrate in specific and individualized fashion the precise nature of the threat, and the necessity and proportionality of the specific action taken, in particular by establishing a direct and immediate connection between the expression and the threat.
The Committee reserves to itself an assessment of whether, in a given situation, there may have been circumstances which made a restriction of freedom of expression necessary. In this regard, the Committee recalls that the scope of this freedom is not to be assessed by reference to a ‘margin of appreciation’ and in order for the Committee to carry out this function, a State party, in any given case, must demonstrate in specific fashion the precise nature of the threat to any of the enumerated grounds listed in paragraph 3 that has caused it to restrict freedom of expression.
...
Limitative scope of restrictions on freedom of expression in certain specific areas
...
Laws that penalize the expression of opinions about historical facts are incompatible with the obligations that the Covenant imposes on States parties in relation to the respect for freedom of opinion and expression. The Covenant does not permit general prohibition of expressions of an erroneous opinion or an incorrect interpretation of past events. Restrictions on the right of freedom of opinion should never be imposed and, with regard to freedom of expression, they should not go beyond what is permitted in paragraph 3 or required under article 20.
The relationship between articles 19 and 20
Articles 19 and 20 are compatible with and complement each other. The acts that are addressed in article 20 are all subject to restriction pursuant to article 19, paragraph 3. As such, a limitation that is justified on the basis of article 20 must also comply with article 19, paragraph 3.
What distinguishes the acts addressed in article 20 from other acts that may be subject to restriction under article 19, paragraph 3, is that for the acts addressed in article 20, the Covenant indicates the specific response required from the State: their prohibition by law. It is only to this extent that article 20 may be considered as lex specialis with regard to article 19.
It is only with regard to the specific forms of expression indicated in article 20 that States parties are obliged to have legal prohibitions. In every case in which the State restricts freedom of expression it is necessary to justify the prohibitions and their provisions in strict conformity with article 19.”
In a report submitted to the UN General Assembly on 7 September 2012 (Promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, UN Doc. A/67/357) the UN Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression said in paragraph 55, in the chapter devoted to “Domestic legislation that contravenes international norms and standards”, that:
“[H]istorical events should be open to discussion and, as stated by the Human Rights Committee, laws that penalize the expression of opinions about historical facts are incompatible with the obligations that the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights imposes on States parties in relation to the respect for freedom of opinion and expression. By demanding that writers, journalists and citizens give only a version of events that is approved by the Government, States are enabled to subjugate freedom of expression to official versions of events”.
In a report submitted to the UN Human Rights Council on 1 July 2013 (UN Doc. A/HRC/24/38), the UN Independent Expert on the promotion of a democratic and equitable international order recommended, in paragraph 56 (e), that States should “repeal legislation that is incompatible with articles 18 and 19 [of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights]; in particular, ... memory laws and any laws that hinder open discussion of political and historical events”. He made a similar recommendation in paragraph 69 (j) of the version of the report that he submitted to the UN General Assembly on 7 August 2013 (UN Doc. A/68/284).
The Additional Protocol to the Convention on Cybercrime, concerning the criminalisation of acts of a racist and xenophobic nature committed through computer systems (European Treaty Series No. 189, 2466 UNTS 205), was opened for signature on 28 January 2003 and entered into force on 1 March 2006. It has been signed by thirty-six out of the forty-seven Member States of the Council of Europe (plus two other States: Canada and South Africa), but thus far only ratified by twenty-four, and three of those (Denmark, Finland and Norway) have, by way of reservations, made use of the possibility to under Article 6 § 2 fully or partly to refrain from criminalising acts covered by Article 6 § 1 (see paragraphs 75 and 76 below). Switzerland signed the Protocol on 9 October 2003 but has not ratified it, and it is, by its Article 10 § 2, not into force in respect of it.
Article 6 of the Protocol, entitled “Denial, gross minimisation, approval or justification of genocide or crimes against humanity”, provides:
“1.  Each Party shall adopt such legislative measures as may be necessary to establish the following conduct as criminal offences under its domestic law, when committed intentionally and without right:
distributing or otherwise making available, through a computer system to the public, material which denies, grossly minimises, approves or justifies acts constituting genocide or crimes against humanity, as defined by international law and recognised as such by final and binding decisions of the International Military Tribunal, established by the London Agreement of 8 August 1945, or of any other international court established by relevant international instruments and whose jurisdiction is recognised by that Party.
A Party may either
(a)  require that the denial or the gross minimisation referred to in paragraph 1 of this article is committed with the intent to incite hatred, discrimination or violence against any individual or group of individuals, based on race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin, as well as religion if used as a pretext for any of these factors, or otherwise
(b)  reserve the right not to apply, in whole or in part, paragraph 1 of this article.”
The explanatory report to the Protocol reads, in so far as relevant (footnotes omitted):
“39.  In recent years, various cases have been dealt with by national courts where persons (in public, in the media, etc.) have expressed ideas or theories which aim at denying, grossly minimising, approving or justifying the serious crimes which occurred in particular during the second World War (in particular the Holocaust).The motivation for such behaviours is often presented with the pretext of scientific research, while they really aim at supporting and promoting the political motivation which gave rise to the Holocaust. Moreover, these behaviours have also inspired or, even, stimulated and encouraged, racist and xenophobic groups in their action, including through computer systems. The expression of such ideas insults (the memory of) those persons who have been victims of such evil, as well as their relatives. Finally, it threatens the dignity of the human community.
Article 6, which has a similar structure as Article 3, addresses this problem. The drafters agreed that it was important to criminalize expressions which deny, grossly minimise, approve or justify acts constituting genocide or crimes against humanity, as defined by international law and recognised as such by final and binding decisions of the International Military Tribunal, established by the London Agreement of 8 [August] 1945. This owing to the fact that the most important and established conducts, which had given rise to genocide and crimes against humanity, occurred during the period 1940-1945. However, the drafters recognised that, since then, other cases of genocide and crimes against humanity occurred, which were strongly motivated by theories and ideas of a racist and xenophobic nature. Therefore, the drafters considered it necessary not to limit the scope of this provision only to the crimes committed by the Nazi regime during the 2nd World War and established as such by the Nuremberg Tribunal, but also to genocides and crimes against humanity established by other international courts set up since 1945 by relevant international legal instruments (such as UN Security Council Resolutions, multilateral treaties, etc.). Such courts may be, for instance, the International Criminal Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia, for Rwanda, the Permanent International Criminal Court. This Article allows to refer to final and binding decisions of future international courts, to the extent that the jurisdiction of such a court is recognised by the Party signatory to this Protocol.
The provision is intended to make it clear that facts of which the historical correctness has been established may not be denied, grossly minimised, approved or justified in order to support these detestable theories and ideas.
The European Court of Human Rights has made it clear that the denial or revision of ‘clearly established historical facts – such as the Holocaust – ... would be removed from the protection of Article 10 by Article 17’ of the ECHR (see in this context the Lehideux and Isorni judgment of 23 September 1998).
Paragraph 2 of Article 6 allows a Party either (i) to require, through a declaration, that the denial or the gross minimisation referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 6, is committed with the intent to incite hatred, discrimination or violence against any individual or group of individuals, based on race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin, as well as religion if used as a pretext for any of these factors. or (ii) to make use of a reservation, by allowing a Party not to apply – in whole or in part – this provision.”
On 31 October 1968 the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted Resolution (68) 30. It recommended to the governments of member states of the Council of Europe to, among other things, (a) sign and ratify the CERD if they had not yet done so, and (b) upon ratification “stress by an interpretative statement the importance which they attach ... to the respect for the rights laid down in the [Convention]”.
On 30 October 1997 the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted Recommendation 97/20 on “hate speech”, which reads, in so far as relevant:
“Considering that the aim of the Council of Europe is to achieve a greater unity between its members, particularly for the purpose of safeguarding and realising the ideals and principles which are their common heritage;
Recalling the Declaration of the Heads of State and Government of the member states of the Council of Europe, adopted in Vienna on 9 October 1993;
Recalling that the Vienna Declaration highlighted grave concern about the present resurgence of racism, xenophobia and antisemitism and the development of a climate of intolerance, and contained an undertaking to combat all ideologies, policies and practices constituting an incitement to racial hatred, violence and discrimination, as well as any action or language likely to strengthen fears and tensions between groups from different racial, ethnic, national, religious or social backgrounds;
Reaffirming its profound attachment to freedom of expression and information as expressed in the Declaration on the Freedom of Expression and Information of 29 April 1982;
Condemning, in line with the Vienna Declaration and the Declaration on Media in a Democratic Society, adopted at the 4th European Ministerial Conference on Mass Media Policy (Prague, 7-8 December 1994), all forms of expression which incite to racial hatred, xenophobia, antisemitism and all forms of intolerance, since they undermine democratic security, cultural cohesion and pluralism;
Noting that such forms of expression may have a greater and more damaging impact when disseminated through the media;
Believing that the need to combat such forms of expression is even more urgent in situations of tension and in times of war and other forms of armed conflict;
Believing that it is necessary to lay down guidelines for the governments of the member states on how to address these forms of expression, while recognising that most media cannot be blamed for such forms of expression;
Bearing in mind Article 7, paragraph 1, of the European Convention on Transfrontier Television and the case-law of the organs of the European Convention on Human Rights under Articles 10 and 17 of the latter Convention;
Having regard to the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and Resolution (68) 30 of the Committee of Ministers on Measures to be taken against incitement to racial, national and religious hatred;
Noting that not all member states have signed and ratified this Convention and implemented it by means of national legislation;
Aware of the need to reconcile the fight against racism and intolerance with the need to protect freedom of expression so as to avoid the risk of undermining democracy on the grounds of defending it;
Aware also of the need to respect fully the editorial independence and autonomy of the media,
Recommends that the governments of member states:
take appropriate steps to combat hate speech on the basis of the principles laid down in this recommendation;
ensure that such steps form part of a comprehensive approach to the phenomenon, which also targets its social, economic, political, cultural and other root causes;
where they have not done so, sign, ratify and effectively implement in national law the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, in accordance with Resolution (68) 30 of the Committee of Ministers on Measures to be taken against incitement to racial, national and religious hatred;
review their domestic legislation and practice in order to ensure that they comply with the principles set out in the appendix to this recommendation.”
An appendix to that recommendation defined “hate speech” as “covering all forms of expression which spread, incite, promote or justify racial hatred, xenophobia, anti-Semitism or other forms of hatred based on intolerance, including: intolerance expressed by aggressive nationalism and ethnocentrism, discrimination and hostility against minorities, migrants and people of immigrant origin”. It went on to lay down a number of principles that applied to hate speech. The relevant ones were:
“The governments of the member states should establish or maintain a sound legal framework consisting of civil, criminal and administrative law provisions on hate speech which enable administrative and judicial authorities to reconcile in each case respect for freedom of expression with respect for human dignity and the protection of the reputation or the rights of others.
To this end, governments of member states should examine ways and means to:
–  stimulate and co-ordinate research on the effectiveness of existing legislation and legal practice;
–  review the existing legal framework in order to ensure that it applies in an adequate manner to the various new media and communications services and networks;
–  develop a co-ordinated prosecution policy based on national guidelines respecting the principles set out in this recommendation;
–  add community service orders to the range of possible penal sanctions;
–  enhance the possibilities of combating hate speech through civil law, for example by allowing interested non-governmental organisations to bring civil law actions, providing for compensation for victims of hate speech and providing for the possibility of court orders allowing victims a right of reply or ordering retraction;
–  provide the public and media professionals with information on legal provisions which apply to hate speech.”
“The governments of the member states should ensure that in the legal framework referred to in Principle 2, interferences with freedom of expression are narrowly circumscribed and applied in a lawful and non-arbitrary manner on the basis of objective criteria. Moreover, in accordance with the fundamental requirement of the rule of law, any limitation of, or interference with, freedom of expression must be subject to independent judicial control. This requirement is particularly important in cases where freedom of expression must be reconciled with respect for human dignity and the protection of the reputation or the rights of others.”
“National law and practice should allow the courts to bear in mind that specific instances of hate speech may be so insulting to individuals or groups as not to enjoy the level of protection afforded by Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights to other forms of expression. This is the case where hate speech is aimed at the destruction of the rights and freedoms laid down in the Convention or at their limitation to a greater extent than provided therein.”
“National law and practice should allow the competent prosecution authorities to give special attention, as far as their discretion permits, to cases involving hate speech. In this regard, these authorities should, in particular, give careful consideration to the suspect’s right to freedom of expression given that the imposition of criminal sanctions generally constitutes a serious interference with that freedom. The competent courts should, when imposing criminal sanctions on persons convicted of hate speech offences, ensure strict respect for the principle of proportionality.”
The European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (“the ECRI”), the Council of Europe’s body tasked with combating racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia, anti-Semitism and intolerance, said, in paragraph 18 (e) of its Policy Recommendation No. 7 on national legislation to combat racism and racial discrimination of 13 December 2002 (CRI(2003)8) that the law should penalise, if “committed intentionally”, “the public denial, trivialisation, justification or condoning, with a racist aim, of crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes”. In the explanatory memorandum to the recommendation, the ECRI said that paragraph 18 (e) referred to “the crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes”. The crime of genocide was to be “understood as defined in Article II of the [Genocide Convention] and Article 6 of the [Rome Statute]”, and crimes against humanity and war crimes were to be “understood as defined in Articles 7 and 8 of the [Rome Statute]”.
In its report of 10 December 2010 (CRI(2011)5), adopted in the course of the fourth monitoring cycle in respect of Turkey, the ECRI noted, inter alia, the following (footnotes omitted):
“83.  ... It is difficult to ascertain the sizes of the various minority groups living in Turkey at present, as the most recent publicly available official estimates date from 2000 and do not cover all relevant groups. ... According to [these estimates], the Armenian population in Turkey is estimated at between 50,000 and 93,500 persons ...
...
In addition to issues with respect to the restitution of property of foundations, the Armenian minority reports difficulties in the field of minority language education due to a lack of textbooks in Armenian and of teachers trained in the Armenian language. This situation has contributed to a gradual decline in the numbers of parents deciding to send their children to Armenian schools; some parents also reportedly avoid sending their children to Armenian schools because they are afraid that either they or their children will be threatened in consequence. ECRI notes that in 2008, a propaganda documentary entitled ‘The Blonde Bride: The Truth behind the Armenian Issue’ was distributed by the Ministry of National Education to all primary schools, along with a notice that it should be screened; the documentary showed bloody images of massacres and children were to write a composition about how they felt after watching it. While the Ministry of National Education eventually ceased distribution of the DVD following wide-scale complaints from parents, the DVDs were not collected from schools, and decisions whether or not to screen it were left to individual education authorities. ECRI is of the view that the dissemination and screening of such materials in schools runs directly counter to the objective of building a more open and tolerant society, and considers it especially regrettable that such material has been targeted at children.
ECRI notes that on 23 July 2009, the Ministry of National Education approved the appointment to Armenian schools of Armenian language, religious culture and ethics teachers. Such teachers had to be Turkish nationals of Armenian origin and hold the necessary teaching qualifications from a faculty recognised by the Turkish Board of Education. They may receive in-service training. ECRI hopes that improved relations between Turkey and Armenia will provide an additional opportunity to resolve some of the concrete problems mentioned above, such as the training of teachers and provision of textbooks in Armenian minority schools. ECRI notes that at present, and although this situation may be seen as far from ideal, Armenia itself is the only realistic source of an adequate range of textbooks in Armenian.
...
... In January 2007, the chief editor of the bilingual Armenian-Turkish Agos weekly newspaper, Hrant Dink, was assassinated, having previously received death threats of which the authorities were reportedly aware. ... In addition to specific, high profile acts of violence such as those mentioned above, minority schools, businessmen and religious institutions have reportedly been threatened by emails, letters and phone calls.
...
... Occasional statements by leading politicians, in particular around Armenian claims of genocide, have also shown that mutual resentment and mistrust may flourish unless considerable care is taken when addressing sensitive issues in political discourse.
...
... [I]n late 2008/early 2009 ... boycotts of Jewish businesses were organised, and some businesses in Eskişehir displayed signs indicating that Jews, Armenians and dogs were not welcome to enter. It was not until one newspaper published photographs of these signs, along with an article asking what more the Ministry of Justice was waiting for, that the latter took action in that case.”
Framework Decision 2008/913/JHA of 28 November 2008 of the Council of the European Union on combating certain forms and expressions of racism and xenophobia by means of criminal law (OJ L 328/55, 6.12.2008, pp. 55-58) provides for the approximation of the laws of the Member States of the European Union on offences involving racism and xenophobia.
First proposed by the European Commission in November 2001 (Proposal for a Council Framework Decision on combating racism and xenophobia, COM(2001) 664 final, OJ C 75 E, 26.3.2002, pp. 269-73), the decision was adopted by the Council of the European Union on 28 November 2008. It entered into force on 6 December 2008. By its Article 10 § 1, the Member States of the European Union were to take the necessary measures to comply with its provisions by 28 November 2010.
The recitals to the decision read, in so far as relevant:
“...
(6)  Member States acknowledge that combating racism and xenophobia requires various kinds of measures in a comprehensive framework and may not be limited to criminal matters. This Framework Decision is limited to combating particularly serious forms of racism and xenophobia by means of criminal law. Since the Member States’ cultural and legal traditions are, to some extent, different, particularly in this field, full harmonisation of criminal laws is currently not possible.
...
(14)  This Framework Decision respects the fundamental rights and observes the principles recognised by Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union and by the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, in particular Articles 10 and 11 thereof, and reflected in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, and notably Chapters II and VI thereof.
(15)  Considerations relating to freedom of association and freedom of expression, in particular freedom of the press and freedom of expression in other media have led in many Member States to procedural guarantees and to special rules in national law as to the determination or limitation of liability.
...”
Article 1 of the decision, entitled “Offences concerning racism and xenophobia” provides, in so far as relevant:
“1.  Each Member State shall take the measures necessary to ensure that the following intentional conduct is punishable:
...
(c)  publicly condoning, denying or grossly trivialising crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes as defined in Articles 6, 7 and 8 of the Statute of the International Criminal Court, directed against a group of persons or a member of such a group defined by reference to race, colour, religion, descent or national or ethnic origin when the conduct is carried out in a manner likely to incite to violence or hatred against such a group or a member of such a group;
(d)  publicly condoning, denying or grossly trivialising the crimes defined in Article 6 of the Charter of the International Military Tribunal appended to the London Agreement of 8 August 1945, directed against a group of persons or a member of such a group defined by reference to race, colour, religion, descent or national or ethnic origin when the conduct is carried out in a manner likely to incite to violence or hatred against such a group or a member of such a group.
For the purpose of paragraph 1, Member States may choose to punish only conduct which is either carried out in a manner likely to disturb public order or which is threatening, abusive or insulting.
...
Any Member State may, on adoption of this Framework Decision or later, make a statement that it will make punishable the act of denying or grossly trivialising the crimes referred to in paragraph 1 (c) and/or (d) only if the crimes referred to in these paragraphs have been established by a final decision of a national court of this Member State and/or an international court, or by a final decision of an international court only.”
Article 7 of the decision, entitled “Constitutional rules and fundamental principles”, provides:
This Framework Decision shall not have the effect of modifying the obligation to respect fundamental rights and fundamental legal principles, including freedom of expression and association, as enshrined in Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union.
This Framework Decision shall not have the effect of requiring Member States to take measures in contradiction to fundamental principles relating to freedom of association and freedom of expression, in particular freedom of the press and the freedom of expression in other media as they result from constitutional traditions or rules governing the rights and responsibilities of, and the procedural guarantees for, the press or other media where these rules relate to the determination or limitation of liability.
In its report on the decision’s implementation, issued on 27 January 2014 (COM (2014) 27 final), the Commission noted that out of the Member States which had specifically criminalised the conduct set out in Article 1 § 1 (c) of the decision (see paragraph 85 above), France, Italy, Latvia, Luxembourg and Romania did not require that the conduct be carried out in a manner likely to incite to violence and hatred, whereas Bulgaria, Portugal, Slovenia and Spain required more than a mere likelihood of incitement. The Commission went on to note that thirteen Member States – Austria, Belgium, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, the Netherlands, Sweden and the United Kingdom – had no criminal-law provisions governing such conduct. Germany and the Netherlands had stated that national case-law applicable to Holocaust denial or trivialisation would also apply to the conduct covered by that Article.
Some Member States had made use of the possibility under Article 1 § 2 of the decision (see paragraph 85 above) to punish hate speech only if it was carried out in a manner likely to disturb public order or was threatening, abusive or insulting. Cyprus and Slovenia had opted for both alternatives. Germany made all such conduct dependent on being capable of disturbing the public peace. Similarly, Hungarian case-law pointed to such conduct being dependent on a likely disturbance of public peace. In Malta and Lithuania, the offence of condoning, denial or trivialisation hinged on either of the two options.
Cyprus, France, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Romania and Slovakia had, in relation to denials or gross trivialisations of the crimes defined in the Rome Statute, availed themselves of the possibility under Article 1 § 4 of the decision to only punish such conduct if those crimes had been established by a competent national or international court (see paragraph 85 above).
The Commission concluded that a number of Member States had not transposed fully or correctly the decision’s provisions. It said that in the course of 2014 it would engage in dialogue with those States with a view to ensuring the decision’s proper transposition, while giving due consideration to freedom of expression.
In the Chamber proceedings, the Swiss Government submitted a comparative law study (opinion 06-184) issued on 19 December 2006 by the Swiss Institute of Comparative Law. This study analysed the legislation of fourteen European countries (Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom), the United States and Canada regarding the offence of denial of crimes against humanity, in particular genocide. The summary of the study reads:
“A study of denial of crimes against humanity and genocide in the different countries under examination reveals considerable variation.
Spain, France and Luxembourg have all adopted an extensive approach to the prohibition of denial of these crimes. Spanish legislation refers generically to the denial of acts with the proven purpose of fully or partially eliminating an ethnic, racial or religious group. The perpetrator faces a sentence of one to two years’ imprisonment. In France and Luxembourg, the legislation refers to denial of crimes against humanity, as defined in Article 6 of the Charter of the International Military Tribunal, annexed to the London Agreement of 8 August 1945 ... This limitation of the substantive scope of the offence of denial of crimes against humanity is offset in Luxembourg by the fact that there is a special provision concerning denial of crimes of genocide. Denial of such crimes is punishable by the same sentences [imprisonment from eight days to six months and/or a fine ranging from 251 to 25,000 euros] as denial of crimes against humanity but the definition of genocide used for these purposes is that of the Luxembourg Law of 8 August 1985, which is general and abstract, not being limited to acts committed during the Second World War. The limited scope of the relevant provisions in France has been criticised and it should be noted in this connection that a Bill aimed at criminalising denial of the existence of the Armenian genocide was approved at its first reading by the National Assembly on 12 October 2006. Accordingly, it appears that only Luxembourg and Spain criminalise denial of crimes of genocide in their legislation, generically and without restricting themselves to particular episodes in history. In addition, denial of crimes against humanity in general is not currently a criminal offence in any country.
In this connection, in a group of countries – among which France can be included, from an analysis of its laws – only the denial of acts committed during the Second World War is a criminal offence. In Germany, for example, anyone who, publicly or at a meeting, denies or trivialises acts committed with the aim of totally or partially eliminating a national, religious or ethnic group during the National Socialist regime is punishable by up to five years’ imprisonment or a fine. In Austria, anyone who, acting in such a way that his or her position may be known by a large number of people, denies or severely trivialises genocide or other crimes against humanity committed by the National Socialist regime is punishable by up to ten years’ imprisonment. Following the same approach, Belgian law punishes by imprisonment for between eight days and one year anyone who denies or grossly trivialises, seeks to justify or approves of the genocide committed by the German National Socialist regime.
In other countries, in the absence of special statutory provision for criminal offences, the courts have intervened to ensure that negationism is punished. In particular, the Netherlands Supreme Court has held that the provisions of the Criminal Code prohibiting discriminatory acts were to be applied to punish denial of crimes against humanity. In addition, a Bill aimed at criminalising negationism is currently being examined in that country. The Canadian Human Rights Tribunal has referred to the criminal offence of exposing others to hatred or contempt, as provided for in the Canadian Human Rights Act, as a basis for condemning the content of a negationist website. The position of the judges in the United States is less settled, since that country affords extremely strict protection of freedom of expression, for historical and cultural reasons. However, it may be noted that in general, victims of offensive speech have to date succeeded in obtaining damages where they may legitimately have felt that their physical integrity was under threat.
In addition, there are a range of countries in which denial of crimes against humanity is not directly contemplated by the law. For some of those countries, it is conceivable that this might be covered by the definition of more general criminal offences. For example, under Italian law it is an offence to condone crimes of genocide; however, the boundary between condoning, trivialising and denying crimes is extremely thin. Norwegian law punishes anyone who makes an official statement that is discriminatory or hateful. This definition could conceivably apply to negationism. The Supreme Court has not yet had occasion to rule on this issue. In other countries, for example Denmark and Sweden, the trial courts have taken a position, having agreed to review whether the provisions of criminal law concerning discriminatory or hateful statements may be applied to cases of negationism, although they have not found them to be applicable in the cases before them. In Finland, the political authorities have expressed the view that such provisions are not applicable to negationism. Lastly, neither United Kingdom law nor Irish law deals with negationism.”
The Chamber went on to note that since the publication of this study in 2006, there had been significant developments in France and Spain.
In France, an Act had been enacted on 29 January 2001 (Law no. 2001-70) with a single section, reading:
“France publicly recognises the Armenian genocide of 1915.”
After that, on 23 January 2012 the French Parliament had passed an Act whose section 1 made it an offence to publicly condone, deny or grossly trivialise genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, as “defined non-exhaustively” in Articles 6, 7 and 8 of the [Rome Statute], Articles 211-1 and 212-1 of the French Criminal Code, and Article 6 of the Charter of the International Military Tribunal, “and as recognised by law, in an international treaty signed and ratified by France or to which France has acceded, in a decision taken by a European Union or an international institution, or as characterised by a French court, such decision being enforceable in France”. Section 2 of the Act expanded the list of associations that could act as civil parties in such proceedings.
In a decision of 28 February 2012 (Décision no 2012-647 DC du 28 février 2012) the French Constitutional Council declared this Act unconstitutional in the following terms:
“...
In the applicants’ submission, the referred law infringes the freedom of expression and communication set forth in Article 11 of the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen, as well as the principle that criminal offences and penalties must be defined by law, as enshrined in Article 8 of the Declaration. In so far as they apply, firstly, only to genocides recognised by French law and, secondly, to genocides alone, excluding other crimes against humanity, these provisions also infringe the principle of equality. The applicant parliamentarians further argue that Parliament has exceeded its own authority and breached the principle of separation of powers enshrined in Article 16 of the 1789 Declaration; they likewise allege a breach of the principle of the necessity of punishments as set forth in Article 8 of the 1789 Declaration, freedom of research and the principle that political parties are free to carry on their activities, as enshrined in Article 4 of the Constitution.
Firstly, Article 6 of the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen provides: ‘Law is the expression of the general will ...’ It follows from that Article and from all the other provisions of constitutional status relating to the purpose of the law that, without prejudice to any special provisions envisaged by the Constitution, the law has the function of laying down rules and must accordingly have a normative scope.
Secondly, under Article 11 of the 1789 Declaration: ‘The free communication of ideas and opinions is one of the most precious of the rights of man. Every citizen may, accordingly, speak, write, and print with freedom, but shall be responsible for such abuses of this freedom as shall be defined by law.’ Article 34 of the Constitution provides: ‘The law shall lay down the rules regarding ... civic rights and the fundamental guarantees afforded to citizens for the exercise of their civil liberties’. On that basis, Parliament is at liberty to enact rules regulating the exercise of the right of free communication, freedom of speech, freedom of written expression and freedom of the press; it is also at liberty on that account to establish criminal offences punishing abuses of the exercise of the freedom of expression and communication which undermine public order and the rights of others. However, freedom of expression and communication is all the more precious since its exercise is a precondition for democracy and one of the guarantees of respect for other rights and freedoms. Any restrictions imposed on the exercise of this freedom must be necessary, appropriate and proportionate to the aim pursued.
A legislative provision with the purpose of ‘recognising’ a crime of genocide cannot in itself have the normative scope attaching to the law. However, section 1 of the referred law makes it an offence to dispute or downplay the existence of one or more crimes of genocide ‘recognised as such under French law’. In thereby making it an offence to dispute the existence and the legal characterisation of crimes which it has itself recognised and characterised as such, Parliament has interfered in an unconstitutional manner with the exercise of freedom of expression and communication. Accordingly, there being no need to examine the other complaints, section 1 of the referred law must be declared unconstitutional; and section 2, which is inseparably linked to it, must likewise be declared unconstitutional.
DECIDES:
Article 1.– The Law on criminalising denial of the existence of genocides recognised by law is unconstitutional.
...”
The Chamber went on to note that in a judgment of 7 November 2007 (no. 235/2007; BOE-T-2007-21161) the Spanish Constitutional Court had declared unconstitutional the offence of genocide denial laid down in Article 607 § 2 of the Spanish Criminal Code. As worded before that judgment, that provision had made it an offence to disseminate, by any means, “ideas or doctrines denying or justifying” genocide. As a result of the judgment, the words “denying or” were struck off.
In that judgment the Spanish Constitutional Court noted that Spain did not have a “militant democracy” and that its Constitution, which lacked a provision akin to Article 17 of the Convention, did not prohibit speech contrary to its essence unless it could effectively harm constitutional rights. The court went on to say that incitement to genocide or racial or ethnic hatred were criminalised under other provisions of the Criminal Code, in line with Spain’s international law obligations. Some other States, which had been particularly affected by the genocide committed under national-socialism, had also criminalised denial of the Holocaust. In reviewing whether Article 607 § 2 of the Criminal Code was compatible with the constitutional right to freedom of expression, the court sought to determine the exact way in which this Article was to be construed. It noted that it criminalised both denial and justification of genocide. In the court’s view, denial was to be understood as maintaining that certain acts had not taken place or had not been carried out in such a way as to be classified as genocide, whereas justification did not entail denying outright the existence of a genocide but relativising it or denying that it was illegal, by identifying to some extent with its perpetrators. The salient question was whether these two forms of expression were “hate speech” as outlined in this Court’s case-law. Mere denial was not, for it could not in itself give rise to a climate of hostility towards a group that had been the victim of a genocide whose reality was disputed. It could therefore only be prohibited if it was in fact conducive to an attitude of hostility towards such a group – all the more because mere conclusions about the existence or otherwise of specific acts, not accompanied by value judgments about those acts or their illegality, fell also within the scope of academic freedom, which was constitutionally entitled to an even higher degree of protection. However, Article 607 § 2 did not contain such a limiting requirement. It thus outlawed conduct that did not constitute even a potential danger and could not therefore be constitutionally criminalised. Justification, on the other hand, being a value judgment, could in some cases be regarded as a means to indirectly incite to genocide. If it presented a genocide as right and thus incited to hatred towards a specific group, it could lead to a climate of hostility and violence, and was thus properly criminalised. Conduct that was disrespectful or degrading for a group of people could properly be outlawed.
Lastly, the Chamber noted the relevant provisions of Luxembourg’s criminal law.
In addition to the above materials, the Grand Chamber had available to it several treatises and articles (M. Whine, Expanding Holocaust Denial and Legislation Against It, in I. Hare and J. Weinstein (eds.), Extreme Speech and Democracy, OUP, Oxford, 2009, pp. 538-56; C. Tomuschat, Prosecuting Denials of Past Alleged Genocides, in The UN Genocide Convention, A Commentary, P. Gaeta (ed.), OUP, Oxford, 2009, pp. 513-30; M. Imbleau, Denial of the Holocaust, Genocide, and Crimes Against Humanity: A Comparative Overview of Ad Hoc Statutes, in L. Hennebel and T. Hochmann (eds.), Genocide Denials and the Law, OUP, Oxford, 2011, pp. 235-77; N. Droin, État des lieux de la répression du négationnisme en France et en droit comparé, RTDH 2014, no. 98, pp. 363-93; and P. Lobba, A European Halt to Laws Against Genocide Denial?, European Criminal Law Review, Volume 4, Number 1 (April 2014), pp. 59-77) that shed light on more recent developments in this area of the law. A perusal of those materials, complemented by the above-mentioned developments and more recent information available to the Grand Chamber, shows that among the High Contracting Parties there are now essentially four types of regimes in this domain, in terms of scope of the offence of genocide denial: (a) States, such as Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, the Netherlands and Romania, that only criminalise the denial of the Holocaust or more generally of Nazi crimes (Romania in addition criminalises the Nazi extermination of the Roma, and Greece criminalises, on top of the Holocaust and Nazi crimes, the denial of genocides recognised by an international court or its own Parliament); (b) States, such as the Czech Republic and Poland, that criminalise the denial of Nazi and communist crimes; (c) States, such as Andorra, Cyprus, Hungary, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Malta, Slovakia, Slovenia and Switzerland, that criminalise the denial of any genocide (Lithuania in addition specifically criminalises denial of Soviet and Nazi crimes vis-à-vis the Lithuanians, but Cyprus only criminalises the denial of genocides recognised as such by a competent court); and (d) States, such as Finland, Italy, Spain (following the 2007 judgment of its Constitutional Court cited in paragraph 96 above), the United Kingdom and the Scandinavian States, that do not have special provisions criminalising such conduct.