The case originated in an application (no. 12668/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mr Denis Aleksandrovich Lambin, a Russian national, on 28 January 2008.
The Russian Government ("the Government") were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant complained, in particular, of having had insufficient time and facilities for the preparation of his defence and about his trial in camera.
On 6 September 2016 those complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1984 and is currently being detained in a correctional colony in the village of Torbeyevo, Mordovia Republic, Russia.
On 21 April 2005 the applicant was convicted during a public hearing of murder and was sentenced to imprisonment. He and his lawyer had had thirty-five minutes to study the case file, which consisted of five volumes. The conviction was upheld on appeal in a public hearing on 18 August 2005 (“the 2005 proceedings”).
On 30 July 2010 the appeal judgment was quashed by way of a supervisory review (on grounds not related to the applicant’s Article 6 complaints in respect of the 2005 proceedings) as the applicant’s right to defence had been breached during the appeal hearing. The case was sent for fresh examination on appeal.
The applicant was allowed to re-read the case file within the new appeal proceedings. He and his lawyer had five days, from 4 to 8 October 2010, to study the now six-volume case file (about 1,500 pages) in remand prison no. IZ-24/1 in Krasnoyarsk, where the applicant was being detained. The applicant was allegedly held in a metal cage while studying the case, without a table or any other facilities to take notes. After studying the case file both the applicant and the lawyer filed appeals. In his appeal statements the applicant analysed the case materials in detail, referred extensively to all the main items of evidence, including expert opinions and witness testimony, and referred to exact pages in the case file.
The applicant’s case was examined by the Supreme Court of Russia (“the Supreme Court”) over four hearings, three of which (21 October, 30 November and 16 December 2010), according to the trial record and the court’s procedural decisions, were held in camera. The case file did not contain any formal decision by the Supreme Court to close the hearings to the public. The applicant was represented by two lawyers who confirmed to the court that they had had enough time to study the case file.
On 16 December 2010 the Supreme Court upheld the judgment of 21 April 2005. The Supreme Court’s judgment was delivered to the remand prison, where the applicant was still being detained, on 11 January 2011 (“the 2010 proceedings”).
Article 241 of the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure at the material time provided for public hearings by default, unless otherwise prescribed by law.
Holding a hearing in camera was possible on the basis of a court decision if:
- the proceedings could lead to the disclosure of a State secret or other classified information;
- the case concerned crimes committed by minors;
- proceedings concerning sex crimes or other crimes could lead to the disclosure of sensitive information on parties’ private lives or to the disclosure of humiliating information;
- a hearing in camera was essential for the safety of parties and their relatives.
A court decision on holding a hearing in camera was to give the exact factual circumstances on which that decision had been based. Such a decision could concern the entire proceedings or a part thereof.
Article 217 of the Code of Criminal Procedure at the material time stated that after the completion of an investigation the investigator had to provide the accused and his or her lawyer with the case file. The time for studying the case file could not be limited unless the accused and the lawyer were manifestly prolonging the studying process.
Under Article 227 of the Code an accused and his or her lawyer could ask for additional time to study the case file after a case had been remitted to the trial court.