The case originated in an application (no. 48982/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Yuriy Ignatyevich Rudakov (“the applicant”), on 12 August 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr Ye. Nazarov, a lawyer practising in Staryj Oskol, Belgorod Region. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his detention pending the study of the case file had been unlawful and that his detention as a whole had not been based on relevant and sufficient grounds.
On 25 March 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1956 and lives in Chernyanka, a village in Belgorod Region.
.  On 10 October and 16 November 2007 criminal proceedings were instituted against the management of the Kristall-Group holding (“the holding”) under Articles 176 § 1 (loan fraud) and 159 § 3 (fraud) of the Criminal Code.
.  On 18 November 2007 criminal proceedings were instituted against the applicant, director general of the holding, on suspicion of fraud and loan fraud under Articles 159 § 3 and 176 § 1 of the Criminal Code respectively. On the same day the applicant was arrested in Kursk. Criminal cases against the management of the holding were joined to the criminal case against the applicant.
On the same day (18 November 2007) the investigator questioned witnesses L. and D., the applicant’s subordinates. L. claimed that the applicant had told him to temporarily leave Belgorod Region and not to divulge anything to the police. D. claimed that he feared the applicant, who was, in his opinion, capable of anything in order to evade criminal liability.
.  On 19 November 2007 Sverdlovskiy District Court of Belgorod (“the District Court”) decided to remand the applicant in custody. The court held as follows:
“... Substantiating the request [for application of a custodial measure], the investigator indicated that [the applicant] might try to flee from the pre-trial investigation and the court, as well as obstruct the administration of justice. Those arguments have been confirmed. The court came to this conclusion for the following reasons.
When the criminal cases were opened in respect of the unlawful actions of the management of the holding, investigative actions were carried out in the course of which it was necessary to question [the applicant] ... The suspect has a permanent place of residence, employment and a family. Nevertheless, for a long time the investigating authorities could not get hold of [the applicant] either through his work, his family, or his place of residence.
The arguments advanced by the prosecution to the effect that [the applicant], using his office, exerted pressure on the witnesses in the case, have also been confirmed ...
These circumstances counter the arguments to the contrary advanced by the defence ...
In view of the above, the court considers it impossible to impose on [the applicant] any other, more lenient, preventive measure, and deems the arguments by the prosecution to be substantiated and sufficient for applying the preventive measure of detention ...”
.  On 27 November 2007 the applicant was charged with two counts of fraudulently obtaining a loan under Article 176 § 1 of the Criminal Code.
.  On 28 November 2007 Belgorod Regional Court (“the Regional Court”) upheld the detention order of 19 November 2007 on appeal.
.  On 15 January, 4 March and 8 May 2008 the District Court extended the applicant’s detention until 10 March, 18 May and 18 July 2008 respectively. The court opined that the grounds for holding the applicant in custody were still valid. It considered that the risk of the applicant’s absconding or otherwise interfering with the proceedings had been supported by statements of witness L. (see paragraph 8 above) and the fact that when the police had identified the applicant’s whereabouts in Kursk he had tried to escape. The court considered and rejected other pertinent facts, such as the fact that since 8 December 2007 the applicant had no longer been director general of the holding, that the suspicion under Article 159 § 3 of the Criminal Code had been dropped, and that the applicant had a permanent place of residence, a family, and positive references. The court further held that the time spent by the applicant in detention had not exceeded the reasonable limits, that the proceedings were being conducted diligently and that less stringent preventive measures could not secure the applicant’s proper conduct during the preliminary investigation. On 22 January, 13 March and 19 May 2008 respectively, the Regional Court upheld the above extension orders on appeal.
.  In the meantime, on 8 February 2008 criminal proceedings were instituted against the applicant under Article 199 § 2 of the Criminal Code (tax evasion), and on 4 May 2008 the applicant was charged with five counts of loan fraud and tax evasion under Articles 176 § 1 and 199 § 2 of the Criminal Code respectively.
.  On 23 May 2008 the prosecution discontinued the criminal proceedings on suspicion of fraud under Article 159 § 3 of the Criminal Code in the absence of constituent elements of the above offence.
On 28 May 2008 the applicant and his lawyer were informed that the pre-trial investigation had been terminated and were given access to the case file.
.  On 7 July 2008 the investigator requested the court to extend the applicant’s detention. The investigator noted, in particular, that pre-trial investigation had been completed and that on 28 May 2008 the applicant had been given access to the case file, comprising one hundred volumes. However, by the end of a month he had only studied twenty-three volumes. Considering the case volume the investigator requested that the applicant’s detention be extended for at least two months.
On 11 July 2008 the District Court, reiterating the reasons which prompted the application of the custodial measure to the applicant and noting the considerable volume of the case file which the applicant had been unable to study in full, extended the applicant’s detention until 18 September 2008. The Court also noted that it had failed to establish any new circumstances warranting the alteration or termination of the custodial measure. On 23 July 2008 the Regional Court upheld the above decision on appeal.
On 17 September and 6 October 2008 the District Court extended the applicant’s detention pending study of the case file until 10 October and 18 November 2008 respectively, that is for a total duration of twelve months. The Court again noted the gravity of the charges against the applicant, the considerable volume of the case file, of which the applicant had read only eighty-two and ninety volumes respectively, and the absence of any grounds for altering or terminating the custodial measure. On 25 September and 20 October 2008 the Regional Court upheld the above extension orders on appeal.
.  On 11 November 2008 the Regional Court extended the applicant’s detention pending study of the case file until 10 January 2009. The court held, in particular, that upon completion of the investigation the applicant had been given access to the case file in compliance with the time-limit set out in Article 109 § 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure; that since the applicant had not finished reading the case file before the expiry of the maximum period of detention (he had read ninety-nine volumes of the case file and studied 1,300 additional pages of material evidence, and there remained one more volume of the case file and 15,600 additional pages of material evidence to read) the provisions of Article 109 § 7 of the Code of Criminal Procedure had allowed the investigator to request a further extension of the period of detention; that the grounds for application of the custodial measure persisted; that application of a less stringent preventive measure had not been possible despite the arguments put forward by the applicant; that the investigation had been particularly complex due to the volume of the case involving several episodes; that no evidence had been submitted to the effect that the applicant’s health prevented him from remaining in custody, and that the applicant had made no complaints regarding the conditions of his detention. On 23 December 2008 the Supreme Court of Russia upheld the above extension order on appeal.
On 30 December 2008 the Regional Court further extended the applicant’s detention for an unlimited period of time while the applicant and his defence counsel finished studying the case file. On 24 February 2009 the Supreme Court of Russia upheld the above decision on appeal.
.  On 16 March and 19 March 2009 respectively the applicant’s defence counsel and the applicant completed studying the case file.
.  On 7 April 2009 the case file was remitted to the trial court.
.  On 7 September 2009 the District Court convicted the applicant of setting up fraudulent loans and tax evasion under Articles 176 § 1 and 199 § 1 of the Criminal Code respectively and sentenced him to three years and six months’ imprisonment.
.  On 18 November 2009 the Regional Court upheld the applicant’s conviction on appeal.
.  The applicant challenged the compatibility with the Constitution of the provisions of Article 109 §§ 4, 7 and 8 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in so far as they allowed the extension of detention “pending investigation” beyond the maximum time-limit and for an unlimited duration while the defendant read the material of the case file.
.  On 30 January 2009 the Constitutional Court declined to examine the applicant’s complaint, relying on its findings in the case of Mr Ye. (see Relevant domestic law and practice section below).
.  The applicant once again challenged the compatibility of Article 109 §§ 4, 7 and 8 of the Code with the Constitution. In addition to his previous concerns the applicant contended that he had been discriminated against in comparison with other detainees in respect of whom the investigation had not been completed within the authorised detention period and others who had been granted access to the case material less than one month before the expiry of the authorised detention period, and who could therefore benefit from immediate release.
.  On 19 March 2009 the Constitutional Court declined to examine the applicant’s complaint. Reference was again made to the case of Mr Ye.
.  Article 22 of the Constitution provides that everyone shall have the right to freedom and inviolability of person. It further provides that arrest, detention and remand in custody shall be allowed only by a court decision.
Article 15 of the Criminal Code provides that serious offences are premeditated offences for which the Criminal Code prescribes a maximum penalty of between five and ten years’ imprisonment. Particularly serious offences are premeditated offences for which the Code prescribes a maximum penalty of more than ten years’ imprisonment or a heavier penalty.
.  Large-scale fraud is punishable by up to six years’ imprisonment (Article 159 § 3 of the Code).
.  Loan fraud is punishable by up to five years’ imprisonment (Article 176 § 1 of the Code).
.  Large-scale tax evasion is punishable by up to two years’ imprisonment (Article 199 § 1 of the Code).
Particularly large-scale tax evasion is punishable with up to six years’ imprisonment (Article 199 § 2 of the Code).
The police may arrest a person suspected of committing an offence punishable by imprisonment if the person is caught in the act of committing an offence or immediately after committing it. No judicial authority is required for the arrest (Article 91).
.  Within forty-eight hours of the time of the arrest a suspect must be released if a preventive measure in the form of remand in custody has not been imposed on the person or a final decision has not been deferred by a court. When remand in custody is deemed necessary, an application must be lodged to that effect with a district court by a prosecutor or by an investigator with the consent of a prosecutor (Article 94).
.  “Preventive measures” or “measures of restraint” (меры пресечения) include an undertaking not to leave a town or region, personal surety, bail and detention (Article 98). If necessary, the suspect or accused may be asked to give an undertaking to appear (обязательство о явке) (Article 112).
.  When deciding on a preventive measure, the competent authority is required to consider whether there are “sufficient grounds to believe” that the accused would abscond during the investigation or trial, reoffend or obstruct the establishment of the truth (Article 97). It must also take into account the gravity of the charge, information on the accused’s character, his or her profession, age, state of health, family status and other circumstances (Article 99).
Detention may be ordered by a court if the charge carries a sentence of at least two years’ imprisonment, provided that a less restrictive preventive measure cannot be applied (Article 108 § 1).
.  After arrest the suspect is placed in custody “pending investigation”. The period of detention “pending investigation” must not exceed two months (Article 109 § 1).
If the investigation cannot be completed within the two-month timelimit, and in the absence of any grounds for lifting or altering the preventive measure, the period of detention pending investigation may be extended to up to six months. Further extensions to up to twelve months are possible only in relation to persons accused of serious or particularly serious criminal offences, in view of the complexity of the case and if there are grounds justifying detention (Article 109 § 2).
In exceptional circumstances detention pending the investigation may be extended to up to eighteen months in respect of detainees charged with a particularly serious criminal offence (Article 109 § 3).
.  Extension of detention beyond eighteen months is prohibited and the detainee must be released immediately, unless the prosecution’s request for an extension for the purpose of studying the case has been granted by a court in accordance with Article 109 § 8 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Article 109 § 4).
Upon completion of the investigation, the detainee must be given access to the case file no later than thirty days before the expiry of the maximum period of detention indicated in paragraphs 2 and 3 (Article 109 § 5).
.  If access is granted on a later date the detainee must be released after the expiry of the maximum period of detention (Article 109 § 6).
If access is granted thirty days before the expiry of the maximum period of detention but the thirty-day period proves insufficient to read the entire case file, the investigator may request the court to extend the period of detention. The request must be submitted no later than seven days before the expiry of the detention period (Article 109 § 7).
Within five days of receipt of a request for an extension, the judge must decide whether to grant it or reject it and release the detainee. If the extension is granted the period of detention is extended until such time as will be sufficient for the detainee and counsel to finish reading the case file and for the prosecution to submit the case to the trial court (Article 109 § 8).
.  Once the defendant has finished reading the file, the prosecutor sends the case to the trial court and from that date the detention is classified as “during judicial proceedings”). The period of detention “during judicial proceedings” is calculated up to the date the judgment is given. It may not normally exceed six months, but if the case concerns serious or particularly serious criminal offences, the trial court may approve one or more extensions of no longer than three months each (Article 255 §§ 2 and 3).
Examining the compatibility of Article 97 of the RSFSR Code of Criminal Procedure (now replaced by Article 109 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the sole difference between the two Articles being that Article 97, in contrast to the new Article 109, imposed a six-month limitation on the maximum period of detention for the purpose of studying the case file) with the Constitution, on 13 June 1996 the Constitutional Court ruled as follows:
“... affording the defendant sufficient time for studying the file must not result in ... his being detained indefinitely. Indefinite detention would amount to punishment of the defendant for exercising his procedural rights and thereby inducing him to waive those rights ...”
On 25 December 1998 the Constitutional Court issued a further clarification of its position (decision no. 167-O), finding as follows:
“3.  ... the studying of the file [by the defendant and his counsel] is a necessary condition for extending the term of detention [beyond eighteen months] but it may not be taken on its own as a sufficient ground for granting such an extension... For that reason, in each case the prosecutor’s application for extending the period of detention beyond eighteen months (Article 97 §§ 4, 6 of the RSFSR Code of Criminal Procedure) must refer not to the fact that the defendant and his counsel continue to study the file... but rather to factual information demonstrating that this preventive measure cannot be revoked and the legal grounds for its continued application remain ...
... Article 97 § 5 of the RSFSR Code of Criminal Procedure expressly provides that, on an application by a prosecutor, a judge may extend a defendant’s detention until such time as the defendant and his counsel have finished studying the file and the prosecutor has submitted it to the [trial] court, but by no longer than six months. Accordingly, the law does not provide for the lodging of repeated applications for extension of the defendant’s detention, even after an additional investigation [has been carried out] ... In the absence of an express legal provision for repeated extensions of detention on that ground, any other interpretation of [Article 97] would breach the prohibition on arbitrary detention within the meaning of the Constitutional Court’s decision of 13 June 1996.”
By its decision no. 184-O of 6 June 2003 the Constitutional Court declined to examine a complaint by a Mr Ye., in which he challenged the compatibility with the Constitution of Article 109 § 8 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in so far as it allowed the extension of detention pending investigation beyond the maximum time-limit and indefinitely while the defendant finished reading the material in the case file. The Constitutional Court held that such an extension was only possible if there still existed “sufficient grounds to believe” that the accused might abscond during the investigation or trial, reoffend or otherwise obstruct the establishment of the truth, as provided by Article 97 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. In so far as the challenged provision did not set a specific time-limit for holding the defendant in custody while he studied the case file, the Constitutional Court considered that it allowed for the possibility of determining such a time-limit for each particular case, depending on its specific features, on condition that the grounds for detention established in Article 97 had been sufficiently confirmed. The court concluded that the challenged provision could not be interpreted as providing for superfluous or unlimited detention. Neither did it deprive the defendant and his counsel of the right to challenge before a higher court the lawfulness and validity of the extension order, as well as to make an application for lifting or altering the custodial measure.
.  By decision no. 352-O of 11 July 2006, the Constitutional Court confirmed its position, by reference to above-cited decision no. 167-O, that in the absence of an express provision to that effect, time-limits during a pre-trial investigation may not be repeatedly extended, particularly on the same grounds, in excess of the maximum time-limit set out in the Code of Criminal Procedure.
.  By its decision no. 271-O-O of 19 March 2009, the Constitutional Court declined to examine a similar complaint by a Mr R. With reference to its previous decisions of 13 June 1996, 25 December 1998 and 6 June 2003, the Constitutional Court held that even though Article 109 § 8 did not define the maximum period within which an extension could be granted for the purpose of studying the case file, it did not imply the possibility of excessive or unlimited detention because, in granting an extension, the court should not rely solely on a well-founded suspicion that the defendant had committed the offence, but should mainly base its decision on specific circumstances justifying the continued detention, such as his potential to exert pressure on witnesses or an established risk of his absconding or reoffending, as well as the importance of the subject matter of the proceedings, the complexity of the case, the conduct of the defendant, and other relevant factors.
In its decision no. 22 of 29 October 2009 “On the Application by the Courts of Preventive Measures in the Form of Remand in Custody, Bail and House Arrest” the Plenum of the Supreme Court held as follows: