The case originated in an application (no. 34528/13) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four Azerbaijani nationals, Ms Zarifa Seyfi gizi Mahaddinova (Zərifə Seyfi qızı Məhəddinova – “the first applicant”), Ms Natavan Movsum gizi Salimzade (Natavan Mövsüm qızı Səlimzadə – “the second applicant”), Ms Kamala Kamal gizi Khalilova (Kəmalə Kamal qızı Xəlilova – “the third applicant”) and Ms Mardana Abbasgulu gizi Huseynova (Mərdanə Abbasqulu qızı Hüseynova – “the fourth applicant”) (“the applicants”) on 13 May 2013.
The applicants were represented by Mr I. Aliyev, a lawyer based in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
The first and second applicants complained that they had been illtreated during the dispersal of assemblies, and that the domestic authorities had failed to investigate their complaints in this respect. The applicants also complained that their right to freedom of assembly had been violated and that they had been hindered in the exercise of their right of individual application.
On 18 May and 11 December 2017 the Government were given notice of the first and second applicants’ complaints under Article 3 of the Convention, the applicants’ complaints under Articles 11 and 34 of the Convention, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants’ particulars are given in the Appendix.
All applicants were members and activists of the Popular Front Party of Azerbaijan.
They attended unauthorised opposition demonstrations organised by the Ictimai Palata group, held in Baku on 14 and 21 May 2012. According to the applicants, the participants in the demonstration of 14 May 2012 were demanding action against corruption and violation of human rights, and reportedly on 21 May 2012 they were demanding the release of political prisoners detained in Azerbaijan. The applicants submitted that the demonstrations had been intended to be peaceful and had been conducted in a peaceful manner.
Shortly after the applicants joined the demonstrations, the police started to disperse the protesters.
According to the first applicant, shortly after the police operation to disperse the demonstration of 14 May 2012 had started, around six or seven police officers pushed her so that she almost fell off a ladder, save that the fourth applicant held onto her. She also claimed that a police officer, whom she did not know, had slapped her neck and she had suddenly become unable to control her physical movements and her vision had temporarily darkened. According to the applicant, she felt pain in her right shoulder, right ear and eyes for a long time afterwards. Subsequently, she was forcibly put on a bus by the police, together with six or seven other female participants in the demonstration, and was released after being driven around in the city for some time.
According to the first applicant, during the 21 May 2012 demonstration, several police officers swore at her and applied physical force to her, as a result of which she had bruises for several months. Police officers dragged her by both hands to a car. She was in pain and shouted and was released by the police with the second applicant’s help.
According to the second applicant, on 14 May 2012 the police pushed her and she fell to the ground, sustaining injuries and pain. She also claimed that the police officers swore at her and intentionally touched some parts of her body to humiliate her as a woman (such as pressing her breasts).
She further submitted that on 21 May 2012 the police officers had pushed her towards a ladder and she had fallen to the ground, sustaining a contusion. The officers dragged her through the street by her hands. She lost consciousness. The applicant submitted that she had to spend two hours in hospital that day.
According to the third applicant, during the dispersal of the demonstration of 14 May 2012 a police officer hit her in the knee hard and swore at her. Later, the police forcibly put her on a bus which was being used to remove people from the demonstration venue.
According to the third applicant, at the demonstration of 21 May 2012 the same officer insulted her again, and at the Sabail District Police Office, where she was taken by the police, the police officer swore at her.
According to the fourth applicant, during the 14 May 2012 demonstration a police officer hit her from behind and pushed her aside. As she tried to help the second applicant, police officers grabbed her and pushed her towards a car. When she tried to escape from him, a police officer stepped on her foot to stop her.
According to the fourth applicant, during the 21 May 2012 demonstration she was taken to the Sabail District Police Office in order to stop her participation in the demonstration.
On various dates the applicants complained to the Sabail district prosecutor’s office, requesting that a criminal investigation be instituted into their ill-treatment during the dispersal of the assemblies.
The Sabail district prosecutor’s office questioned police officers from the Sabail District Police Office, namely police officers A.R., M.B., and A.J., in respect of the complaints of all of the applicants. Police officers S.G. and E.M. were also questioned in respect of the fourth applicant’s complaint. All officers stated that they had not applied physical force to any of the participants at the demonstration, including the applicants, but had warned the participants to disperse.
The applicants were questioned, and they reiterated their complaints regarding ill-treatment by the police. Apart from the third applicant, they all submitted video footage and photographs taken during the demonstrations.
A forensic expert, who was appointed following criminal complaints lodged by the first and second applicants on 21 May 2012, examined the first and second applicants on 25 and 31 May 2012 and then issued forensic reports on 29 and 31 May 2012 respectively, according to which there were no traces of any injuries on them. The third and fourth applicants refused to be examined by the forensic expert, claiming that the signs of ill-treatment had disappeared with the passage of time.
By decisions of 1 June 2012 in respect of the first and second applicants, a decision of 6 July 2012 in respect of the third applicant, and a decision of 30 June 2012 in respect of the fourth applicant, the Sabail district prosecutor’s office refused to open criminal cases. The Sabail district prosecutor office addressed the applicants’ complaints with regard to the demonstration of 14 May 2012, and relied on the police officers’ statements, as well as the lack of proof that the applicants had in fact been injured.
On an unspecified date the applicants lodged a criminal complaint with the Sabail District Court against the refusals to open a criminal case. They complained that the investigation into their complaints had not been effective: the security camera recordings relating to the demonstrations in question had not been reviewed; the witnesses who had observed the police using force against them had not been called or examined; the investigation had not had regard to the video footage and photographs of the demonstrations they had submitted; the police officers questioned by the district prosecutor’s office had been selected randomly, without regard to the officers’ personal involvement in the applicants’ cases; and the district prosecutor’s office had not conducted any investigation into the demonstration of 21 May 2012 despite the applicants’ specific complaints in this connection.
On 23 October 2012 the Sabail District Court, examining the case in the framework of the judicial supervision procedure, dismissed the applicants’ complaints and found the prosecuting authorities’ refusals to open criminal proceedings lawful. According to that court decision, the applicants participated in unauthorised assemblies on 14 and 21 May 2012 and “were removed from the venue of the unlawful assembly, by being put on buses, for having violated public order and not obeying the police officers”. Furthermore, the court held that the applicants’ claims of having been subjected to attacks and ill-treatment by the police officers concerned had not been proved and the court found no criminal offence in the police officers’ actions. The analysis section of the court’s decision addressed the parties’ submissions concerning the assembly on 14 May 2012.
In an appeal of 5 November 2012 the applicants reiterated their previous complaints.
On 16 November 2012 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the firstinstance court’s decision, dismissing the applicants’ appeal.
The relevant domestic law concerning the prohibition of ill-treatment is summarised in Mustafa Hajili v. Azerbaijan (no. 42119/12, §§ 26-28, 24 November 2016).
The relevant domestic law concerning freedom of assembly and the organisation and holding of public assemblies is summarised in Gafgaz Mammadov v. Azerbaijan (no. 60259/11, §§ 27-30, 15 October 2015).