The case originated in seven applications (nos. 29292/12, 40828/12, 69598/12, 40163/13, 66281/13, 70048/13 and 70065/13) against Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Lithuanian nationals Bogdan Petrulevič, Ričardas Mironovas, Roman Ivanenkov, Romualdas Klintovič, Romualdas Gaska, Vidas Traknys and Dainius Zeleniakas (“the applicants”), on 4 May, 18 June and 16 October 2012, and 14 June, 15 October and 4 November 2013 (the last two applicants), respectively.
The applicant B. Petrulevič was represented by Mr D. Fomkin, a lawyer practising in Vilnius. The applicant R. Mironovas, who was granted legal aid, was represented by Mr S. Tomas. The applicant R. Ivanenkov was represented by Mr R. Lilas, a lawyer practising in Kaunas. The applicants R. Klintovič, R. Gaška, V. Traknys and D. Zeleniakas, who were also granted legal aid, were represented by Mr K. Ašmys, a lawyer practising in Vilnius.
The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by  their Agent Ms Elvyra Baltutytė, and later by their Agent Ms Karolina Bubnytė.
The applicants complained about the conditions of their detention in different Lithuanian prisons. They relied on Article 3 of the Convention.
On 18 January 2013 and 7 January 2014 the applications were communicated to the Government.
The Vilnius Regional Administrative Court established that the applicant had been held in overcrowded cells for just under a year and a half, given that for that duration he had been held in cells where he had less than 5 square metres of personal space. On the basis of Article 21 § 2 of the Constitution, Articles 6.250 and 6.271 of the Civil Code and the Strasbourg Court’s judgment in Savenkovas v. Lithuania (no. 871/02, 18 November 2008), the first-instance court held that because of the overcrowding the applicant’s dignity had suffered. Nonetheless, the court dismissed the applicant’s remaining complaints about the detention conditions in the Lukiškės Remand Prison as not actually proven. It also noted that he had not complained to any authority of the unsanitary conditions in Lukiškės while he had been held there. The court also took into account that after having been transferred to the Pravieniškės Correctional Home, the applicant had undergone a medical examination. The doctors had established that he was healthy, which provided evidence that the conditions of his detention in Lukiškės had had no impact on his health.
Having taken into account the economic conditions in Lithuania, namely, a minimal monthly salary of 800 Lithuanian litai (LTL, approximately 230 euros (EUR)) and an average monthly salary of LTL 2,151 (EUR 620), as well as the Lithuanian administrative courts’ practice in similar cases, the court awarded the applicant LTL 3,000 (EUR 870) in compensation for non-pecuniary damage on account of overcrowding.
The Supreme Administrative Court also established that for 564 days the applicant had been kept at the Lukiškės Remand Prison in inadequate conditions on account of overcrowding, understood by the domestic law requirement to guarantee prisoners 5 square metres of personal space in a remand prison cell. It can be deduced from the Supreme Administrative Court’s analysis of the details of the applicant’s placement in Lukiškės that for 361 days he was held in cells where he had less than 3 square metres of personal space. The Supreme Administrative Court also noted that for most of his detention, namely for 309 days, the applicant had been held in cells where his personal space had been even less than 2.5 square metres. The court noted that, despite the overcrowding, for 366 days out of 564 the applicant had been held in two cells where heating, ventilation, sanitary and electric systems had been renovated in 2004, thus providing him with somewhat better material conditions (geresnėmis buitinėmis sąlygomis, nors ir neužtikrinant minimalios gyvenamojo ploto normos). Nevertheless, he had been held in overcrowded cells for twenty-three hours a day, and the Lukiškės Remand Prison had provided no evidence that the lack of living space had been remedied in any other way. For the court, such conditions went beyond the inevitable element of discomfort connected with detention (it referred to Kudła v. Poland [GC], no. 30210/96, § 92, ECHR 2000XI), degraded the applicant and were in breach of Article 3 of the Convention.
The Supreme Administrative Court also noted that the Strasbourg Court would sometimes hold that finding a violation constituted sufficient just satisfaction. In the instant case, however, the Supreme Administrative Court considered that the degree of the applicant’s suffering called for pecuniary compensation. Moreover, the sum of LTL 3,000 was not sufficient. Yet, the Supreme Administrative Court took into account that the applicant had not lodged a claim for damages until three years after his detention in such conditions had ended, by which time the court considered that the impact on a person’s emotional and physical suffering had decreased (laiko veiksnys asmens patirtas dvasines ir fizines kančias menkina, jos blėsta). The fact that the applicant had not instituted court proceedings for damages until three years after his release from the Lukiškės Remand Prison led the court to the conclusion that his mental suffering (dvasinė skriauda) was not so significant. Furthermore, when detained, the applicant was nineteen to twenty years old. During the hearing before the first-instance court he had acknowledged that he was in a good state of health. Accordingly, the conditions of his detention in Lukiškės had had no negative effect on his health. On the evidence, no other complaints, except for those concerning overcrowding, were found to be substantiated in his case. Lastly, the court held that the applicant had been partly favoured by the first-instance court’s initiative to restore the time-limit for lodging a claim for damages. It was therefore reasonable and just to award LTL 8,000 (approximately EUR 2,300) to compensate him for any non-pecuniary damage.
The Vilnius Regional Administrative Court concluded that the applicant’s right to be treated in appropriate conditions had been breached. It underlined that the flaws could not be justified by a lack of financing for the hospital. The court considered that compensation of LTL 2,000 (EUR 580) would be sufficient for the applicant, taking into account the principles of reasonableness and justice, and the economic situation in Lithuania.
Mr Roman Ivanenkov
Mr Romualdas Klintovič
Mr Romualdas Gaska
By a decision of 23 May 2013, the Supreme Administrative Court acknowledged that there had been overcrowding during the first period of the applicant’s detention in Lukiškės, on account of the prison authorities’ failure to keep up with the domestic law requirement to provide 5 or, later, 3.6 square metres of personal space in the remand prison cells. The court had no doubts that staying in cells that did not meet hygiene standards had caused the applicant mental suffering. Furthermore, even though the applicant had objected to being placed with inmates who smoked, in breach of the domestic legislation, he had been held with smokers for
Mr Dainius Zeleniakas
Article 30 of the Constitution reads as follows:
“The person whose constitutional rights or freedoms are violated shall have the right to apply to court.
Compensation for material and moral [i.e. non-pecuniary] damage inflicted upon a person shall be established by law.”
The Civil Code reads as follows:
Article 6.250. Non-pecuniary damage
“1.  Non-pecuniary damage shall be deemed to be a person’s suffering, emotional experiences, inconveniences, mental shock, emotional depression, humiliation, deterioration of reputation, diminution of possibilities to associate with others, etc., evaluated by a court in terms of money.
Non-pecuniary damage shall be compensated only in cases provided for by law. Non-pecuniary damage shall be compensated in all cases where it is incurred due to crime, health impairment or deprivation of life, as well as in other cases provided for by law. The court, in assessing the amount of non-pecuniary damage, shall take into consideration the consequences of such damage sustained, the gravity of the fault of the person by whom the damage is caused, his financial status, the amount of pecuniary damage sustained by the aggrieved person, and any other circumstances of importance for the case, as well as the criteria of good faith, justice and reasonableness.”
Article 6.271. Liability to compensation for damage caused by unlawful actions of institutions of public authority
“1.  Damage caused by unlawful acts of institutions of public authority must be compensated by the State from the means of the State budget, irrespective of the fault of a concrete public servant or other employee of public authority institutions. Damage caused by unlawful actions of municipal authority institutions must be redressed by the municipality from its own budget, irrespective of its employee’s fault.
For the purposes of this Article, the notion ‘institution of public authority’ means any subject of the public law (state or municipal institution, official, public servant or any other employee of these institutions, etc.), as well as a private person executing functions of public authority.
For the purposes of this Article, the notion ‘action’ means any action (active or passive actions) of an institution of public authority or its employees, that directly affects the rights, liberties and interests of persons (legal acts or individual acts adopted by the institutions of state and municipal authority, administrative acts, physical acts, etc., with the exception of court judgements – verdicts in criminal cases, decisions in civil and administrative cases and orders).
Civil liability of the state or municipality, subject to this Article, shall arise where employees of public authority institutions fail to act in the manner prescribed by law for these institutions and their employees.”
Pursuant to Article 15 § 1 (3) of the Law on Administrative Proceedings (Administracinių bylų teisenos įstatymas), administrative courts decide cases concerning damage caused by unlawful acts of public authorities, as provided for in Article 6.271 of the Civil Code.
The relevant part of the Law on Administrative Proceedings reads as follows:
Article 57. Evidence
“1.  Evidence in an administrative case is all factual data found admissible by the court hearing the case and based upon which the court finds ... that there are circumstances which justify the claims and rebuttals of the parties to the proceedings and other circumstances which are relevant to the fair disposal of the case, or that there are no such circumstances ...
Evidence is provided by the parties and other participants in the proceedings. If necessary, the court may propose to those persons to provide supplementary evidence or, on their request or on its own initiative, to obtain necessary evidence or to obtain explanations from officials.”
In accordance with Hygiene Standard HN 76:1999 (Laisvės atėmimo ir kardomojo kalinimo įstaigos. Įrengimas, eksploatavimo tvarka, sveikatos priežiūra), approved by the Minister of Health on 22 October 1999, an inmate held in a remand prison cell (tardymo izoliatoriaus kamera) or in a prison cell (kalėjimo kamera) must have no less than 5 square metres of personal space.
For persons held at the Prison Department Hospital, the space requirement was established at no less than 7 square metres per bed.
A person held in a dormitory-type room (pataisos darbų kolonijos bendrabučio gyvenamasis kambarys) was entitled to at least 3 square metres of personal space.
According to the secondary legislation adopted by the Minister of Justice, Minister of Health and the Prison Department, as of 30 April 2010, personal space in a dormitory-type room has to be no less than 3.1 square metres.
As of 11 May 2010, persons held in a remand prison cell or arrest cell (areštinės kamera) should have no less than 3.6 square metres of personal space.
Article 69 of the Code for the Execution of Sentences (Bausmių vykdymo kodeksas) provides that a person who has been sentenced to deprivation of liberty is to serve his entire term in the same correctional institution (vienoje pataisos įstaigoje). He may be transferred from that institution only because of illness or in exceptional circumstances. The Code refers to the Internal Regulations of Correctional Facilities (Pataisos įstaigų vidaus tvarkos taisyklės) for further guidance on the matter of prisoners’ transfer.
The Internal Regulations of Correctional Facilities provide that a convicted person may be transferred to another institution “on doctor’s orders” or “for other exceptional circumstances, which prevent holding the convicted person in the same correctional institution (dėl kitų išimtinių aplinkybių, kliudančių nuteistąjį toliau laikyti toje pačioje pataisos įstaigoje)”. The Regulations do not specify what “exceptional circumstances” means. If the governor of the correctional facility considers that there are exceptional circumstances preventing from keeping the inmate in that correctional facility, he may submit a reasoned request (motyvuota išvada) and the prisoner’s character report (charakteristika) to the Prisons Department, which decides whether to transfer the prisoner (point 72 of the Regulations).
Article 19 of the Law on Tobacco Control (Tabako kontrolės įstatymas) provides that smoking is to be prohibited in common living areas and other common areas where non-smokers may be forced to breathe smoke-polluted air.
Article 52 of the Law on Administrative Proceedings at the relevant time provided that the claimant has a right to withdraw the claim or to change or specify the basis for his claim at any stage of the proceedings, but until the moment the court leaves the hearing room to deliberate.
On 1 July 2012 the Law on Probation (Probacijos įstatymas) has come into effect. It defines the major re-socialization forms for persons on probation, and resocialization is set as a fundamental component of probation (also see paragraph 68 below).
To illustrate the criteria applied by the domestic courts when deciding on conditions of detention cases, the Government referred to a number of the Supreme Administrative Court’s judgments. Those principles may be enumerated as follows:
−  the repeated nature of the negative consequences on the prisoner; the courts should evaluate whether some of the violations of the detention conditions complained of by the inmate were eliminated in a timely manner;
−  when the claim for damages was submitted; on numerous occasions the administrative courts considered that the person’s mental and physical suffering was most acute at the time the person was in the inappropriate detention conditions; the person’s suffering diminishes over time;
−  the intentions of the prison personnel; the courts should determine whether the prison administration deliberately sought to humiliate the prisoner or otherwise treat him inhumanely by worsening his detention conditions; conversely, the courts were also to take into account whether the prison administration had made efforts to improve the situation of the detainee;
−  the nature of the detention regime; a minor non-compliance with the minimum space requirement could be partly offset by freedom of movement within the prison;
−  the impact, if any, on the inmate’s health; and
−  whether the inmate had complained about the conditions to the prison administration.
As to compensation for non-pecuniary damage, the Supreme Administrative Court has held a number of times that not all violations caused by improper conditions of detention would necessarily lead to a pecuniary award. Acknowledgment of a violation of a person’s rights may also constitute a sufficient and adequate redress. Nevertheless, such means of redress should only be applied in exceptional cases, where the damage suffered by the aggrieved person was of minor significance, for example when a non-smoker was held with smokers for one day only. The same means of redress applied when the minimum personal space requirement had not been met: this could be considered as a minor violation. Conversely, where the duration of the violation was sufficiently long, a mere acknowledgment of the violation could not be considered as an adequate form of just satisfaction. Last but not least, the standard of living in Lithuania was relevant. The sum of compensation should reflect the State’s economic and financial situation, as well as the living standard.
The relevant extracts from the 2nd General Report by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“the CPT”) (CPT/Inf (92) 3) read as follows:
“46.  Overcrowding is an issue of direct relevance to the CPT’s mandate. All the services and activities within a prison will be adversely affected if it is required to cater for more prisoners than it was designed to accommodate; the overall quality of life in the establishment will be lowered, perhaps significantly. Moreover, the level of overcrowding in a prison, or in a particular part of it, might be such as to be in itself inhuman or degrading from a physical standpoint.
A satisfactory programme of activities (work, education, sport, etc.) is of crucial importance for the well-being of prisoners ... [P]risoners cannot simply be left to languish for weeks, possibly months, locked up in their cells, and this regardless of how good material conditions might be within the cells. The CPT considers that one should aim at ensuring that prisoners in remand establishments are able to spend a reasonable part of the day (8 hours or more) outside their cells, engaged in purposeful activity of a varied nature ...
Specific mention should be made of outdoor exercise. The requirement that prisoners be allowed at least one hour of exercise in the open air every day is widely accepted as a basic safeguard ... It is also axiomatic that outdoor exercise facilities should be reasonably spacious ...
Ready access to proper toilet facilities and the maintenance of good standards of hygiene are essential components of a humane environment ...
The CPT would add that it is particularly concerned when it finds a combination of overcrowding, poor regime activities and inadequate access to toilet/washing facilities in the same establishment. The cumulative effect of such conditions can prove extremely detrimental to prisoners.”
The CPT’s 7th General Report (CPT/Inf (97) 10) contains the following passage:
“13.  As the CPT pointed out in its 2nd General Report, prison overcrowding is an issue of direct relevance to the Committee’s mandate (cf. CPT/Inf (92) 3, paragraph 46).
An overcrowded prison entails cramped and unhygienic accommodation; a constant lack of privacy (even when performing such basic tasks as using a sanitary facility); reduced out-of-cell activities, due to demand outstripping the staff and facilities available; overburdened health-care services; increased tension and hence more violence between prisoners and between prisoners and staff. This list is far from exhaustive.
The CPT has been led to conclude on more than one occasion that the adverse effects of overcrowding have resulted in inhuman and degrading conditions of detention ...”
The CPT’s 11th General Report (CPT/Inf (2001) 16) states:
“28.  The phenomenon of prison overcrowding continues to blight penitentiary systems across Europe and seriously undermines attempts to improve conditions of detention. The negative effects of prison overcrowding have already been highlighted in previous General Reports ...
In a number of countries visited by the CPT, particularly in central and eastern Europe, inmate accommodation often consists of large-capacity dormitories which contain all or most of the facilities used by prisoners on a daily basis, such as sleeping and living areas as well as sanitary facilities. The CPT has objections to the very principle of such accommodation arrangements in closed prisons and those objections are reinforced when, as is frequently the case, the dormitories in question are found to hold prisoners under extremely cramped and insalubrious conditions ...
Large-capacity dormitories inevitably imply a lack of privacy for prisoners in their everyday lives... All these problems are exacerbated when the numbers held go beyond a reasonable occupancy level; further, in such a situation the excessive burden on communal facilities such as washbasins or lavatories and the insufficient ventilation for so many persons will often lead to deplorable conditions.”
Other relevant Council of Europe materials on minimum standards for treatment of prisoners have been cited by the Court in Neshkov and Others v. Bulgaria (nos. 36925/10, 21487/12, 72893/12, 73196/12, 77718/12 and 9717/13, §§ 144 and 148, 27 January 2015), and in Varga and Others v. Hungary (nos. 14097/12, 45135/12, 73712/12, 34001/13, 44055/13, and 64586/13, §§ 34, 36 and 37, 10 March 2015).
A delegation of the CPT visited Lithuania from 21 to 30 April 2008. In its ensuing report, published on 25 June 2009, the CPT noted:
“B.  Prisons
Preliminary remarks
The delegation visited [Pravieniškės] Correction Home No. 3 for the first time. It also carried out follow-up visits to Lukiškės Remand Prison and Prison in Vilnius (hereinafter Lukiškės Remand Prison) and to Kaunas Juvenile Remand Prison and Correction Home, where it paid special attention to the remand prisoners.
[Pravieniškės] Correction Home No. 3 is located in a wooded area of the region of Kaišiadorys, some 30 km to the east of Kaunas. Opened in 1968, it comprises several buildings, most of which have since been renovated or completely rebuilt. The building work included the adaptation of the prisoners’ living areas, in particular the conversion of dormitories into cells (at the time of the visit, there were still a few dormitories, containing up to 15 beds). With an official capacity of 567 places (including 67 places in the arrest section), the correction home was accommodating 250 inmates (including 37 in the arrest section) at the time of the visit. The delegation was informed that, following a decision by the Director of the Ministry of Justice Prisons Department in February 2008, the establishment was in the process of being emptied so that, with effect from 1 July 2008, it could take in prisoners sentenced (for the first time) for serious offences, thereby reducing overcrowding in neighbouring Correction Home No. 2.
Lukiškės Remand Prison was described in the reports on the visits made by the CPT in 2000 and 2004. At the time of the 2008 visit, the prison, with an official capacity of 864, was housing 1,002 prisoners, including approximately 750 remand prisoners and 81 life prisoners.
...
At the start of the visit, the authorities informed the delegation that the situation regarding overcrowding in prisons in Lithuania had improved somewhat since the 2004 visit. With regard to sentenced prisoners, only one establishment was overcrowded ([Pravieniškės] Correction Home No. 2) and measures had already been decided (and were in the process of being implemented) to reduce the number of inmates being accommodated there (see paragraph 33). Moreover, further improvements in the situation were expected, in that a “plan for release on parole in Lithuania” had been drawn up in 2007. The CPT welcomes these developments.
However, the situation was less favourable regarding remand prisoners. At the time of the visit, all of the remand prisons in the country (except Kaunas Juvenile Remand Prison) were overcrowded.
The CPT recommends that the Lithuanian authorities pursue their efforts to combat overcrowding in remand prisons, drawing on the Recommendations of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe to member States, in particular Rec(2006)13 on the use of remand in custody, the conditions in which it takes place and the provision of safeguards against abuse, and R (99) 22 concerning prison overcrowding and prison population inflation.
Under the legislation in force, the capacity of prisons was calculated on the basis of living space of 3 m² per inmate in the dormitories and 5 m² per inmate in the cells.
In the CPT’s view, a standard of 3 m² does not offer a satisfactory amount of living space. For as long as the dormitories remain in use, the CPT recommends that this standard be raised to at least 4 m² per inmate. The official capacities of the prisons concerned will have to be reviewed accordingly.
...
Conditions of detention of the general prison population
material conditions
At [Pravieniškės-2] Correction Home No. 3, over 80% of the detention areas had been renovated since the start of the year 2000. In particular, the material conditions in the arrest section, which was opened in 2003, were good: the cells, which had a maximum capacity of six places, were in a good state of repair and suitably furnished (including fully partitioned toilets), and had adequate access to natural light and appropriate ventilation and artificial lighting.
The ordinary regime and “lenient” regime sections had also been refurbished recently. However, the sanitary facilities – which were not in the cells – left much to be desired. Most of the toilets were only partially partitioned (some were not partitioned at all) and several were not functioning properly (or at all). Furthermore, the building that accommodated the prisoners who worked was not equipped with showers: as a result, these prisoners were only able to have a shower once a week (in another building). The delegation also found that many mattresses were in a very bad state. The CPT recommends that these shortcomings be remedied rapidly.
In the strict regime section, the material conditions were mediocre (dilapidated cells, sanitary equipment and facilities in a poor state, etc.). The delegation was, however, informed that this section, which was empty at the time of the visit, would be refurbished by 1 July 2008 at the latest, the date when the new occupants would arrive. The CPT would like to receive detailed information about the refurbishment work carried out in the strict regime section.
At Lukiškės Remand Prison, material conditions varied considerably from one part of the prison to another. The best conditions were to be found in the recently renovated sections (in particular, wing 1 of Building 2, containing approximately 60 cells). However, the cells were still overcrowded, sometimes to an outrageous degree (for example, up to six prisoners in a cell measuring approximately 8 m²). In the sections which had not been renovated (Building 3 and most of wing 2 of Building 2), conditions – which were described as very poor in the report on the 2004 visit – had deteriorated to the extent that they could be described as deplorable (dilapidated cells and furnishings, poor ventilation, etc.). Some of the cells were dirty. Furthermore, several prisoners complained that the buildings were not sufficiently heated in winter.
In the CPT’s opinion, the cumulative effect of overcrowding and poor material conditions (to which must be added the lack of a programme of out-of cell activities, see paragraph 48) could be considered to be inhuman and degrading, especially when persons are being held under such conditions for prolonged periods (i.e. up to several months).
The delegation was informed that there were plans to build a new remand prison near Vilnius and to close Lukiškės Remand Prison in 2011 (sentenced prisoners would be transferred to [Pravieniškės] Correction Home No. 1). The CPT welcomes these plans and recommends that the Lithuanian authorities implement them as quickly as possible. In this regard, the CPT would like to receive a detailed schedule concerning the construction/commissioning of the new Remand Prison in Vilnius.
The CPT is aware that the construction of new buildings inevitably absorbs a significant amount of the financial resources available. However, care should be taken to ensure that this does not lead to unacceptable situations; the decision to deprive a person of his or her liberty entails a correlative duty upon the State to provide decent conditions of detention. Regardless of the timetable for the above-mentioned developments, the CPT recommends that the necessary steps be taken to ensure that all persons detained in Lukiškės Remand Prison, including remand prisoners, have acceptable conditions of detention as regards cell equipment and furnishings, as well as heating during cold weather. Furthermore, all prisoners should be provided with cleaning products (in sufficient quantity) for their cells.
In the two establishments mentioned, the delegation noted that, in spite of the legislation and regulations adopted following the CPT’s 2004 visit, many inmates did not have essential personal hygiene products (soap, toilet paper, sanitary towels, toothpaste, toothbrushes).
The CPT reiterates its recommendation that steps be taken to ensure that all prisoners in Lithuania have adequate quantities of essential personal hygiene products.
...
At Lukiškės, in spite of the recommendations made by the CPT in its reports on the 2000 and 2004 visits, no progress had been made in terms of offering remand prisoners out-of-cell activities, apart from the daily outdoor exercise (1½ hours). Moreover, the legislation still banned prisoners from associating with prisoners from other cells. They therefore usually spent 22½ hours a day locked up in their cells, their only occupation being reading and listening to the radio or watching television if they could afford sets.
The CPT once again calls upon the Lithuanian authorities to take the necessary steps, without further delay, to ensure that remand prisoners at Lukiškės Remand Prison (and, where appropriate, at other remand prisons in Lithuania) are provided with a programme of out-of-cell activities, including group association activities. The relevant legislation should be amended accordingly.
Furthermore, steps should be taken to ensure that all sentenced prisoners in [Pravieniškės] Correction Home No. 3, including those in the arrest section, are able to spend a reasonable part of the day outside their cells engaged in purposeful activities of a varied nature (work, preferably with vocational value; education; sport; and recreation), including group association activities.”
On 15 September 2009 the CPT published the Lithuanian Government’s Response to its findings of 2008. The Government mentioned a plan to “build a new remand prison for approximately 2,000 persons on the outskirts of Vilnius by 2015, and transfer the Lukiškės Remand Prison to this establishment as well as building a new remand prison for approximately 300 persons in the vicinity of Klaipėda and a new remand prison for approximately 1,500 persons in Šiauliai, and transferring the Šiauliai Remand Prison and the Panevėžys Correctional Institution to these establishments.” As to the CPT’s recommendation of raising the standard for prisoners’ living space in dormitories from 3 square metres to 4 square metres, the Government responded as follows:
‘The minimum standard for living space per inmate has been fixed at 3 m2 in living rooms in dormitories of correctional establishments. In addition to living rooms, there are toilets, bathrooms, rooms for domestic purpose, clothes and shoe dryers, facilities for storing personal belongings, food storage facilities, relaxation rooms and sports facilities in each dormitory. Furthermore, convicts living in dormitories are free to go outside and spend their time within the territory of a [facility]. Therefore, we believe that the 3 m2 standard for living space per inmate is satisfactory. This standard is not breached by any correctional establishment, but not all correctional establishments are capable of establishing a higher standard for living space and ensuring it.’
Having visited Lithuanian prisons from 27 November to 4 December 2012, the CPT published a report on 19 July 2013. The report reads as follows:
“B.  Prison establishments
Preliminary remarks
The CPT visited, for the first time, Alytus Correction Home. It also carried out follow-up visits to Lukiškės Prison in Vilnius (particularly to assess the situation of remand prisoners and life sentenced prisoners) and Kaunas Juvenile Remand Prison, as well as a targeted visit to Šiauliai Prison focusing on the situation of remand prisoners.
Alytus Correction Home (hereafter “Alytus Prison”) is located in the outskirts of the city of Alytus. With an official capacity of 1,460 places, the prison was holding 1,426 sentenced prisoners at the time of the visit. There were two main detention blocks, “Dormitories” Nos. 1 and 2.
Renovation work had been carried out in many parts of the establishment during the past few years, including in Dormitory No. 1 which was completed a few days before the CPT’s visit.
Lukiškės Remand Prison and Prison (hereafter “Lukiškės Prison”) has been visited by the Committee on several occasions and its structure had not changed significantly since the CPT’s most recent visits. At the time of the visit, the prison – with an official capacity of 954 places – was holding 1,068 inmates, including 552 remand prisoners and 88 persons sentenced to life imprisonment...
With an official capacity of 435 places, the Šiauliai Prison was accommodating 619 inmates (including six juveniles and 45 women) at the time of the visit. Of them, 354 were sentenced prisoners and 265 were on remand.
At the time of the visit, the Lithuanian prison population stood at 9,754, including 1,304 remand prisoners, representing an incarceration rate of some 325 per 100,000 inhabitants, one of the highest among Council of Europe member States. And the total number of prisoners has been rising constantly over the last decade.
The authorities recognised that the size of the prison population and the resulting overcrowding in prisons constituted a major challenge. The delegation was informed that alternative measures to detention, including probation, had recently been introduced. However, it is clear that these measures have had little impact so far. The fact that a State locks up so many persons cannot be convincingly explained away by a high crime rate; the general approach of members of the law enforcement agencies and the judiciary must, in part, be responsible.
The CPT urges the Lithuanian authorities to make vigorous efforts to combat prison overcrowding, by placing further emphasis on non-custodial measures in the period before the imposition of a sentence, increasing the use of alternatives to imprisonment and adopting measures facilitating the reintegration into society of persons deprived of their liberty. In this context, they should be guided by the relevant Recommendations of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe: Recommendation Rec (99) 22 concerning prison overcrowding and prison population inflation, Recommendation Rec (2000) 22 on improving the implementation of the European rules on community sanctions and measures, Recommendation Rec (2003) 22 on conditional release (parole), Recommendation (2006) 13 on the use of remand in custody, the conditions in which it takes place and the provision of safeguards against abuse, and Recommendation Rec (2010) 1 on the Council of Europe Probation Rules.
Appropriate action should also be taken vis-à-vis the prosecutorial and judicial authorities with a view to ensuring their full understanding of the policies being pursued, thereby avoiding unnecessary pre-trial custody and sentencing practices.
At the time of the visit, the official minimum standard of living space per adult sentenced prisoner was still 3.1 m² for dormitory-type accommodation and 3.6 m² for multi-occupancy cells.
As indicated in previous reports, these standards are too low. Furthermore, the delegation observed that even these standards were often not respected. For example, it found at Alytus Prison that inmates had less than 2 m² of living space per person in certain cells. Subsequently, the authorities informed the CPT of their intention to address this specific deficiency; the Committee would like to be informed of the precise measures taken in this regard.
The CPT’s delegation was told that the standard of 4 m² per prisoner would be used when designing new prisons. The CPT reiterates its recommendation that the minimum standard of living space per prisoner be raised to 4 m² in multi-occupancy cells (not counting the area taken up by any in-cell toilet facility) throughout the prison estate. The official capacities of all prisons should be reviewed accordingly.
...
Conditions of detention of the general prison population
material conditions
At Alytus Prison, in addition to the two main detention blocks, another building accommodated prisoners employed in the workshops and a fourth building accommodated, among others, persons subject to the strict regime. Most of the buildings had been renovated and the material conditions were generally satisfactory, although severe overcrowding was observed in certain areas.
However, Dormitory No. 2 – in which some 700 inmates were accommodated – had not been renovated and was in a very bad state of repair, a fact also observed by the Seimas Ombudsman. The building had dirty and run-down dormitories (with crumbling walls and damaged floors), dilapidated furniture, as well as very old and foul-smelling sanitary installations in the corridor. The equipment consisted essentially of old bunk beds and the state of the bedding left much to be desired. Many inmates also indicated the presence of rats and cockroaches. The Prison Director indicated that the scheduled renovation of this building had been postponed due to financial constraints.
The entire premises of Šiauliai Prison were old and run down. Prisoners were accommodated in dilapidated and damp cells, where in-cell toilets were only partially partitioned and often dirty. Further, mattresses and blankets provided to prisoners were soiled and worn out. From the number of sleeping places available, it was also clear that many cells could at times be severely overcrowded (e.g. up to ten persons in a cell measuring between 18 and 22 m²); a fact confirmed both by prison staff and inmates. That said, cells had satisfactory lighting (including access to natural light).
The CPT recommends that the scheduled renovation of Dormitory No. 2 at Alytus Prison be reactivated and that vigorous action be taken to improve the material conditions of detention at Šiauliai Prison, in the light of the above remarks. As regards more specifically sanitary facilities in multi-occupancy cells, they should be equipped with a full partition (i.e. from floor to ceiling).
At Lukiškės Prison, the material conditions continued to vary considerably. Since the last CPT visit in 2008, some renovation work had been carried out in the second wing and the first wing was in the process of being refurbished. However, conditions of detention remained very poor in many other parts of the prison. As an example, most of the remand adult women were held in deplorable conditions (broken windows, dilapidated furniture, old and dirty mattresses). Shortcomings in cells throughout the establishment included unpartitioned toilet facilities and insufficient heating. Further, some cells had limited access to natural light and a number of them were both very small and overcrowded (e.g. some 5 m² for two inmates).
In 2008, the CPT was informed that the Lithuanian authorities intended to close Lukiškės Prison by 2011. During the 2012 visit, the delegation was informed that the authorities now aimed at transferring the sentenced prisoners to an establishment in Pravieniškės by 2015 and at definitely closing the establishment in 2017.
The CPT would like to receive a detailed schedule regarding the transfer of sentenced prisoners to another establishment by 2015 and the closure of Lukiškės Prison in 2017. Pending the taking out of service of the establishment, the Committee recommends that the Lithuanian authorities take urgent measures in order to ensure that all inmates at Lukiškės Prison have acceptable conditions of detention as regards cell equipment and furnishings, as well as access to natural light and heating, and that toilet facilities are fully partitioned. As regards more specifically cells measuring some 5 m², they should only be used for single occupancy and for short periods of time.
...
The regime for remand prisoners at Lukiškės Prison remained impoverished. Nearly all of them were locked up in their cells for 23 hours a day, with no out-of-cell activities other than outdoor exercise of one hour in small and dilapidated yards.
A similar situation was observed at Šiauliai Prison, where the vast majority of remand prisoners were confined to their cells for up to 23 hours per day (watching TV, reading books, playing table games), the only regular daily out-of-cell activity for them also being one hour of outdoor exercise...”
On 4 June 2014 the CPT published the Lithuanian Government’s Response to the report on the 2012 visit. The relevant parts of the Response read as follows:
“MONITORING OF PLACES OF DEPRIVATION OF LIBERTY
Comments
The Lithuanian authorities are invited to consider acceding to the Optional Protocol to the United Nations Convention against Torture (paragraph 8).
By the Law No. XII-630 of 3 December 2013 the Seimas ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. The Law became effective on 1 January 2014.
Besides, by the Law No. XII-629 of 3 December 2013 the Seimas adopted amendments to the Law on the Seimas Ombudsmen by which the Seimas Ombudsmen’s Office undertook the functions of the national preventive institution. In order to prevent torture and inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, the law, which became effective on 1 January 2014, shall provide a possibility for the Seimas Ombudsmen to visit the places of deprivation of liberty for preventive purposes on a regular basis.
Pursuant to the Law, a place of deprivation of liberty is any place falling within the jurisdiction or under the control of the Republic of Lithuania, where liberty of persons is or may be restricted on the basis of the decision passed by a state authority or at its demand, or with its consent or permission. The following shall be considered as the places of deprivation of liberty: 1) correctional establishments; 2) remand prisons; 3) arrest houses; 4) psychiatric establishments; 5) infectious disease treatment facilities; 6) care homes; 7) border control checkpoints; 8) Foreigners’ Registration Centre; 9) other places of deprivation of liberty.
While implementing the national prevention of torture, the Seimas Ombudsmen have the right: 1) to monitor, on a regular basis, how persons, whose liberty is restricted, are treated in places of deprivation of liberty; 2) to receive all information about treatment of persons whose liberty is restricted, about their treatment conditions, also the information about the number of such persons, the number and location of places of deprivation of liberty; 3) to enter all places of deprivation of liberty and all premises of such places, to inspect their equipment and infrastructure; 4) to interview without the presence of any witnesses, the persons, whose liberty is restricted, also any other persons, who could provide the necessary information; 5) to choose, which places of deprivation of liberty are to be visited and which persons are to be interviewed; 6) to conduct monitoring visits of places of deprivation of liberty together with selected experts; 7) to provide proposals (recommendations) to the relevant state authorities on the improvement of treatment of persons, whose liberty is restricted, and their treatment conditions as well as on the prevention of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment; 8) to draw up conclusions regarding amendment of the existing legislation and draft laws.
The competent authorities must examine the proposals (recommendations) provided by the Seimas Ombudsmen, to consult with the Seimas Ombudsmen on the possible measures of implementation of their proposals (recommendations) and to notify the Seimas Ombudsmen about the results of implementation of their proposals (recommendations).
...
Recommendations
- the Lithuanian authorities have to make every effort to reduce overcrowding in correction houses and remand prisons by placing further emphasis on non-custodial measures before the imposition of a sentence, increasing the use of alternatives to imprisonment and adopting measures facilitating the reintegration into society of persons deprived of their liberty. In this context, they should be guided by the relevant Recommendations of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe: Recommendation Rec (99) 22 concerning prison overcrowding and prison population inflation, Recommendation Rec (2000) 22 on improving the implementation of the European rules on community sanctions and measures, Recommendation Rec (2003) 22 on conditional release (parole), recommendation Rec (2006) 13 on the use of remand in custody, the conditions in which it takes place and the provision of safeguards against abuse, and Recommendation Rec (2010) 1 on the Council of Europe Probation Rules. Appropriate actions should also be taken vis-à-vis the prosecutorial and judicial authorities with a view to ensuring their full understanding of the policies being pursued, thereby avoiding unnecessary pre-trial custody and sentencing practices (paragraphs 33-35);
The Law on Probation, the Law on Amendments to Code on Enforcement of Penal Sanctions, Criminal Code, and Code of Criminal Procedure which are highly relevant to combat overcrowding in correction houses, have come into effect on 1 July 2012.
The Law on Probation and amended Code of Criminal Procedure provide for the evaluation of the social environment of an accused and criminogenic factors, which can help court to individualise sentences, and, in case when the accused is found guilty and is imposed a non-custodial sentence, to select adequate probation conditions.
The Criminal Code has widened the circle of persons eligible for probation. Presently, the Criminal Code provides for a sentence suspension for persons who are imposed a custodial sentence up to four years (up to three years under the previous regulations) (in the event of juvenile, a five-year custodial sentence limit is set instead of a four-year one).
Also, the Criminal Code provides for persons on probation to be assigned by the court an obligation to participate in re-socialization programs, to do unpaid public works, to reimburse damages incurred by the offence, and other obligations which, in the opinion of the court, may have a positive effect on the person who committed the offence. If it comes out during the probation that the assigned obligation is ineffective, it can be replaced by a more effective one, while the custody sentence would be employed only as ultima ratio.
The Law on Probation defines the major re-socialization forms for persons on probation, and resocialization is set as a fundamental component of probation. Re-socialization is performed through an individual motivation development program Behaviour-Interview-Change, through an individual behaviour modification program One-to-One, and through EQUIP, the behaviour modification program for work with juveniles. Also, this law has set forth the grounds – the procedure for drawing an individual supervision plan, supervision measures, and their intensity and periodicity principles – for individual work with inmates based on risk evaluation of inmates and criminogenic factors.
The introduction of intensive supervision (electronic monitoring), a new preventive measure, was one of the most significant measures to solve the problem of overcrowding in remand prisons.
Following the amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure, amendments to types of preventive measures are to come into effect on 1 January 2015, which provide for the use of intensive supervision – a preventive measure which is expected to cut down the number of detentions, and consequently, to help combat the overcrowding of remand prisons.
On 22 May 2012, a meeting-discussion was held in Kaunas Remand Prison for judges, prosecutors, directors of penitentiary institutions on the application and implementation of probation, and seminars on the application of probation were organised for judges and prosecutors at the Training Centre of the National Court Administration on 11/12 of June 2012.
To your information, the number of inmates in penitentiary institutions decreased by 5% since 2012: there were 8,144 inmates in penitentiary institutions in Lithuania on 1 January 2014 after 8,550 on 1 January 2013, and 8,573 on 1 January 2012. Also, a decrease of 17% was registered in the number of the detainees in the remand prisons: there were 1,118 detainees in remand prisons on 1 January 2012, after 1,179 on 1 January 2013 and 1,347 on 1 January 2012.
After the new probation system was put into place, a decrease is observed in the number of the inmates arriving to serve their sentence in penitentiary institutions, who were put on probation. In 2007/2011, the inmates on probation who arrived to penitentiary institutions (for the evasion of probation or after being imposed a sentence for a new offence) made up on average 35% of all the inmates serving their sentence in penitentiary institutions, an increase from 28.3% in 2012 when the Law on Probation came into force.
- the minimum standard of living space per prisoner to be raised to 4m2 in multi-occupancy cells (not counting the area taken up by an in-cell toilet facility) throughout correction houses and remand prisons. The official capacities of all penitentiary institutions should be reviewed accordingly (paragraph 36).
Seeking to implement the CPT’s recommendation, the number of the inmates should be reduced to 7,500, or at least 1,000 new places for the inmates should be installed.
As mentioned before in the answer regarding paragraphs 33/35 of the CPT’s Report, the number of inmates is gradually going down, and is expected to decrease further even more rapidly (especially the number of the detainees) after an intensive supervision, a preventive measure, is to be introduced in 2015. Based on data as of 16 December 2013, the total number of places throughout the prison establishments was 9,399 and the total number of persons kept there was 9,263. Consequently, a standard for living space per one person is 3.1 m2 in multi-occupancy cell where the inmates have access to premises of collective use (toilets, washrooms, leisure rooms, and premises for sports, library, and a reading room) without any restrictions regarding the outdoor activities, and 3.6 m2 per person in cell type premises. If the downward trend regarding the number of inmates is to prevail, the standard of living space per person will grow.
In implementing the Strategy for Modernization of Custodial Facilities as approved by the Government of the Republic of Lithuania in 2009, the public procurement procedures are underway over the construction of a 320-place prison by using a private and public sectors co-operation model. The procurement procedures are in line with the approved timing. According to the procurement conditions, the newly built prison is to be put into operation in three years after signing the agreement.
Also, feasibility studies regarding the construction of a 1,620-place remand prison-correction house near Vilnius and remand prison/correction house of 1,180 places close to Šiauliai have been prepared. After the mentioned institutions are built, Lukiškės Remand Prison/Closed Prison and Šiauliai Remand Prison will be closed.
...
Requests for information
- information on the precise measures taken to address the problem of overcrowding at Alytus Correction House (paragraph 37).
As mentioned above in the answer regarding paragraphs 33 to 35 of the CPT’s Report, the number of inmates has been gradually decreasing after the Law on Probation of the Republic of Lithuania and amendments to the Code on Enforcement of Penal Sanctions came into effect on 1 July 2012: total number of persons in penitentiary institutions went down from 9,729 on 1 January 2013 to 9,262 on 1 January 2013, a decrease of 5% (414 persons). In Alytus Correction House, the number of the inmates shrank during the same period by 7% – from 1,477 to 1,398 (by 99 persons). At the present time, the number of inmates in Alytus Correction House does not exceed the maximum allowed number for Alytus Correction House, which is 1,460 and which was established by the Rules for the Internal Procedure at Correction Institutions as approved by Order No. 194 of 2 July 2003 of the Interior Minister of the Republic of Lithuania. It should be noted, that the decrease in the number of the prisoners has been a continuous trend.
...
Requests for information
- a detailed schedule regarding the transfer of sentenced inmates at Lukiškės Remand Prison to another establishment by 2015 and the closure of Lukiškės Remand Prison in 2017 (paragraph 50);
To improve the conditions for inmates at Lukiškės Remand Prison, a feasibility study was prepared for the implementation of a project “Construction of Vilnius Remand Prison-Correction House and Provision of Services” through a co-operation between public and private sectors. To implement the project a public tender for selecting a private partner is to be announced, and a competition dialogue is to be used as a procurement method. Procurement procedures are planned to start in early 2014.
The tender preparation and the tender are expected to take about 15 months. The feasibility study provides for the construction works to take three years; this time period is also to be set in the tender documents. Therefore, the new penitentiary institution is expected to start functioning in late 2017 or early 2018.
In implementing the Strategy for the Modernization of Custodial Facilities as approved by the Government of the Republic of Lithuania in 2009, the public procurement procedures are underway over the construction of 320-place prison by using a private and public sectors co-operation model. The procurement procedures are in line with the approved timing. According to the procurement conditions, the newly built prison is to be put into operation in three years after signing the agreement.”
The Strategy for Modernization of Custodial Facilities for 2009-2017, as approved by the Government of the Republic of Lithuania, provided for the construction of new facilities (to address the issue of overcrowding in the places of deprivation of liberty) following the public-private partnership principle. Due to the reduced funding, the works foreseen under the aforementioned strategy slowed down during the crisis, resulting, in 2014 in the decision on the extension of the time limit for the implementation of the strategy by an additional five years until 2022.