The case originated in an application (no. 34653/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Sayd-Akhmed Saydemiyevich Zubayrayev (“the applicant”), on 19 July 2004.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms K. Moskalenko, a lawyer practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the criminal proceedings against him had been unfair because of the authorities’ failure to ensure his presence at the appeal hearing.
On 23 October 2008 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1979 and is serving a prison sentence in the Sverdlovsk Region.
On 29 April 2003 the applicant was apprehended and taken into custody in the . It appears that his detention was extended pending trial.
On 12 November 2003 the Supreme Court of the Chechen Republic found the applicant guilty of numerous offences including, but not limited to, the assassination of a law-enforcement officer, trafficking and possession of illegal firearms, terrorism, theft and rape, and sentenced him to twenty-one years’ imprisonment and confiscation of his property. The court dismissed as unsubstantiated the applicant’s allegations that the investigating authorities had subjected him to physical and mental pressure to make him confess. The court further stated, in the operative part of the judgment, that the applicant had a right to appeal against the conviction within ten days following the receipt of the text of the verdict and that he had a right to ask the appeal court to ensure his participation in the appeal proceedings should he decide to appeal.
The applicant received a copy of the judgment of 12 November 2003 on 22 November 2003.
On 24 November 2003 Ms Kh., a lawyer retained by the applicant, lodged a statement of appeal. Ms Kh. referred to the excessive severity of the sentence and sought, inter alia, to have the applicant’s conviction for trafficking and possession of illegal firearms quashed, citing a lack of evidence. She reiterated the applicant’s allegations of ill-treatment and claimed that the applicant’s confrontation with one of the witnesses had been carried out in contravention of the applicable rules of criminal procedure. She did not indicate that the applicant wished to participate in the appeal hearing.
The Supreme Court of the  scheduled the appeal hearing for 29 January 2004. According to the applicant, he retained another lawyer, Ms A., immediately before the appeal hearing. At the hearing Ms A. asked the court for an adjournment, arguing that she had not had sufficient time to study the case file. The court granted her request and scheduled the hearing for 19 February 2004.
On an unspecified date Ms A. filed an additional statement of appeal in which she asked the appeal court to acknowledge a violation of the applicant’s rights as set out in Article 5 of the Convention. In particular, she argued that, following his arrest, he had been detained in the absence of a court order and that his pre-trial detention had not been based on relevant and sufficient reasons.
On 4 February 2004 Ms A. informed the Supreme Court of the  of the applicant’s wish to attend the appeal hearing.
On 11 February 2004 the applicant filed a similar request with the Supreme Court of the .
On 19 February 2004 the Supreme Court of the  decided to proceed with the appeal hearing in the applicant’s absence. As the court reasoned, the applicant had filed his request for participation too late and, in any event, only his lawyer had submitted the statement of appeal. After hearing the judge rapporteur, Ms A. (the applicant’s lawyer), and the prosecutor, the Supreme Court upheld the applicant’s conviction in substance. The court removed the confiscation of property from the applicant’s sentence and reclassified the charge of theft.
A judgment shall be quashed or amended on appeal if there is an inconsistency between the conclusions reached by the trial court and the facts of the case established by that court. Violation of procedural law and wrongful application of criminal law, as well as unfairness of the judgment, shall also constitute grounds for reversing or amending the judgment (Article 379 of the CCP).
A defendant may lodge a statement of appeal within ten days of receipt of the text of the verdict. The other parties to the proceedings may appeal against the verdict within ten days of its pronouncement (Article 356 § 1 of the CCP). If the defendant detained in custody wishes to participate in the appeal hearing, he should indicate as much in his statement of appeal (Article 375 § 2 of the CCP).
A statement of appeal lodged belatedly will be dismissed without consideration on the merits (Articles 356 § 3 of the CCP).
A defendant who is detained in custody and has asked to participate in the appeal hearing may take part in the proceedings either in person or by way of videoconference (Article 376 § 3 of the CCP).
Article 413 of the CCP, setting out the procedure for the reopening of criminal cases, reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“1.  Court judgments and decisions which became final should be quashed and proceedings in a criminal case should be reopened if there are new or newly discovered circumstances.
...
New circumstances are:
...
(2)  a violation of a provision of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms committed by a court of the  during examination of a criminal case and established by the European Court of Human Rights, pertaining to:
(a)  application of a federal law which runs contrary to provisions of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms;
(b)  other violations of provisions of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms;
(c)  other new circumstances.”
When discussing the issue of the defendants’ participation in the appeal hearing, the Presidium indicated as follows:
“... a defendant held in custody may, within ten days of his receipt of a copy of the verdict, ask [the court] to ensure his participation in the appeal hearing.
The [rule] that an appellant may, prior to the appeal hearing, modify his appeal or submit new arguments, is not in contravention of the above finding. A request for participation in the appeal hearing indicated in a defendant’s additional statement of appeal should not be construed as a new argument and, accordingly, does not impose an obligation on the appeal court to ensure the participation of the defendant who is detained in custody in the appeal hearing.”
When deciding on the case of D., who had not been provided with an opportunity to participate in the appeal hearing, the court noted as follows:
“It follows from the materials in the case-file that D. did not appeal against the verdict. On 13 November 2006 he learnt about the appeals lodged [by other parties] upon receipt of the [relevant] documents dispatched by the [trial] court to the remand prison [where he was detained]. At the same time he was informed of the date, place, and time of the appeal hearing and his right to take part in it.
He expressed his wish to participate in the appeal hearing by indicating so in the proof of receipt. However, his request was denied.
Article 376 § 3 of the [CCP] provides that a defendant who is detained in custody and expresses the wish to participate in an [appeal hearing], may take part in the hearing directly or present his arguments by means of a video link.
...
The argument that [the defendant] missed the ten-day time-limit for lodging a request for participation in the appeal hearing, as indicated in the [appeal court’s] decision of 1 December 2006, cannot justify the [appeal court’s] decision to deny him an opportunity to present his arguments before the appeal court directly or by means of a videoconference.”