The case originated in an application (no. 55495/08) against the Republic of Austria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Austrian national, Mr Michael Genner (“the applicant”), on 7 November 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr W.L. Weh, a lawyer practising in Bregenz. The Austrian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ambassador H. Tichy, Head of the International Law Department at the Federal Ministry for European and International Affairs.
The applicant alleged that his conviction for defamation had violated his rights under Article 10 of the Convention.
On 4 September 2013 the complaint concerning the alleged violation of Article 10 was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The applicant was born in 1948 and lives in Vienna.
At the time of the events the applicant worked for the association “Asyl in Not”, which offers legal and social support to asylum seekers and refugees.
In 2005, an amendment to a number of laws concerning the status of foreigners and of asylum seekers and concerning relevant proceedings (Fremdenrechtspaket 2005) was drafted and adopted by Parliament. The amendments entered into force on 1 January 2006.
On 31 December 2006 the then Federal Minister for Interior Affairs, L.P., died unexpectedly of an aneurysm at the age of 55.
On 1 January 2007 the applicant published a statement on the association’s website entitled “One less. What’s coming now?” (“Eine weniger. Was kommt danach?”). It continued: “The good news for the New Year: L.P., Minister for torture and deportation, is dead.” (“Die gute Meldung zum Jahresbeginn: L.P., Bundesministerin für Folter und Deportation, ist tot”) After referring to some specific individual stories of asylum seekers, the text stated further that “Mrs P. was a desk war criminal just like many others there have been in the atrocious history of this country: completely desensitised, indifferent to the consequences of their laws and regulations, the compliant instrument of a bureaucracy contaminated with racism. No decent human is shedding tears over her death.” (“L.P. war eine Schreibtischtäterin, wie es viele gab in der grausamen Geschichte dieses Landes; völlig abgestumpft, gleichgültig gegen die Folgen ihrer Gesetze und Erlässe, ein willfähiges Werkzeug einer rassistisch verseuchten Beamtenschaft. Kein anständiger Mensch weint ihr eine Träne nach.”). The applicant concluded the text by suggesting that their goal for the New Year was to fight for a new minister who would make good the damage done by L.P. so that Austria could return to being a country welcoming asylum seekers and a place where human rights were respected.
G.P., the late Minister’s husband, filed a private prosecution (Privatanklage) for defamation against the applicant and the association.
On 19 September 2007 the Vienna Regional Court (Landesgericht für Strafsachen Wien) convicted the applicant of defamation in respect of the above-quoted passages of the statement and sentenced him to a fine in the amount of EUR 1,200. Half of the fine was suspended for three years. It dismissed G.P.’s request for recognition of the association’s liability for its employee’s actions.
The court found that the average reader would understand the relevant passages of the statement to mean that L.P. had ordered or tolerated the torture pending expulsion or the deportation of detainees and had violated human rights. The word “torture”, in particular, implied the intentional infliction of physical or psychological suffering. An average reader would also place the word “deportation” (Deportation) in the context of the historical events under the national-socialist regime which forcefully deported segregated groups of people to ghettos and camps to subject them to forced labour or extermination. The statement in question suggested that L.P. exercised her political function in a particularly despicable way, that she was indifferent to officials’ criminal abuse of authority in relation to asylum seekers and that her actions were motivated by racist, sadistic, xenophobic and national-socialist attitudes. The publication of the statement had triggered considerable reaction from the media and the public. The applicant had been criticised as tactless and disrespectful. In response thereto, on 9 January 2007, the applicant published in a daily newspaper a reply in which he stated that his comments had been directed solely towards L.P. and he apologised to her family members, who were not responsible for the late Minister’s inhumane policies.
The Regional Court acknowledged that a criminal charge of defamation was at odds with the right to freedom of expression as guaranteed by the Convention. It found that the voicing of opinions by refugee associations criticising politicians and their legislative projects represented an important corrective element and that the limits of acceptable criticism were particularly widely drawn in the context of the present case. However, in the court’s opinion, the published statement overstepped the limits of acceptable criticism. The legislative background to the amendment of the laws governing foreigners and asylum seekers and the fact that criticism was allowed to be shocking, still could not justify positioning L.P. in a national-socialist and racist context and suggesting that she had tolerated the intentional physical ill-treatment of detainees pending expulsion or “deportations”. Such accusations against the then only recently passed away L.P – together with the acclamation of her death and the call on “decent” people not to mourn her passing – clearly went beyond the limits of acceptable criticism in a democratic society. Moreover, the allegations made by the applicant had not been proven to be true, nor had he shown any journalistic diligence in that regard.
The applicant filed an appeal on points of law and fact, and also appealed against the sentence.
On 7 May 2008 the Vienna Court of Appeal (Oberlandesgericht Wien) dismissed his appeal. Referring to the reasoning of the first-instance court, it conceded that the word “deportation” nowadays had acquired the additional meaning of “expulsion or removal” and was not only used in the context of the national-socialist regime, but also in the context of the forced expulsion of foreigners. However, the context of the word in which it had been used (“a desk war criminal just like many others there have been in the atrocious history of this country”) acted as a reminder of the national-socialist history of the country. Therefore, even though the statements at issue were political value judgments (“politische Wertungen”), the applicant had not produced any proof of a factual basis for his allegations. The applicant had further argued that, following the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights and of the domestic courts with regard to Article 10, the impugned statement was covered by freedom of expression. The Court of Appeal, however, found that even such case-law did not provide carte blanche for the applicant to make comparisons with the national-socialist regime without any factual basis.
That decision was served on the applicant’s counsel on 3 June 2008.
On 7 November 2008 the applicant lodged a request for the renewal of the criminal proceedings (“Erneuerung des Strafverfahrens”) pursuant to Article 363a of the Code of Criminal Procedure with the aim of having the proceedings re-opened and the conviction set aside.
On 14 October 2009 the Supreme Court dismissed the request. It stated that the admittedly broad limits of tolerable criticism in the political discourse did not cover excessive value judgments without any factual basis. Statements made in even heated political conflicts needed to respect a minimum of decency and moderation. In the present case the Supreme Court found that the evaluation by the courts had rightly led to the conclusion that the text in question justified the limitation of the applicant’s right to freedom of expression. The value judgment suggesting criminal behaviour on the part of L.P. had no factual basis. The courts had not misjudged the considerable public interest in the discussion concerning migration and asylum policy. However, the applicant’s statements had not contributed to that public discussion, since they were directed at defaming and discrediting the late Minister. The court further noted that the sanction imposed was, in view of the disrespectful statements and their temporal proximity to L.P.’s death, appropriate and even moderate.
The Supreme Court’s decision was served on the applicant’s counsel on 10 November 2009.
Article 111 of the Criminal Code (Strafgesetzbuch) defines defamation as follows:
Article 117 (5) of the Criminal Code (Strafgesetzbuch), as in force until 1 January 2010,) read: