The case concerns an alleged breach of the applicants’ right to adversarial proceedings on account of the Court of Cassation basing its decision on appeal on certain information and documents not submitted to the parties for their comments.
The applicants were born in 1953 and 1959 respectively and live in Istanbul. They were represented by Ms A. Turan, a lawyer practising in Istanbul.
The Government were represented by their Agent.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties and as can be seen from the documents submitted by them, may be summarised as follows.
The case concerns a plot of land located in Kemerburgaz, Istanbul.
In 1939 a boundary-marking exercise pursuant to law no. 3116 was carried out in Kemerburgaz in order to determine the boundaries of Belgrade Forest. The outcome of the exercise and the boundaries of the forest were publicly announced and, as no objection was made, this decision became final in 1940.
Following a land cadastral survey subsequently carried out in Kemerburgaz in 1956, the plot of land in question was registered in the names of two individuals, E.A. and H.A.
In 1984 a forest cadastral commission conducted a cadastral evaluation (aplikasyon çalışması) in the Kemerburgaz area. The purpose of this evaluation was to identify the forests which were not yet included in the cadastral map and to remove the forest status of lands which had lost their characteristics defined in the law and to apply the forest boundary results which had become final (kesinleşmiş orman sınırlarının araziye aplike işlemi) to the area in question.
In its application of the forest boundary results of the boundary marking exercise of 1939 (see paragraph 6 above), the forest cadastral commission found that the plot of land in question fell inside the boundaries of Belgrade Forest. The commission completed its evaluation in 1985 but announced its results by way of public announcement only on 15 June 1988.
On 30 October 1991 the applicants purchased the majority of the shares of the plot of land from H.A.
On 17 December 1993, at the request of the Treasury, an annotation (şerh) was made in the land register by the land Registry office, indicating that the applicants’ plot of land was part of the forest.
On 3 April 2003 the applicants brought an action against the forest administration before the Eyüp Civil Court, requesting the removal of the annotation from the land register.
In its examination of the claim the Eyüp Civil Court carried out an on-site examination and subsequently appointed an expert panel comprised of three experts in forest engineering, with a view to determining whether the plot of land fell within the boundaries of the forest. In their report submitted to the court on 8 February 2005, the experts concluded that the boundaries established in the forest cadastral survey in 1939 had not been correctly applied in the subsequent cadastral evaluation carried out in 1985. In their view, as a result of the errors committed in the evaluation of 1985, the applicants’ plot of land, which was originally outside the forest boundaries of 1939, had been determined as falling inside the forest.
On 10 March 2005 the Eyüp Civil Court granted the applicants’ action on the basis of the conclusions of the expert report. It therefore ruled that the annotation in the land register had been unlawful and should be removed.
The forest administration appealed against the decision to the Court of Cassation, arguing that the expert report contained erroneous calculations.
In two decisions that were not communicated to the parties, the Court of Cassation returned the case-file to the first-instance court in order for it to complete and send the case-file back by including, inter alia, i) land register records of the properties adjacent to the applicants’ land, ii) the case-files on similar disputes, if any, lodged by the owner of the adjacent properties or by the forest administration, iii) information relating to the previous owners of the plot of land in question, iv) the case-file of the criminal proceedings lodged against the applicants for the commission of a forest trespassing offence.
On 10 October 2007 the Court of Cassation quashed the Eyüp Civil Court’s decision of 10 March 2005, holding that the expert reports relied on by the cadastral and civil courts in three other disputes concerning adjacent properties had determined that those properties fell inside the boundaries of the forest. The Court of Cassation also took into account the expert reports obtained in the criminal proceedings – which had been discontinued because of the expiry of the five-year prosecution period – against the applicants for the forest trespassing offence. According to the experts heard by the criminal courts, the applicants’ property fell within the boundaries of the forest corresponding to the boundary-marking exercises of 1939 and 1985. In the light of documents produced in those previous proceedings as well as the cadastral maps and application documents, the Court of Cassation held that the 1985 application exercise had not been erroneous. The Court of Cassation therefore concluded that the property in question could not be owned by private individuals in so far as it was classified as a forest and that therefore the annotation had been lawful. It went on to add that the administration always had the possibility to seek the annulment of the applicants’ title deed in so far as the land cadastre of 1956 had been null and void.
On 26 November 2007 the applicants requested before the Court of Cassation a rectification of its decision of 10 October 2007. They submitted, inter alia, that expert reports submitted in other proceedings concerning different properties had been taken into account by the Court of Cassation and that they had not been given an opportunity to comment on them. Furthermore, they argued that the Court of Cassation had not commented at all on the expert report obtained by the Eyüp Civil Court in their own proceedings. In their opinion, there were significant contradictions between the conclusions reached by experts in their case and the ones that had been taken into account by the Court of Cassation in those other proceedings. For that reason, the applicants argued that the Court of Cassation, rather than quashing the judgment on the merits, should have remitted the case back to the Eyüp Civil Court due to incomplete examination. In that connection, the applicants submitted that there had been errors in the application of the forest boundaries by the cadastral commission in 1985 and that the amendments of 2003 in the cadastre law had called for a special procedure to be followed by forest cadastral commissions to rectify the errors in forest maps. Finally, the applicants considered that the ten-year prescription period had expired in respect of the land cadastre of 1956 and that therefore the forest administration did not have a right to claim that the property could not be owned by private individuals.
On 11 March 2008 the Court of Cassation dismissed the applicants’ request for the rectification of its decision, holding that the grounds put forward by the applicants were not different from those they had argued in the proceedings.
On 25 November 2008 the applicants asked the first-instance court not to comply with the Court of Cassation’s decision but to persist in its decision of 10 March 2005.
On the same day, after hearing the parties, the Eyüp Civil Court dismissed the case by incorporating the high court’s reasoning in its decision.
On 1 July 2009 the Court of Cassation upheld the Eyüp Civil Court’s decision of 25 November 2008 after an unsuccessful appeal by the applicants.
A full description of the relevant domestic law may be found in Şamat v. Turkey, no. 29115/07, §§ 33-37, 21 January 2020.
The former Code of Civil Procedure (Law no. 1086), as in force at the time, described the procedure to be followed by a first-instance court in case its decision is quashed by the Court of Cassation. The relevant section reads as follows:
Section 429
“If the relevant Chamber of the Court of Cassation quashes the appealed decision, [it] shall remit the case to the [first-instance] court which delivered the decision or to any other court it shall deem appropriate.
That court, by (...), shall decide whether to comply with the Court of Cassation’s decision to quash after having invited, on its own motion, the parties for a hearing and having heard them.
If the court persists in its earlier decision, an appeal against the decision to persist shall be made to the Grand Chamber of the Court of Cassation for Civil Law Matters.”