The case originated in an application (no. 47191/06) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by the Church of Scientology of St Petersburg and six Russian nationals whose names are set out below (“the applicants”), on 17 November 2006.
The applicants were represented by Mr D.P. Holiner and Ms G. Krylova, lawyers practising in London and Moscow respectively. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants complained about the arbitrary denial of legal-entity status to their Scientology group.
On 26 January 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicants are:
The Church of Scientology of St Petersburg, an unincorporated group of Russian citizens formed for the collective study of Scientology (“the applicant group”);
Ms Galina Petrovna Shurinova, born in 1954, the president of the applicant group and a member since 1989;
Ms Nadezhda Ivanovna Shchemeleva, born in 1955, a member of the applicant group since 1993;
Ms Anastasiya Gennadyevna Terentyeva, born in 1979, a member of the applicant group since 1998;
Mr Ivan Vladimirovich Matsitskiy, born in 1975, a member of the applicant group since 1994;
Ms Yuliya Anatolyevna Bryntseva, born in 1977, a member of the applicant group since 1995;
Ms Galina Georgiyevna Frolova, born in 1955, a member of the applicant group since 1999.
In 1984, a first group of Scientologists appeared in St Petersburg under the leadership of Mr M. Goldberg. By the end of the 1980s it had split into two smaller groups, one of which was led by the second applicant.
On 23 March 1995 the second applicant, together with nine other founder members of the “Church of the Scientology Mission in St Petersburg”, applied for registration of their group. Having received no response for more than two years, the second applicant pressed the authorities for an explanation. The St Petersburg Justice Department replied that their application had been sent to the State Duma’s Expert Consultative Council for an opinion by an expert in legal and religious studies but had received no response, and it had been decided to “leave the application unconsidered”.
On 7 February 2002 the individual applicants, together with other fellow believers, submitted a new application for registration of the applicant group as a local religious organisation. The municipal council of municipal circuit no. 20 of St Petersburg provided the applicants with a letter which stated:
“In accordance with section 11 (5) of the Religions Act and on the basis of the application and documents provided, the municipal council ... confirms that the religious group of Scientologists has existed in St Petersburg since 1984.”
On 6 March 2002 the St Petersburg Justice Department refused the application, citing three technical grounds relating to the application documentation. On 7 March 2002 the applicants corrected these defects and resubmitted the application.
On 3 April 2002 the Justice Department notified the applicants that it had extended the period for consideration of the application because of the “necessity of conducting a State expert religious study”.
On 11 September 2002 the Justice Department issued a formal refusal of the resubmitted application. The refusal made no reference to any religious study but instead cited eight different technical grounds and asserted that the confirmation of the applicant group’s existence in St Petersburg for at least fifteen years was “unreliable”, without giving further details.
On 24 October 2002 the applicants resubmitted a corrected application which was refused on 22 November 2002, referring to the eight new technical grounds and the “unreliability” of the group’s existence for fifteen years. It also stated that an unspecified expert religious study had concluded that the applicant group was non-religious in nature.
On 19 December 2002 the second applicant asked the Justice Department to explain the basis for its claim regarding the “unreliability” of the group’s existence and to provide her with a copy of the religious study. In a letter of 8 January 2003, the Justice Department declined to give any clarification, referring to its discretionary power to refuse applications.
The third applicant complained to the Ombudsman about the Justice Department’s actions. In response to a subsequent enquiry from the Ombudsman’s office, the Justice Department supplied a copy of the religious study, dated 19 November 2002 and authored by Mr I., an academic secretary at the State Museum of the History of Religion in St Petersburg.
On 11 February 2003 the Ombudsman notified the head of the Justice Department that the religious study had breached the established procedure for conducting religious studies, as approved by Government Regulation no. 565. The study had not been approved by majority vote of the panel of experts duly appointed under the terms of the Regulation and therefore reflected nothing more than Mr I.’s personal opinion.
On 17 April and 14 August 2003 the applicants submitted a fifth and a sixth registration application, which were refused on 14 May and 8 September 2003 respectively. On each occasion, the Justice Department cited a number of new technical grounds that it had not relied upon in the previous refusal: it also referred to the expert religious study and the assertion that the confirmation of the applicant group’s existence for at least fifteen years had been “unreliable”.
Responding to a further request for clarification by the applicant Ms Shurinova, on 31 July 2003 the Justice Department stated that she did not have a right of access to the documents supporting the conclusion that the information purportedly confirming the existence of the religious group for fifteen years was unreliable, and that the law did not require it to provide any explanation as to the reasons for refusing State registration.
On 11 October 2003 the applicants challenged the Justice Department’s refusals in court. The first hearing on the merits was held on 21 September 2005, and further hearings were held on 1 November and 20 December 2005.
On the latter date the Oktyabrskiy District Court of St Petersburg gave judgment, holding that the refusal had been lawful. In respect of the Justice Department’s rejection of the confirmation letter, it stated:
“Having examined the letter of 16 February 2002 and the reply from the municipal council to the enquiry from the [Justice Department] concerning the documents that served as the basis for the letter, the court concludes that the applicants have not supplied evidence that there was only one religious group of Scientologists in St Petersburg that included the applicants and that the letter was given to their particular group. One cannot exclude the possibility that there were many groups practising this creed in St Petersburg and that the letter confirms the existence of one of the [other] groups of Scientologists, and not the religious group of Scientologists that decided to create the local religious organisation ‘Church of Scientology of St Petersburg’...
Even if any of the participants in the religious group that currently includes the applicants had studied Scientology in St Petersburg since 1984 and had participated in Scientologist rituals and ceremonies and in auditing, that does not prove that he or she did so within one and the same continuously operating, stable religious group that currently includes the applicants, as opposed to some other group that currently does or does not exist, and [later] ended up forming part of the applicants’ group.
In addition, the court takes into consideration the following.
The St Petersburg Law no. 111-35 of 23 June 1997 on Local Authorities, which establishes an exhaustive list of matters that come within the competence of municipal councils in St Petersburg (section 8), did not place the registration of religious organisation or the issuing of letters confirming the existence of a religious group in St Petersburg within the competence of municipal bodies.
There is no St Petersburg law that confers such powers upon municipal bodies.
On the basis of the above, it follows that the [municipal council] was not competent to issue such letters.
Furthermore, as can be seen from the municipal council’s reply ... to the court’s enquiry, the [municipal council] was formed on 8 February 1998 and registered by order no. 111 of 27 May 1998 of the Legislative Assembly of St Petersburg, so it cannot reliably confirm the existence of any religious group before its formation in 1998...”
As to the Justice Department’s reliance on Mr I.’s religious study, the court noted that at the time of the study’s preparation no expert panel had been appointed in St Petersburg under the terms of the Regulation, even though the Justice Department had “undertaken all possible measures” to comply with the Regulation. The court did not make any assessment of the legal significance of Mr I.’s religious study.
The applicants appealed.
On 24 May 2006 the St Petersburg City Court rejected their appeal, endorsing the first-instance court’s findings that the municipal council was not authorised by law to provide confirmation of the religious group’s existence or the claim that it had been one and the same group of Scientologists who had existed for fifteen years.
On 1 October 1997 the Federal Law on the Freedom of Conscience and Religious Associations (no. 125-FZ of 26 September 1997 – “the Religions Act”) entered into force.
A “religious association” is a generic term for any voluntary association of Russian nationals formed for the joint profession and dissemination of their creed (section 6(1)). “Religious associations” may take the form of either “religious groups” or “religious organisations” (section 6(2)).
A “religious group” is a voluntary association of citizens for the profession and dissemination of faith, which carries out its activities without State registration and without obtaining legal personality (section 7(1)). In contrast to a religious group, a “religious organisation” is a voluntary association of Russian nationals and permanent residents of Russia formed for the profession and dissemination of faith and duly registered as a legal entity (section 8(1)).
The relevant part of section 7 provides:
“2.  Citizens who form a religious group with the intention of further transforming it into a religious organisation shall inform the local administrative authority of creation thereof and the beginning of its activity ...”
The relevant part of section 11 provides:
“5.  For State registration of a local religious organisation, the founders shall submit to the competent territorial division of the federal registration authority ...
... a document issued by a local administrative authority confirming the existence of the religious group on the given territory for a period no shorter than fifteen years ...”
Government Regulation no. 656 of 3 June 1998 on the procedure for State religious expert studies provides in particular:
“2.  A State religious expert study (hereinafter – expert study) ... is conducted following a decision by the registration authority ... if it is necessary for the registration authority to carry out additional research into whether the organisation is recognised as being a religious one and in order to verify information concerning its fundamental religious teachings and its corresponding practice ...
Expert studies are conducted by expert panels that have been specifically set up for this purpose... by the executive branch of the Russian region...
The examination of a registration authority’s enquiry concerning a specific religious organisation shall, as a rule, be carried out in the presence of its authorised representative, who shall be invited in good time to attend the hearing before the expert panel...
Once the expert panel has carried out the study of the presented documents, it will adopt an expert opinion that contains reasoned findings concerning the possibility (or impossibility) of recognising the organisation as a religious one and the reliability of information concerning the fundamentals of its creed and practices. The expert opinion shall be deemed adopted if it has been approved by a majority of members of the expert panel.”
Methodological recommendations on the application of certain provisions of the Religions Act by Justice Departments (a circular letter issued by the Ministry of Justice, no. 08-18-257-97 of 24 December 1997) stated:
“...2.  What are the requirements for a document confirming the existence of a religious group for no less than fifteen years? What can serve as evidence of the accuracy of this period?
The law does not specify any procedure for maintaining a list of religious groups with municipal bodies or the issuing of confirmations or the form thereof. In this connection it would be expedient to regulate this procedure in a legal act of the [relevant] region of the Russian Federation. As for evidence of the length of existence of the religious group, this should be provided to the municipal body by the group itself in the form of information about the State registration and local listing with the former Council for Religious Affairs under the USSR Council of Ministers, archive materials, court decisions, witness testimony and other forms of evidence.”
In Latvia, the Law on Religious Organisations of 7 September 1995 provides that a religious organisation may be founded by no fewer than twenty adult Latvian nationals (section 7 (1)). The list of documents accompanying an application for registration of a congregation includes the articles of association, a list of founders, the minutes of the first meeting, and evidence of payment of a registration fee (section 9). A religious organisation acquires the status of a legal entity from the moment of registration (section 13 (1)).
In Romania, Law 489/2006 on the Freedom of Religion and the General Status of Denominations defines a religious association as a private-law legal entity made up of individuals who practice the same religion (section 6 (2)). A religious association obtains legal-entity status by registering with the Registry of Religious Associations upon production of the following documents: the articles of association, a declaration of faith, evidence of existence of a head office, consultative opinion from the Ministry of Culture and Religious Denominations, and evidence that the chosen name is available (sections 40 and 41). A religious denomination is a public-utility legal entity that is eligible for tax breaks and State subsidies; it acquires its status through a Government decree after having existed on Romanian territory, as a religious association, for at least twelve years and having a membership of Romanian nationals equal to at least 0.1% of the population (sections 8(1), 11, 12, 17 and 18).