The case originated in an application (no. 36378/02) against Georgia and the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by thirteen nationals of those States, Mr Abdul-Vakhab Shamayev, Mr Rizvan (or Rezvan) Vissitov, Mr Khusein Aziev, Mr Adlan (or Aslan) Adayev (or Adiev), Mr Khusein Khadjiev, Mr Ruslan Gelogayev, Mr Akhmed Magomadov, Mr Khamzat Issayev, Mr Robinzon Margoshvili, Mr Giorgi Kushtanashvili, Mr Aslambek Khanchukayev, Mr Islam Khashiev alias Rustam Elikhadjiev alias Bekkhan Mulkoyev and Mr Timur (or Ruslan) Baymurzayev alias Khusein Alkhanov (see paragraphs 54 and 55 below) of Chechen and Kist origin (“the applicants”), on 4 and 9 October 2002. The applications of Mr Khanchukayev and Mr Adayev reached the Court on 9 October 2002. They were joined to the other applicants' complaints, which were lodged on 4 October 2002.
The applicants, seven of whom had been granted legal aid limited to the admissibility stage, were represented before the Court by Ms L. Mukhashavria and Ms M. Dzamukashvili (authorities to act received on 9 October and 22 November 2002), lawyers who both worked for the association “Article 42 of the Constitution” in Tbilisi. The above-mentioned seven applicants were also represented by Ms N. Kintsurashvili, a lawyer working for the same association (authority dating from 4 August 2003). The lawyers were assisted by Ms V. Vandova, an adviser.
The Georgian Government were represented by Mr L. Chelidze, then by Ms T. Burdjaliani, who was replaced from 9 August 2004 by Ms E. Gureshidze, General Representative of the Georgian Government before the Court. The Russian Government were represented by Mr P. Laptev, Representative of the  at the Court.
The applicants submitted, in particular, that their transfer to the Russian authorities would be contrary to Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention. They asked that the extradition proceedings against them be suspended, that the Russian authorities provide information on what would happen to them in  and that their complaints under Articles 2, 3, 6 and 13 of the Convention be examined by the Court.
Between 3.35 p.m. and 4.20 p.m. on 4 October 2002 the applicants' representatives sent the Court, through a series of interrupted faxes containing the names of eleven applicants (Mr Adayev and Mr Khanchukayev were not mentioned – see paragraph 1 above), a request for application of Rule 39 of the Rules of Court.
At 5 p.m. on the same date (8 p.m. in Tbilisi), given that the President of the Second Section was unavailable, the Vice-President of the Section (Rule 12) decided to indicate to the Georgian Government, in application of Rule 39, that it would be in the interests of the parties and the proper conduct of the proceedings before the Court not to extradite the eleven applicants to Russia until the Chamber had had an opportunity to examine the application in the light of the information which the Georgian Government would provide. The latter were invited to submit information on the grounds for the applicants' extradition and the measures that the Russian Government intended to take in their regard should the extradition go ahead. It was also decided to give notice, as a matter of urgency, of the introduction of the application and its object to the Russian Government (Rule 40).
At 6 p.m., the Registry of the Court telephoned the General Representative of the Georgian Government, who was in  on official business, in order to notify him of the introduction of the application and of the Court's decision. A few minutes later his assistant telephoned the Court from  and asked that the names of the applicants be dictated to him, which they were.
At 6.50 p.m. the Russian Government received a fax indicating the Court's decision in respect of Russia, together with the decision taken in respect of .
It proved impossible to send the Court's decision to the Georgian Government by fax. At the other end of the telephone line, the technical staff at the Ministry of Justice, apparently on duty, referred alternately to electricity problems and a lack of paper in the fax machine.
The General Representative of the Georgian Government was re-contacted. He indicated that the Court's message had been transmitted to the Government and promised to take the necessary steps to resolve the problem with the fax line, referring vaguely to a problem beyond his control.
At 7.45 p.m., following the unsuccessful attempts to send the fax, the Registry of the Court contacted the Deputy Minister of Justice with responsibility for extradition matters and for supervising the Office of the Georgian Government's General Representative before the Court, on his mobile phone, to inform him of the problems encountered and to reiterate the Court's decision. The Deputy Minister was told that, in the absence of a functioning fax line, this communication counted as official notification of the Court's decision. He took note of the decision and promised to attempt to restore the line.
Following a connection failure at 7.56 p.m., the letter setting out the Court's decision went through at 7.59 p.m. (10.59 p.m. in ). According to the extradition papers, five of the applicants were handed over to the Russian authorities at Tbilisi Airport at 7.10 p.m. (10.10 p.m. in ).
The application was allocated to the Second Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1). Within that Section, the Chamber that would examine the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1. On 8 October 2002 the VicePresident of the Second Section informed that Chamber of his decision of 4 October 2002, which was approved.
On 22 October 2002, under Rule 47, an application against Georgia and  was lodged on behalf of thirteen applicants by their representatives.
On 23 October 2002 the Court asked the Russian Government to inform it of the name and address of the detention facilities in which the extradited applicants were being held. On 1 November 2002 the Russian Government asked the Court for written assurances that this information would remain confidential and would not be improperly divulged.
On 5 November 2002 the Court extended until 26 November 2002 the interim measure in respect of the eight applicants detained in . It also decided to examine, of its own motion under Article 5 §§ 1, 2 and 4 of the Convention, which is the lex specialis in matters of detention, the complaints submitted by the applicants under Articles 6 and 13, and to give notice of the application to the respondent Governments (Rule 54 § 2 (b)). It further decided to give priority to the application (Rule 41) and to make the President of the Section personally responsible for protecting the confidentiality of any information that would be submitted by the Russian Government. The latter were then re-invited to provide the address of the detention facilities in which the extradited applicants were being held and the contact details of their lawyers.
On 14 November 2002, in conditions of strict confidentiality, the Russian Government communicated the address of the establishment in which the extradited applicants were being held.
On 19 November 2002, at the Court's request, the Russian Government gave undertakings to the Court in connection with all thirteen applicants. In particular, they promised that
“(a)  the death penalty [would] not be applied to them;
(b)  their safety and health [would be] protected;
(c)  they [would be] guaranteed unhindered access to medical treatment and advice;
(d)  they [would be] guaranteed unhindered access to legal assistance and advice;
(e)  they [would be] guaranteed unhindered access to the Court and free correspondence with it; and
(f)  the Court [would have] unhindered access to the applicants, including through free correspondence with them and the possible organisation of a fact-finding mission”.
On 20 November 2002 Ms N. Devdariani, Ombudsperson of the Georgian Republic, applied to join the proceedings as a third party (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention).
On 23 and 25 November 2002 the Georgian Government requested that the interim measure be lifted, on the ground that they had received the requisite assurances from the Russian Government as to the future treatment of the eight applicants if they were extradited. On 25 November they also submitted photographs of the individuals concerned. On 26 August 2003 they submitted photographs of the cells in which the non-extradited applicants were then being held. Photographs of the extradited applicants were provided by the Russian Government on 23 November 2002 and on 22 January and 15 September 2003.
On 26 November 2002, in the light of the undertakings given by the Russian Government on 19 November 2002, and considering that the question of compliance with those undertakings and the extradition procedure in Georgia would be examined during the subsequent proceedings, the Court decided not to extend the period of application of the interim measure indicated on 4 October 2002. In view of the sensitivity of the case, its political impact and the requests by the Governments, the Court also decided to classify all the documents in the case file as confidential vis-à-vis the public, in accordance with Rule 33 §§ 3 and 4 as then in force.
On 6 December 2002 three applicants – Mr Gelogayev, Mr Khashiev and Mr Baymurzayev – applied to the Court, requesting a stay of execution of the extradition order issued against them on 28 November 2002. On the same date the Acting President of the Section decided not to indicate the requested interim measure to the Georgian Government.
On 24 January 2003 Ms E. Tevdoradze, a member of the Georgian parliament, asked the Court for leave to intervene in the proceedings as a third party (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention).
On 17 June 2003 the Court decided to hold a hearing on the admissibility of the application and to indicate to the Russian Government, under Rule 39, that it would be in the interests of the parties and the proper conduct of the proceedings before the Court, especially the preparation of the hearing, to grant Ms Mukhashavria and Ms Dzamukashvili unhindered access to the extradited applicants. In addition, the Court dismissed the requests for leave to intervene as third parties (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention) submitted by Ms N. Devdariani and Ms E. Tevdoradze (see paragraphs 19 and 23 above).
By a decision of 16 September 2003, after a hearing on admissibility (Rule 54 § 3), the Chamber declared the application admissible and joined two preliminary objections by the Russian Government to the examination of the merits. The Court further decided to organise fact-finding visits to Russia and , under Article 38 § 1 (a) of the Convention and Rule 42 § 2 as then in force, with a view to establishing the facts of the case.
The Chamber instructed three delegates – Mr J.-P. Costa, Mr A.B. Baka and Mr V. Butkevych – to carry out an investigation in the two countries. The visit to  was due to take place from 28 to 31 October 2003. On 3 October 2003, following a request by the Georgian Government, it was decided to adjourn the visit on account of campaigning for the Georgian parliamentary election, scheduled for 2 November 2003.
The following may be noted from the voluminous exchange of correspondence with the Russian Government to which the fact-finding visit gave rise.
On 30 September 2003 the Court informed the Russian Government that its delegation would visit Russia in order to hear the extradited applicants on 27 October 2003 and to see their cells in the pre-trial detention centre (“SIZO”) in town B (see paragraph 53 below). As the Government raised no objections in their subsequent correspondence, preparations were made for the visit.
On 20 October 2003 the Russian Government produced a ruling of 14 October 2003 by the  denying the Court access to Mr Shamayev, Mr Vissitov, Mr Adayev and Mr Khadjiev on the ground that the criminal case against them was pending before it. The ruling stated that the Court delegation would only be able to visit those persons once the judgment had been delivered and become final. It also specified that the  had established that Mr Shamayev, Mr Vissitov and Mr Adayev had never applied to the Court, while Mr Khadjiev claimed to have lodged an application with the Court against  challenging his unlawful extradition, and insisted on a meeting with the judges from the Court.
The communication of 20 October 2003 also contained a letter dated 15 October 2003, signed by Mr Kartashov, judge at the , refusing the Court leave to hear Mr Aziev, the fifth extradited applicant. The judge claimed that a hearing in that applicant's case was due to be held on 29 October 2003 and that “the legislation on Russian criminal procedure [did] not allow for the question of contact between the judges of the  and Mr Aziev to be examined before the hearing and in any other context”.
In submitting those documents, the Russian Government maintained that the Court's planned fact-finding visit would infringe domestic criminal legislation and required that it be postponed until such time as a final judgment had been given in the applicants' case. They added that such an approach reflected the principle of subsidiarity between national and European proceedings.
On 22 October 2003, taking account of this information, the Court adjourned its fact-finding visit to  until a later date. It nonetheless reminded the Russian Government of the provisions of Articles 34 and 38 § 1 (a) of the Convention.
On 7 January 2004 new dates for the visit (23-29 February 2004) were proposed to the Russian Government. They were invited to suggest, if need be, other more convenient dates by 9 January 2004. The Court emphasised that the application was being dealt with as a priority (see paragraph 16 above). The Government were also informed that if the fact of holding the visit inside the applicants' pre-trial detention centre would create security problems, a secure location could be proposed and the applicants transferred to it.
In their letter of 8 January 2004, the Russian Government criticised the Court's press release on the adjournment of its visit in October 2003 and pointed out that, according to the Russian Constitution, the judicial authorities (in this case, the Regional Court) were independent and that, furthermore, the Convention was based on the principle of subsidiarity.
On 13 January 2004 they maintained that the criminal case against the extradited applicants was pending before the  and that, until a final and binding judgment had been given, the Court's delegation could not meet the applicants. However, they did not rule out the possibility that the  would alter its decision of 14 October 2003 and advised the Court to apply to it with a request to that effect. The Government explained that, by virtue of the principle of subsidiarity, the issue of contact with the applicants was solely a matter for the  and that no one, not even an international judicial body, was entitled to amend or overturn its decision.
Furthermore, the Russian Government asked the Court to take the same approach as it had for Georgia (see paragraph 26 above) and to adjourn its fact-finding visit to  in view of the presidential election scheduled for 14 March 2004. They also submitted that the Court might experience difficulties in the North Caucasus region in February on account of the risk of terrorist attacks or poor weather conditions.
On 19 January 2004, reminding the Russian Government of their undertakings of 19 November 2002, the Court informed them that it would carry out its visit at the beginning of May 2004. The option of transferring the applicants to a safer location was again raised. The Court stated that if the necessary guarantees and arrangements for the conduct of the investigation were not forthcoming on this occasion, it would be required to cancel its visit and to draw the appropriate conclusions under the Convention.
In response, the Russian Government reaffirmed on 23 January 2004 that it would only be possible to visit the applicants once the judgment in their case had become final. Their undertakings of 19 November 2002 to the Court, particularly with regard to unhindered access to the applicants, concerned only the investigation phase and not the period when the case was being examined by the courts. In any event, the trial before the  would be public and no one would be prevented from “either attending it or following the deliberations and looking at the defendants”.
The dates proposed by the Court were rejected by the Russian Government on the ground that the period between 1 and 11 May coincided with Russian public holidays to commemorate victory in the Second World War; they also stated that they were taking all necessary measures to ensure the proper conduct of the visit. The idea of transferring the applicants to another location was also dismissed on security grounds.
In their next letter of 5 February 2004, the Russian Government claimed that they had taken all the security measures necessary for the Court's delegation, including an air escort, but that they could not, however, exclude the possibility of a terrorist attack. In response, the Court suggested to the Russian Government that the fact-finding visit be conducted after 12 May 2004, in other words after the public holidays in Russia, on condition that they gave a prior unconditional assurance that the delegation would have unhindered access to the applicants on that occasion. Once such an undertaking had been given, the Court would assess the risks connected with the potential terrorist attack mentioned in the letter.
On 2 and 11 February 2004 the Russian Government asked that the fact-finding visit to Georgia be adjourned in view of the Russian presidential election, due to be held on 14 March 2004. On 5 and 13 February 2004 respectively, the Court dismissed these requests.
On 31 October 2003 and 9 February 2004 the Georgian Government listed the witnesses whom they considered it necessary for the Court to hear. The Russian Government did the same on 23 January 2004, but on 19 February 2004 they withdrew their list of witnesses on the ground that the Court had not acceded to their various procedural requests (see paragraphs 36 and 41 above and 243 below). The applicants did not call any witnesses.
From 23 to 25 February 2004 six of the non-extradited applicants and twelve witnesses were heard at the Georgian Supreme Court in . Ms Mukhashavria, Ms Kintsurashvili and delegations from both Governments took part in these proceedings. Two applicants – Mr Khashiev and Mr Baymurzayev – did not appear, as they had been reported missing since 17 February 2004 by the Georgian authorities. Two witnesses – Mr R. Markelia and Mr A. Tskitishvili – failed to appear because they were out of the country.
On the last day of the proceedings, the Court considered that it was necessary to hear Mr Arabidze, Mr R. Khidjakadze and Mr G. Gabaydze, the applicants' representatives before the domestic courts, but the lawyers were unable to appear immediately. Questions were accordingly put to them in writing, to which the Court received replies on 17 April 2004 (see paragraph 212 below).
On 8 March 2004 the Court asked the two Governments to provide information on the disappearance of Mr Khashiev and Mr Baymurzayev and, if applicable, on their health and place of detention in . On 13 and 29 March 2004 the Governments submitted information about those disappearances (see paragraph 101 below).
On 17 March 2004 the Court informed the Russian Government of the exact dates of its fact-finding visit (5-8 June 2004). Reminding them that the previous attempts to conduct the visit had met with failure, it invited the Government to inform it by 8 April 2004 whether, on this occasion, they undertook to guarantee that the delegation would have free and unhindered access to the four applicants who had been extradited on 4 October 2002 (Mr Adayev, the fifth applicant, having been released in the meantime – see paragraph 107 below), and to the two applicants who had been arrested in Russia following their disappearance in Tbilisi (see paragraphs 100 et seq. below). Drawing the Government's attention to Article 38 § 1 (a) of the Convention, the Court also reminded them that, in the absence of unconditional confirmation and the necessary resources to carry out the visit, it would be obliged to abandon its attempt to obtain access to the applicants and to prepare the judgment on the basis of the evidence in its possession.
On 21 April 2004 the  decided to deny the Court access to Mr Aziev. This decision was based on the same grounds as the ruling of 14 October 2003 (see paragraph 29 above).
On 8 April 2004 the Russian Government informed the Court that, in spite of their determination to cooperate with it, the Court would not be able to hear Mr Shamayev, Mr Khadjiev, Mr Adayev and Mr Vissitov, since proceedings were pending before the appeal court. They made no reference to Mr Aziev or to the two applicants who had disappeared (see paragraph 43 above) and subsequently been arrested in  on 19 February 2004.
Given its unsuccessful attempts to persuade the Russian Government to adopt a more cooperative attitude, the Court decided on 4 May 2004 to cancel its fact-finding visit to Russia and to proceed with preparation of the judgment on the basis of the evidence before it (see, by analogy, Cyprus v. Turkey, no. 8007/77, Commission's report of 4 October 1983, Decisions and Reports 72, p. 73, § 52).
Also on 4 May 2004 it invited the parties to send it their final submissions on the merits of the case (Rule 59 § 1), together with their corrections to the verbatim record of the proceedings in  (Rule A8 § 3 of the Annex to the Rules). On 11 June 2004 the Georgian Government filed its written observations on the merits of the case. After two extensions of the relevant deadlines, the Russian Government and the applicants also filed their observations, on 20 July and 9 August 2004 respectively. On 11 June and 9 August 2004 the Governments submitted their corrections to the verbatim record of the proceedings.
On 7 and 13 September 2004 the Governments submitted their respective comments on the applicants' claims for just satisfaction, in accordance with Rule 60 § 3.
As to the non-extradited applicants, Mr Margoshvili has been free since his acquittal on 8 April 2003 (see paragraph 94 below); Mr Gelogayev was released following a judgment of 6 February 2004 (see paragraph 99 below); Mr Khanchukayev, Mr Issayev, Mr Magomadov and Mr Kushtanashvili were released on 5 and 6 January 2005 and 18 February 2005 (see paragraph 98 below). The identity of those six applicants has been established by the Court (see paragraphs 110-15 below). After disappearing in  on 16 or 17 February 2004, Mr Khashiev and Mr Baymurzayev were arrested by the Russian authorities on 19 February 2004. They are apparently detained at present in the Essentuki pre-trial detention centre (see paragraph 101 below). Having been unable to hear them in  (see paragraphs 46 et seq. above), the Court will refer to them by the surnames communicated by their representatives when lodging the application.
(i)  the investigation orders in respect of each of the applicants, issued by the decentralised service of the federal Procurator-General's Office in , dated 8 August 2002;
(ii)  the international search warrant in respect of the applicants, issued by the Russian authorities on 15 August 2002;
(iii)  certified copies of the provisional detention orders in respect of each of the applicants, issued on 16 August 2002 under Article 108 of the new Code of Criminal Procedure by the Staropromislovsk Court of First Instance (Grozny) on an application by the investigator responsible for the case;
(iv)  extracts from the case file of the criminal proceedings brought against the applicants in , setting out the charges against them;
(v)  photographs;
(vi)  copies of passports, with photographs;
(vii)  copies of Form no. 1;
(viii)  other information on the applicants' nationality and identity.
According to the orders of 8 August 2002, which were submitted to the Court by the Georgian Government, the applicants were under investigation in Russia for causing bodily harm to employees of the police and security forces (a crime punishable by life imprisonment or the death penalty – see Article 317 of the Criminal Code, paragraph 260 below); organising illegal armed groups and participation in such groups, with aggravating circumstances (punishable by a sentence of up to five years' imprisonment under Article 208 § 2 of the Criminal Code); gunrunning with aggravating circumstances (punishable by two to six years' imprisonment under Article 222 § 2 of the Criminal Code); and illegal crossing of the Russian Federation's border in July 2002, with aggravating circumstances (punishable by up to five years' imprisonment under Article 322 § 2 of the Criminal Code). (The same documents, submitted by the Russian Government, are dated 13 August 2002 with regard to Mr Adayev and Mr Vissitov.)
On 22 September 2002 the charges against the applicants in  were redefined and extended. The applicants were also placed under investigation for terrorism. The texts of the relevant orders, issued separately in respect of each applicant, are identical, as were those of 8 August 2002 (see paragraph 66 above).
Following their release on 6 February 2004, Mr Khashiev and Mr Baymurzayev moved in with a relative in ; they were joined by Mr Gelogayev. On 16 February 2004 they left the house for an appointment at the Ministry for Refugees, but disappeared before ever arriving there. On 25 February 2004 the Georgian media, citing a Russian agency report, announced that the missing men were being held in a Russian prison in the town of , on suspicion of having crossed the Russo-Georgian border illegally. On 5 March 2004 Ms Mukhashavria informed the Court of this and stated that she was anxious about the health of Mr Baymurzayev, who apparently needed an operation on his jaw. She explained that, following their release, the three applicants had not left their residence unless accompanied by their representatives. As the latter had assured them that they had nothing to fear in , Mr Khashiev and Mr Baymurzayev had dared to venture out alone for the first time on the day in question.
On 13 March 2004 the Georgian Government claimed that an investigation by the Ministry of the Interior had ascertained that the two applicants had disappeared on 16 February 2004 at 10.30 a.m. They had subsequently been arrested by the Russian authorities near the village of Larsi () for crossing the border illegally. On 29 March 2004 the Russian Government alleged that the two applicants had been arrested in Larsi on 19 February 2004 by the Federal Security Service on the ground that they were on the list of wanted persons. At the time of his arrest, Mr Khashiev had been carrying a false passport in the name of Mulkoyev (see paragraph 88 above). On 20 February 2004 Mr Khashiev and Mr Baymurzayev, under the names of Rustam Usmanovich Elikhadjiev and Khusein Mauladinovich Alkhanov, had been placed under investigation and imprisoned in Essentuki Prison, pursuant to a decision by the  (). Transferred on 6 March 2004 to a SIZO in town A, they had been returned to Essentuki on 22 March 2004 for the purposes of the investigation.
It appears from documents submitted by the Georgian Government on 19 September 2004 that on 28 March 2004 the  procurator's office opened an investigation into the kidnapping of Mr Khashiev and Mr Baymurzayev. The Georgian Government offered no explanation on this subject.
On 5 and 30 November 2004 Ms Mukhashavria submitted copies of the judgments delivered by the Supreme Court of the Chechen Republic on 14 September and 11 October 2004 respectively in the cases of Mr Khashiev (Mr Elikhadjiev, Mr Mulkoyev) and Mr Baymurzayev (Mr Alkhanov). She claimed to have obtained them with the help of individuals close to the applicants. In the judgments Mr Khashiev is referred to as Elikhadjiev Rustam Usmanovich and Mr Baymurzayev as Alkhanov Khusein Mauladinovich (see paragraph 83 above). The first was cited as having been born in 1980 in Grozny and the second in 1975 in the  in Ingushetia. During the trial Mr Khashiev alleged that he had been arrested on 16 February 2004, not at the Russian border, but on Tbilisi's . He had then been transferred to Essentuki (see paragraph 101 above).
According to the judgments, Mr Khashiev and Mr Baymurzayev were part of an armed group formed in the Pankisi Gorge (Georgia) by a certain Issabayev for the purpose of exterminating members of the federal armed forces in  and local residents who cooperated with those troops. In July 2002 they had allegedly crossed illegally into the Itum-Kalinsk region in , with about sixty members of the armed group in question. On 27 July 2002, surrounded by Russian border guards, the group had opened fire and attacked the guards. Eight Russian soldiers had been killed and several others injured. Given the lack of evidence of their direct participation in that attack, Mr Khashiev and Mr Baymurzayev were acquitted on the charge of terrorism and of the offences set out in Article 205 § 3 and Article 317 of the Criminal Code (see paragraphs 66 and 71 above). They were also acquitted of the offences listed in Article 188 § 4 and Article 208 § 2 of the same Code (see paragraph 66 above) on the ground that there was no corpus delicti in their actions. Mr Khashiev and Mr Baymurzayev were convicted of participation in an illegal armed group, crossing the border illegally and of carrying, transporting and handling weapons illegally; they were sentenced to thirteen years' and twelve years' imprisonment respectively, to be served in a closed prison. Mr Khashiev was also convicted of using a false passport in the name of Mulkoyev (see paragraph 101 above). In imposing those sentences, the Supreme Court stated that it took account of the applicants' ages and the fact that they had no criminal record. Mr Baymurzayev's health (serious deformation of the lower jaw) was also taken into consideration. An appeal to the Supreme Court of the  lay against those judgments.
Mr Khamzad(t) Movlievich Issiev (Issayev), alias Khamzat Movlitgalievich Issayev, stated that his real name was Khamzat Movlievich Issayev, that he was of Chechen origin and that he had been born on 18 October 1975 in the village of Samachki, in .
Mr Seibul (Feisul) Bayssarov stated that he was called Giorgi Kushtanashvili, that he was a Georgian citizen who belonged to the Kist ethnic group and that he had been born in the village of Duisi, in the Akhmeta region of .
Mr Aslan Khanoyev stated that his real name was Aslambek Atuievich Khanchukayev, that he was a Russian national of Chechen origin, and that he had been born on 25 February 1981 in the village of Selnovodsk, in .
Mr Adlan (Aldan) Usmanov stated that he was in fact named Akhmed Lechayevich Magomadov, that he had been born on 4 July 1955 in Pavlodar in , and that he was of Chechen origin.
Mr Ruslan Mirjoyev stated that his real name was Ruslan Akhmedovich Gelogayev, that he was of Chechen origin and that he had been born on 16 July 1958.
Mr Tepsayev stated that he was in fact Robinzon Margoshvili, son of Parola, that he was a Georgian citizen of Kist origin, and that he had been born on 19 April 1967 in the village of Duisi, in the Akhmeta region of .
With the exception of Mr Margoshvili, who was detained in the prison infirmary (see paragraph 60 above), those applicants confirmed that they had known the extradited applicants in prison and had been held with them in the same cell. The photographs of the applicants, submitted by the Governments on 23 and 25 November 2002, were shown to them for identification. The names on the photographs had previously been covered over by the Court's Registry.
Each of the applicants (except for Mr Margoshvili) recognised himself in the relevant photograph submitted by the Georgian Government. Mr Robinzon Margoshvili (formerly Ruslan Tepsayev) was identified by the other applicants as Ruslan (four times) and Ruslan Tepsayev (once).
With regard to the two missing applicants, namely, Mr Timur (Ruslan) Baymurzayev alias Khusein Alkhanov, and Mr Islam Khashiev alias Rustam Elikhadjiev alias Bekkhan Mulkoyev (see paragraph 43 above), the first was identified as Baymurzayev (once), Timur (once), Khusein (twice) and Khusein Alkhanov (once). The second was named as Islam (twice), Bekkhan (twice), Mulkoyev (once) and Bekkhan Mulkoyev (once).
With regard to the extradited applicants, four applicants identified Abdul-Vakhab and one applicant identified Abdul-Vakhab Shamayev in the photograph submitted by the Russian Government as that of Mr Abdul-Vakhab Shamayev. The photograph of Mr Khusein Khadjiev was identified as Khusein (three times), Khusein Khadjiev (once) and Khusein Nakhadjayev (once). Three applicants identified Khusein Aziev and two applicants identified Khusein in the photograph submitted as that of Mr Khusein Aziev. Mr Adlan (Aslan) Adayev (Adiev) was identified as Aslan Adayev (twice) and Aslan (three times). On the other hand, all five applicants identified the person in the photograph submitted by the Russian Government as Mr Rizvan (Rezvan) Vissitov as a certain Musa.
By virtue of the authorities to act submitted on 9 October 2002, the six non-extradited applicants were represented before the Court by Ms Mukhashavria and Ms Dzamukashvili. On the basis of the authorities to act dated 4 August 2003, those applicants, with the exception of Mr Margoshvili, were also represented by Ms Kintsurashvili.
During the proceedings in Tbilisi, at which only Ms Mukhashavria and Ms Kintsurashvili were present, five applicants confirmed that, with the assistance of Ms Mukhashavria and Ms Dzamukashvili, they had lodged an application with the Court against Georgia and  in order to challenge their extradition and have it stayed. They stated that they wished to pursue their application and continue to be represented by the same lawyers in the proceedings that would ensue before the Court (or, in some cases, by the lawyers then present in the room). As he had only a very basic knowledge of Georgian, Mr Margoshvili, the sixth applicant who was heard, had difficulty in understanding the questions put by the Court. However, he maintained that he was complaining about his arrest under the Chechen name of Tepsayev, as he was merely a simple Georgian shepherd. Mr Margoshvili confirmed that he had applied to the Court, that the lawyers present in the room were his representatives and that he wished to pursue his complaint.
The events concerning the extradition of 4 October 2002
Five of the applicants who appeared were heard by the Court in Russian with interpretation into English, one of the Court's two official languages. Having stated that he was unable to read Russian, Mr Margoshvili, the sixth applicant, took the oath in Georgian; he also expressed himself in that language.
During the few weeks before 4 October 2002, eleven applicants had found themselves detained in the same cell (no. 88) in Tbilisi Prison no. 5. A total of fourteen prisoners had been held in the cell. Mr Adayev and Mr Margoshvili, the twelfth and thirteenth applicants, had been in the prison infirmary at the time.
The applicants had had a television set in their cell. Although rumours had been circulating for a while about their possible extradition to , it was only on 3 October 2002 that they learned from the 11 p.m. news bulletin on Rustavi-2 that the extradition of five or six of their number was imminent (see paragraph 216 below). No names having been given, they were unaware of who exactly would be affected by that operation. They had received no prior information or official notification on this matter. The applicants understood that the information gleaned from the television was accurate when, between 3 and 4 a.m., prison wardens arrived and asked them to leave the cell so that it could be disinfected (or searched, according to Mr Kushtanashvili). The applicants categorically refused to comply, with the result that the prison governor named four individuals and asked them to leave the cell. In response, the applicants asked that nothing be done until daybreak and that their lawyers be summoned; this request was refused. About fifteen hooded members from the Georgian Ministry of Justice's special forces then entered the cell and removed the applicants one by one. They used truncheons and applied electric shocks. The applicants were beaten as they lay on the floor in the corridor. The four applicants affected by the extradition order were immediately removed and the others were placed in solitary confinement. Around 4 a.m. Mr Adayev, the fifth applicant against whom an extradition order had been issued, was transferred directly from the prison infirmary.
All of the applicants heard claimed that they had put up only verbal resistance to leaving the cell. They complained that they had been beaten, insulted and “treated like animals” by the special troops. Following this incident, Mr Issayev had two fractured ribs and an eye injury, the scar from which was still visible. Mr Kushtanashvili sustained injuries from truncheon blows. Mr Khanchukayev sustained extensive bruising. Mr Magomadov had a broken tooth, a laceration to the ear, an injury to the frontal bone and extensive bruising on his back and legs. Mr Gelogayev had extensive bruising on his body and other injuries (to the shoulder and cheek) and had suffered an inflammation of the left kidney, injuries which he himself described as “trivial” (see paragraphs 200, 201 and 211 below). All of the prisoners were injured more or less seriously. In particular, the applicants referred to broken ribs and a fractured shoulder in some cases, and blood-splattered heads in others. According to Mr Kushtanashvili and Mr Khanchukayev, the applicants who were to be extradited were given the most severe beatings. Mr Issayev, Mr Magomadov and Mr Khanchukayev had heard that Mr Aziev had died as a result of his injuries. According to Mr Gelogayev, Mr Aziev must have had a broken spine, since he was no longer able to walk and was dragged along the corridor by two members of the special troops. He also appeared to have an eye turned inside out. According to Mr Gelogayev, the photograph of Mr Aziev allegedly taken by the Russian authorities after his arrest could have been a copy of an old photograph.
Once placed in solitary confinement, the non-extradited applicants were examined by a doctor, who listed each prisoner's injuries in writing. He merely measured the extent of their bruises with a ruler and did not provide treatment. The applicants did not subsequently receive any other medical care.
None of the applicants confirmed that he had been informed by a member of the Procurator-General's Office that extradition proceedings were pending against him. They all claimed to have received visits from numerous persons while in prison (officially assigned lawyers, investigators and prosecutors), whose names they did not remember. They remembered having met once, in the absence of their lawyers, a man and a young woman (see paragraphs 162-66 below) who asked them to sign documents drawn up in Russian (in Georgian, according to Mr Kushtanashvili), which they refused to do.
With the exception of Mr Kushtanashvili and Mr Margoshvili, the applicants all claimed that they had entered Georgia in search of refuge from the armed combat in . They denied having been armed when they crossed the border. They had not been arrested at the border, but had voluntarily given themselves up to the Georgian border guards, from whom they had sought assistance. The latter had tended to their wounds before calling for a helicopter to transport them to .
The applicants confirmed that they had all supplied false names to the Georgian authorities. With the exception of Mr Kushtanashvili and Mr Margoshvili (see paragraphs 135 and 143 below), they had acted in this way to avoid extradition to Russia and to prevent family members and friends who were still in Russia from being endangered should they (the applicants) fall into the hands of the Russian authorities. Mr Issayev alleged that he was weary of ten years of war in  and that, if it would put him out of danger, he “[would] willingly change not only his name, but also his appearance”. He was convinced that he had escaped extradition on account of his false identity.
Mr Gelogayev and Mr Khanchukayev indicated that their officially assigned lawyers (including Ms Magradze, according to Mr Khanchukayev) and an investigator from the Ministry of Security had advised the applicants to say that they were armed when they crossed the border, since this would ensure that they were kept in  pending trial. The applicants had followed this advice.
The applicants all denied categorically that they had put up any resistance to State employees during the night of 3 to 4 October 2002.
Mr Issayev stated that he was opposed to his extradition to  on the ground that “no distinction is made there between peaceful civilians, terrorists and fighters”. When speaking with the representatives of the prosecution service who visited them in prison, he and his fellow prisoners had always expressed their wish not to be extradited to Russia and their fear of being subjected to ill-treatment in that country. They had asked to be tried in . They had had no access to the extradition papers. According to Mr Issayev (and also Mr Kushtanashvili), the officially assigned lawyers, the investigator and the representatives of the prosecutor's office had asked the applicants to tell them their real names so that they could help them avoid extradition. Those who had complied had been extradited immediately.
Prior to his arrest, in August 2002, Mr Issayev had, he claimed, attempted unsuccessfully to obtain refugee status in .
Mr Kushtanashvili claimed that he was Georgian (of Kist origin) and was a shepherd in the area bordering . When the region was being shelled by the Russian armed forces in August 2002, he had met seven injured Chechens who were fleeing. He had descended the mountain slopes on the border with them and taken them to a shepherds' hut. He himself had sustained a head injury that night. He repeatedly claimed not to have clear memories of the events in question on account of this injury.
Mr Kushtanashvili explained that, since he had no money, he had given the Georgian authorities and doctors a false Chechen name in order to pass for a fugitive and thus receive free medical care. He did not believe that his Georgian nationality represented an obstacle to extradition and considered that he was still in danger on account of his Chechen origins. In a letter sent to the Court on 13 November 2002, he alleged that, during the night of 3 to 4 October 2002, the applicants had asked to see their lawyers before leaving the cell as requested. The prison governor had replied that “neither lawyer nor investigator” would turn up and that “[they should] leave the cell voluntarily before [he used] force”. In the same letter Mr Kushtanashvili also claimed that Mr Aziev had received a violent blow to the head and that one of his eyes had practically come out of its socket. He had seen him for the last time when a member of the special troops “was dragging him along the corridor like a corpse”.
Mr Khanchukayev stated that, shortly after his arrest, “extradition started to be mentioned”. The applicant, who was afraid of being tortured in Russia, had signed papers, the content of which he could not remember, in the hope of being tried in  and avoiding extradition. In certain cases the applicants had allegedly been threatened with extradition if they refused to sign. After 4 October 2002 he had written to the Georgian President asking him not to authorise his extradition (see paragraph 80 above). He admitted that he was still afraid of extradition and that he lived in a state of uncertainty. At the initial stage of the proceedings before the Court, this applicant claimed that he could not return to Russia on account of the “genocide of the Chechen people” being perpetrated “by  throughout the country”.
Mr Khanchukayev did not recognise the explanatory statement of 23 August 2002 which, according to Mr Darbaydze, he had refused to sign (see paragraphs 163-64 below).
Mr Magomadov claimed that he did not know on which side of the border he had been injured, since the border line was not marked in the area in question (see paragraph 89 above). After being knocked out by a shell wound to the head, he had been carried by his comrades. A Georgian general had arrived by helicopter and had introduced himself as commandant of the border troops. He had promised the applicants that he would report the facts to the Georgian President in person and that they would be given refugee status. The general had previously given orders to the effect that the applicants were to receive hospital treatment.
During the meeting with a man and young woman from the Procurator-General's Office (see paragraphs 162-66 below), the applicants had been asked to sign documents without being informed of their contents. All of the non-extradited applicants had met those individuals, but in small groups. Mr Magomadov himself had been brought before the two members of the prosecution service in the company of Aslan (Khanoyev alias Khanchukayev) and Bekkhan (Khashiev alias Mulkoyev) (see paragraph 419 below). Mr Magomadov claimed that he still feared extradition.
Mr Gelogayev claimed that he had held refugee status in Georgia since February 2002 (see paragraph 86 above) and had been granted this status in the Akhmeta region, which bordered . He had then left legally for Chechnya, travelling via Baku (Azerbaijan), in the hope of bringing his family to . Once in , he had begun looking for a family member who had been missing for more than a year, and had arrived in the Itum-Kalinsk region. There, he had witnessed armed combat between the Russian federal army and the Chechen fighters, who had been surrounded on 25 July 2002.  had been the only way out. He had received a shrapnel wound to the leg but had nonetheless walked as far as the Georgian border, which he had crossed on 3 August 2002. He had requested asylum from the Georgian soldiers who arrived on the scene by helicopter. He had been hospitalised and operated on in , then transferred to a prison infirmary two days later.
Mr Margoshvili stated that in August 2002 he had been wounded while watching his flock in pastureland near the border. He did not know whether he had been wounded by Georgians, Russians or Chechens. After being taken to , he was treated in the prison infirmary, where he was detained for three months. He was informed that he had been arrested because he was carrying weapons. He claimed that he had not been imprisoned “with a weapon, but with a quilted jacket and shepherd's boots”.
Mr Margoshvili claimed that he had not assumed a false name of his own volition. Having been taken to hospital in a serious condition, he learned on recovering consciousness that he was being referred to as Mr Tepsayev. At first he had been happy to receive free medical treatment on the strength of this name, but had then rapidly challenged this identity in the infirmary and subsequently before a judge.
The Court heard Mr A. Dalakishvili, in-house inspector at Tbilisi Prison no. 5 (who was on duty on the night of 3 to 4 October 2002), Mr Buchukuri, employee of the Ministry of Justice's Prisons Department (who was also on duty that night), Mr E. Kerdikoshvili, chief inspector of the Prisons Department's service responsible for transporting foreign nationals, and Mr N. Chikviladze, employee of the Prisons Department, and head of security at Prison no. 1.
Those individuals all said that they had not been officially informed of the applicants' imminent extradition and that they had learned later, on the morning of 4 October 2002, that five Chechen prisoners were to be extradited. Mr Buchukuri and Mr Dalakishvili alleged that, as they had been on duty, they were unable to watch television to keep themselves informed. According to Mr Chikviladze, only the prison governor, his deputies and the head of the prison secretariat (special division) had been informed of the applicants' imminent transfer. He had learned from the media that four or five Chechen prisoners were to be extradited, but none of the prison staff had been told their names.
The above-mentioned persons confirmed that thirteen or fourteen Chechen prisoners were held in the same cell. According to Mr Tchikviladze, the decision to keep these prisoners together had been based on their religious convictions, so that they would not be hindered in carrying out their daily rites.
At about 4 a.m. on 4 October 2002, the above-mentioned prison staff were informed that a loud noise was coming from cell no. 88. Mr Dalakishvili instructed a warden to find out what was happening. The latter looked through the peephole in the cell door and saw that the prisoners were dismantling beds and shouting in a foreign language. According to Mr Chikviladze, after a certain period the warden was no longer able to observe what was going on, as the prisoners had covered over the peephole from the inside. Mr Dalakishvili submitted a written report on the situation to the prison governor, who was still in his office. At the latter's request, Mr Dalakishvili, Mr Buchukuri and Mr Chikviladze, accompanied by other members of staff and the deputy governor, went to the cell to see what was happening. The deputy governor ordered that the cell be opened. According to Mr Dalakishvili, they hoped to talk to the applicants. When the door was opened, they found the cell in chaos, heard shouts and saw that bits of metal and bricks were being thrown in their direction. Mr Chikviladze shouted an order to close the door quickly. He asked that it be left closed until such time as he had reported the situation to his superiors in the Prisons Department. Mr Dalakishvili, who did not understand the reason for such violence, believed that a riot was about to begin and increased the number of wardens on the floor in question.
Returning to the prison's administrative wing, Mr Chikviladze saw that the director of the Prisons Department was already there, together with about ten or so other people. He was then officially informed that four prisoners were to be removed with a view to their extradition. A vehicle was apparently ready in a neighbouring courtyard and the airport authorities had been informed. Accompanied by the director of the Prisons Department, the prison governor and their deputies, the wardens again gathered in front of the cell. The prison governor entered first, with four sealed files under his arm, one for each of the prisoners affected by the extradition order. The others followed him into the cell. According to Mr Kerdikoshvili, the prisoners were standing on their beds and throwing bowls, plates and other objects at them. The governor informed them that an internal measure was to be implemented in the cell and that the prisoners were to leave it. According to Mr Chikviladze, the governor mentioned the need to search the room. The prisoners categorically refused to obey and launched a direct attack.
The wardens heard by the Court confirmed that all the applicants were armed with pieces of metal which had been removed from the beds, metal grills which they had removed from the windows and trousers filled with bricks and tied at the end of the legs, which were being used as projectiles.
In this connection Mr Chikviladze explained that Prison no. 5 was housed in a building that had been constructed in 1887, and that the walls were so eroded that bricks could be pulled out by hand. Mr Dalakishvili also stated that the walls were in a state of disrepair and that bricks could be removed using one's bare hands. Having subsequently participated in drawing up the damage assessment report (see paragraph 96 above), Mr Chikviladze noted that the cell walls had been damaged and that the metal bed-frames were in several pieces. The water pipe above the sink had apparently been pulled out of the wall.
Since the prison governor's arrival in the cell had led to an open attack, masked members of the special troops, who had previously been posted in the staircase, entered the premises at the governor's request. Mr Dalakishvili and Mr Chikviladze considered that the use of special troops had been necessary in view of the scale of the resistance put up by the prisoners. They both agreed that hand-to-hand combat had taken place between the prisoners and members of the special troops. According to Mr Buchukuri, the special troops, who had been placed at the prison administration's disposal in case of necessity, usually carried a truncheon each and could hardly enter the prison armed in any other way.
According to Mr Dalakishvili, the applicants had heard rumours about the extradition order from the television. Mr Chikviladze supposed that they could have kept mobile phones illegally in their cell or could have listened to the radio. In addition, certain neighbouring cells contained television sets and their occupants could have passed on the news to the applicants without difficulty.
Mr Dalakishvili alleged that, on entering the cell behind the prison governor, he had been injured on the elbow and knee by “projectiles” fabricated on the spot by the prisoners (see paragraph 205 below). He nonetheless returned to his office, where the non-extradited prisoners had been taken for a check-up. Mr Dalakishvili observed that all of the applicants were covered in dust, but no one was bleeding. He stated that if Mr Magomadov had had a lacerated ear he would have noticed it (see paragraph 125 above). As he himself had not noted any injury and the applicants had not asked for medical assistance, Mr Dalakishvili had not been required to call a doctor at that point. Since the prisoners who were to be extradited had been led away immediately, he had not seen them again in his office and therefore had not seen Mr Aziev.
At the end of his shift, on coming across demonstrators outside the prison, Mr Dalakishvili learned that prisoners had been extradited. Given his position, he had been surprised that the authorities had not informed him so that, as was customary, he could inform the prisoners concerned on the day prior to their extradition. He explained to the Court that, under normal circumstances, a written, signed and stamped notification was sent to him by the head of the prison secretariat which managed the prisoners' personal files; Mr Dalakishvili's role was to check the documents for which he was responsible and to inform the individual concerned of the time of departure, so that he or she would have time to prepare. This procedure had not been followed in the instant case.
Mr Buchukuri claimed that he had been wounded in the foot by a piece of metal (see paragraph 204 below), that his wound had bled and that he had immediately gone to the prison administration's premises for treatment. Although his wound was not serious, it had required treatment for approximately ten days.
Mr Kerdikoshvili stated that, on arriving at the prison, he had learned that the prisoners were refusing to leave their cell, but that no one had explained to him why they were refusing to do so or why they had to be moved. Having followed the prison governor into the cell, he had been injured on the hand (see paragraph 204 below) and had immediately gone downstairs to the infirmary. Other wardens had also been injured and the prison doctor had provided medical treatment.
According to Mr Chikviladze, two or three prisoners, armed with pieces of metal, climbed to the top of the bunk beds when the prison governor entered the cell. One of them took aim at Mr Chikviladze several times, but failed to hit him. A member of the special troops then pushed Mr Chikviladze out of the way for his own safety. The most violent prisoners had been the four individuals whose sealed files the governor had brandished; two other prisoners had attempted unsuccessfully to calm them down.
Mr Chikviladze considered it likely that, like the State employees, the prisoners could have been injured, given the hand-to-hand fighting that had taken place in the cell.
Mr Z. Sheshberidze explained that the special troops were based not far from Prison no. 5, which they could reach in ten minutes if they ran. On the night in question he and about fifteen of his colleagues had been instructed to defuse the situation in cell no. 88. Unaware of the reason for the disorder, the group had been positioned in staircases near the cell, from where noise and shouting in a foreign language could be heard. The prison governor had entered the cell, but had returned a few minutes later and asked the troops to intervene. They had complied and had performed their task “after encountering limited resistance”. The prisoners had been armed with pieces of metal and missile-like objects made from trousers containing a solid mass. Mr Sheshberidze stated that he and his colleagues had indeed been wearing masks, in line with the regulations. On the other hand, they had not worn special vests or any other protective equipment. Armed only with rubber truncheons, they had not carried electric batons or other weapons. They had made the prisoners lie down in the corridor and had handed them over to the prison wardens before leaving the building. Mr Sheshberidze had learned from the television that the applicants had been removed from the cell in order to be extradited.
Mr Sheshberidze claimed that he had sustained a small injury (see paragraph 204 below). He denied the allegation that he and his colleagues had beaten the applicants mercilessly and insulted them.
The Court questioned Mr L. Darbaydze and Ms A. Nadareishvili, trainee prosecutors at the Procurator-General's Office at the relevant time, Mr P. Mskhiladze, director of international relations at the Procurator-General's Office, and Mr N. Gabrichidze, former Georgian Procurator-General.
Mr Darbaydze explained that, under the supervision of Mr Mskhiladze, his superior, he had been responsible for various tasks in connection with the disputed extraditions. In particular, Mr Mskhiladze had asked him to visit the applicants in prison, to inform them that the issue of their extradition was being examined by the Procurator-General's Office and to request explanations concerning their nationality. He had carried out this visit on 23 August 2002 with his fellow trainee, Ms Nadareishvili, and without the lawyers being present, since “it was not official questioning, but a request for information”. On that date they met only five applicants.
Mr Darbaydze had first spoken with Mr Khanchukayev in Russian in a separate room. The latter had provided information orally, but had refused to sign the corresponding document that would provide formal confirmation of his remarks (see paragraph 137 above). On being returned to the room where the other prisoners were being held, Mr Khanchukayev had said something to them in Chechen. The prisoners then collectively refused to “provide the required explanations and sign the relevant document”, on the ground that they were not assisted by a lawyer and a Chechen interpreter.
The document that Mr Khanchukayev had refused to sign was an explanatory statement intended for the Procurator-General. It contained the applicant's assertions to the effect that he was Chechen and had been born in Grozny in 1981; had arrived in Georgia on 4 August 2002 and been arrested by the Georgian authorities; had been held for a few days in the Ministry of Security's investigation prison then transferred to Prison no. 5 in Tbilisi; and had been informed at the time of his arrest that he had been arrested for crossing the border illegally. The following sentence can be read at the bottom of this piece of paper: “The prisoner refused to sign this document and requested the assistance of a lawyer.” The document had been drawn up by Mr L. Darbaydze, trainee prosecutor. According to the minutes of the meeting, signed only by Mr Darbaydze and Ms Nadareishvili, they had unsuccessfully attempted “to obtain an explanatory statement from the applicant in connection with his extradition”.
Following this refusal to communicate, Mr Darbaydze postponed the discussion in order to seek the assistance of an interpreter. Mr P. Mskhiladze, his superior, arranged with the Ministry of Security's team of investigators (see paragraph 190 below) that, following an interview scheduled for 13 September 2002, Mr Darbaydze would be able to meet the applicants. Mr Darbaydze thus received an assurance that lawyers and a Chechen-speaking interpreter would be present at the meeting.
On 13 September 2002, accompanied by his colleague Ms Kherianova, Mr Darbaydze went to the prison. He met Mr T. Saydayev, an interpreter hired by the Ministry of Security (see paragraph 189 below), and explained to him that, “on account of an ongoing extradition procedure, [he wished] to receive information from the Chechen prisoners that would enable their nationality to be established”. The interpreter had translated these remarks, but, since he did not speak Chechen, Mr Darbaydze had been unable to assess the accuracy of the interpretation. In response, the applicants reiterated their refusal to provide information and to sign the corresponding documents, which had been drawn up in Russian. Nonetheless, the documents were read out to them.
As the applicants' representatives had indicated that Mr Darbaydze's name did not appear on either of the two “visitors' logs (citizens, lawyers and investigators) for Prison no. 5” covering the periods of 5 August to 12 September and 13 September to 17 October 2002 respectively, Mr Darbaydze explained that on 23 August and 13 September 2002 his name had not been entered in those logs but in the prison's “register of access to the investigation room”. Since prosecutors – unlike visitors, lawyers and investigators – had no need of a pass and could enter the prison on the strength of their professional badge alone, he did not believe that his name could have been entered in the visitors' log mentioned by the lawyers. By the same token, his name did not appear in the “register of requests to bring a prisoner [from his or her cell]” because, on the two dates in question, he had joined the applicants in the investigation room, to which they had been conducted at the request of the Ministry of Security's investigators (see paragraph 190 below).
Mr Darbaydze explained that the Ministry of Justice, which was responsible for executing extradition orders, had been informed immediately of the decision of 2 October 2002 (see paragraph 178 below). On the same date Mr Mskhiladze had personally informed the applicants' domestic lawyers by telephone and, furthermore, had served the written extradition orders on them. Mr Darbaydze seemed to remember going to the lawyers' offices for that purpose.
According to Mr Darbaydze, at the material time neither the Georgian Code of Criminal Procedure nor any regulatory measure governed the procedure to be followed in lodging an appeal against an extradition order. Article 259 § 4 of the above-mentioned Code alluded to it only vaguely (see paragraph 254 below). This loophole had been remedied by the Georgian Supreme Court's case-law in the Aliev case (see paragraph 258 below).
Mr Darbaydze stated that, given the lawyers' criticism that neither they nor their clients had been informed of the extradition proceedings and orders, he had contacted Mr Saydayev in December 2002 and had asked him to certify by affidavit that he had indeed gone to the prison on 13 September 2002 and informed the applicants of the extradition proceedings against them. Mr Darbaydze produced the affidavit in question before the Court (see paragraph 196 below).
Ms Nadareishvili confirmed that she had been responsible for the extradition case in question within the Procurator-General's Office. On 23 August 2002, together with Mr Darbaydze, she had met five of the applicants in the investigation room of Tbilisi's Prison no. 5. Given those five individuals' refusal to cooperate, she and her colleague had decided against asking that the other applicants be brought to them, as originally planned. Ms Nadareishvili and Mr Darbaydze wished to obtain information about the applicants' dates and places of birth, and their nationalities. They informed the applicants that they were working on the question of their extradition for the Procurator-General's Office and that they were not investigators. The applicants had initially pretended not to speak Russian but had subsequently stated in that language that they did not wish to return to  and that some of them had Georgian nationality. This conversation took place without a lawyer or an interpreter.
With regard to the fact that her name did not appear in the prison's visitors' log, Ms Nadareishvili claimed not to know the procedure for access to the prison, since she had visited it for the first and last time on 23 August 2002.
Mr Mskhiladze, who was Mr Darbaydze's and Ms Nadareishvili's hierarchical superior, explained that the Georgian Procurator-General's Office had not been satisfied with the documents submitted by the Russian authorities in support of the extradition request concerning the applicants; those documents had been handed over during Mr Ustinov's visit to Georgia (see paragraphs 62 and 63 above). Confirming the facts set out in paragraphs 62-64, 67-69 and 71-72 above, Mr Mskhiladze emphasised that the Georgian authorities had asked their Russian counterparts for firm assurances concerning the treatment that would await the applicants in the event of extradition. He pointed out that those had not been general assurances, but individual guarantees in respect of each applicant, cited by name in the relevant letters. Given that the assurances had come from the Russian Procurator-General's Office and that the Office had the role of prosecutor during criminal trials in , the Georgian authorities had every reason to believe that the death penalty would not be sought in respect of the applicants. They had also taken into account that a moratorium on the death penalty had been in force in  since 1996 and that the imposition of such a sanction had been prohibited by the Constitutional Court's judgment of 2 February 1999. Beset by “certain doubts”, the Georgian authorities had required the same type of assurance with regard to inhuman or degrading treatment. It was only after it had obtained satisfactory assurances in that respect that the Georgian Procurator-General's Office had begun examining the extradition request.
Without denying that the Procurator-General's Office had sent the Russian authorities photographs of the applicants which had been taken in , Mr Mskhiladze firmly denied that the Russian side had used those photographs in their extradition request or in support of that request. The Russian authorities had indeed submitted the photographs of the applicants which were included with the copies of Form no. 1 (see the footnote on page 12 above). According to Mr Mskhiladze, this was explained by the fact that, at the request of the Ministry of Security's investigation team responsible for examining the illegal border crossing, the Procurator-General's Office had submitted a request for assistance in that criminal case to the Russian authorities, in accordance with the Minsk Convention. The request, accompanied by the applicants' photographs and fingerprints, was intended to identify the persons concerned and had been drawn up at the end of August 2002. Given that the extradition request, supported by photographs of the applicants and other documents, had been submitted on 6 August 2002, Mr Mskhiladze did not believe that the two sets of photographs could be the same.
As to the identification of the extradited applicants, Mr Mskhiladze explained that the Russian investigation orders contained their real names and that the applicants themselves had never contested this. They had also been identified by means of identification procedures in , photographs, identity documents and copies of Form no. 1, submitted by the Russian authorities. In addition, according to the Georgian Ministry of Justice, those individuals did not possess, and had never possessed, Georgian nationality. The Ministry for Refugees had also indicated that they were not on the refugee list. Thus, the extradition orders of 2 October 2002 had not resulted from a hasty procedure. For two months, the Procurator-General's Office had meticulously examined the documents showing that the applicants were accused of serious crimes in , were Russian nationals and were protected by firm assurances from the Russian authorities.
Mr Mskhiladze considered that the extradition proceedings had been transparent. At his request, trainee prosecutors who were supervised by him had informed the applicants of the extradition proceedings and had obtained information about their nationality. In addition, the applicants had also been kept informed by the media. Mr Mskhiladze stated that the extradited applicants' lawyers had consequently been able to rely on Article 259 § 4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 254 below) and to apply to a court at any stage of the proceedings, especially as such an application would have had a suspensive effect on execution of the extradition orders. However, Mr Mskhiladze accepted that he was unaware of instances in which Article 259 § 4 had been used prior to the Aliev case (see paragraph 258 below). He pointed out that, following the Supreme Court judgment in that case, three applicants had been able to challenge the extradition orders issued against them (see paragraphs 83 and 84 above).
With regard to the issue of access to the extradition files, Mr Mskhiladze explained that the applicants' lawyers had asked to inspect the files, but that this had been refused on the ground that the employees of the Procurator-General's Office responsible for the case needed to be able to study these files themselves. In any event, according to Mr Mskhiladze, the lawyers would have been able to consult the files only if they had decided to apply to a court against the extradition proceedings.
Mr Mskhiladze stated that at about 1 p.m. on 2 October 2002 he had personally handed over a copy of the extradition orders – issued that day at noon – to the relevant individual in the Ministry of Justice, with a view to their execution. He had also informed Mr Khidjakadze and Mr Gabaydze, the applicants' lawyers, of the orders by telephone (see paragraphs 212 et seq. below). As he was unable to contact Mr Arabidze, he had asked the latter's colleagues to inform him. He had then sent the lawyers a letter containing a copy of the orders. Mr Mskhiladze submitted to the Court a copy of this letter of notification, which also informed the lawyers that they were entitled to apply to a court on behalf of their clients. As he was unable to send the letter by fax on account of electricity problems – a regular occurrence in  – Mr Mskhiladze instructed Mr Darbaydze to leave the letter at the lawyers' offices (see paragraph 168 above). Since the lawyers were absent, Mr Darbaydze handed over the envelope to an office employee. The copy of the letter submitted by Mr Mskhiladze has an almost entirely illegible and faded signature, preceded by the words “I confirm receipt on 2 October 2002”.
As to Mr Aziev's allegedly alarming condition, Mr Mskhiladze did not rule out the possibility that he had been injured during the incident between the prisoners and special troops and that the journalists had not wished to film him at the airport. In any event, Red Cross representatives had visited each applicant at the airport. Russian television had subsequently shown Mr Aziev being admitted to prison.
Mr Mskhiladze dismissed Ms Mukhashavria's argument that the applicants' detention had been directly linked to the fact of Mr Ustinov's lodging of an extradition request against them.
Mr Gabrichidze said that on 6 August 2002 Mr Ustinov had visited  with his deputy, several employees of the Russian Procurator-General's Office and special guards. The main purpose of his visit had been to discuss the alarming situation prevailing in the Pankisi Gorge, a Georgian valley which bordered . On that occasion he submitted the request for extradition of the applicants and certain supporting documents. Mr Gabrichidze had initially refused this request for the reasons set out in paragraphs 62 and 63 above. Mr Ustinov had not contested that decision, but did however ask that the proceedings be expedited.
According to Mr Gabrichidze, the extradition proceedings were conducted with maximum transparency, given that they were covered by the media and the Procurator-General's Office organised regular press conferences on the subject. During the proceedings, firm assurances were obtained from the Russian authorities that the death penalty would not be applied and that the extradited individuals would not be subjected to inhuman and degrading treatment and would receive legal assistance. In addition, account had been taken of the fact that a moratorium on capital punishment had been in force in  since 1996 and that the imposition of that penalty was hardly possible since the Constitutional Court's judgment of 2 February 1999. As a Procurator-General himself, Mr Gabrichidze had had no reason to doubt the credibility of guarantees provided by a  of the Council of Europe.
Having concluded that the material in his possession enabled him to consent to the extradition of five applicants, he had contacted his Russian counterpart, asking him to supervise personally the investigation proceedings in  and to ensure that those individuals' procedural rights were fully respected. He had even telephoned Mr Fridinskiy, Russian Deputy Prosecutor-General responsible for the North Caucasus area, who had given verbal guarantees and reassured him by referring to the assurances already provided in writing.
Once it had been decided to extradite the five applicants, execution of this measure depended only on the arrival of an aeroplane from . Mr Gabrichidze had instructed Mr Mskhiladze to inform the applicants' lawyers of the decision immediately. Once informed, the latter could have challenged the extradition before the courts. However, Mr Gabrichidze noted that the Code of Criminal Procedure contained only one provision on this subject, which was worded in general terms, did not set out either the procedure or the time-limits for lodging an appeal and did not identify the relevant court. He conceded that, given this deficiency in the legislation and the total lack of precedent, the fact that no appeal had been made was not entirely imputable to the lawyers. Between 1996 (the year in which the Minsk Convention came into force in respect of Georgia) and October 2002, there had been no instance in  of a judicial appeal against an extradition order. Mr Gabrichidze stressed the need to reform Georgian legislation in this area.
Mr Bakashvili, an employee of the Ministry of Security, had led a team of investigators in the proceedings against the applicants for crossing the border illegally. He had personally dealt with the cases of Mr Khanchukayev, Mr Gelogayev, Mr Khashiev, Mr Magomadov, Mr Baymurzayev and Mr Adayev. Of those, only Mr Adayev had been in possession of a Soviet passport; this document stated that he was named Aslan Lechievich Adayev, was a Russian national and had been born on 22 July 1968. The identity of the other applicants listed above had initially been established on the basis of their own statements. Subsequently, a request for assistance in criminal matters was sent to the Russian authorities through the Procurator-General's Office (see paragraph 174 above). The “reports on identification by a third party using photographs”, the statements by the applicants' neighbours and close family, as well as other documents provided by the Russian authorities, had made it possible to establish that Mr Khanoyev was Khanchukayev Aslanbeg Atuyevich, that Mr Mirjoyev was called Gelogayev Ruslan Akhmedovich, that Mr Khashiev was called Mulkoyev Bekkhan Seidkhatanevich, that Mr Usmanov was Magomadov Akhmad Lechievich and that Mr Baymurzayev was named Alkhanov Khusein Movladinevich.
With regard to the secrecy surrounding their real identity, the applicants told the investigator they were afraid that their relatives and friends left behind in  would be persecuted. They had confessed to being armed when they crossed the Georgian border and had cooperated during the investigation. They had not explicitly referred to their fear, but had stated on several occasions that they did not wish to be extradited to .
The investigation had been conducted in Chechen with assistance from Mr Saydayev, an interpreter hired from time to time under contract. The applicants all spoke Russian very well and, with the exception of the investigation interviews, had spoken with the investigator in that language.
“On 13 September 2002, at Tbilisi Prison no. 5, I assisted investigators from the Ministry of Security as an interpreter in the case of Mr A. Adayev, Mr T. Baymurzayev and other individuals (thirteen persons in total). Once the investigators' work was complete, Mr L. Darbaydze, trainee prosecutor at the Department of International Relations in the Procurator-General's Office, arrived to question the same Chechen prisoners. He first informed them that the question of their extradition was being examined by the Procurator-General's Office and then asked them to provide the necessary explanations in order to establish their nationality. The Chechen prisoners refused, after which Mr Darbaydze drew up a report and submitted it to them for signature. The prisoners refused to sign this document. The prosecutor and the prisoners communicated through me.”
(d)  Facts submitted by the medical expert
(e)  Extracts from the applicants' “prisoner files”
(f)  Facts submitted in writing by the applicants' lawyers before the domestic courts
Article 13 § 4
“It is forbidden to extradite a citizen of  to a foreign State except in those cases prescribed by international treaty. An appeal against any extradition decision lies to the courts.”
Article 18 §§ 3 and 5
“3.  Anyone arrested or otherwise deprived of his or her liberty shall be brought before a competent court within forty-eight hours. If the court fails to rule on the detention or other custodial measure within twenty-four hours following the hearing, the individual concerned must be immediately released.
...
An arrested or detained person must be informed at the time of arrest or detention of his or her rights and the grounds for the deprivation of liberty.”
Article 42 § 1
“Everyone has the right to apply to a court for protection of his or her rights and freedoms.”
Article 159 § 1
“No one may be detained without an order of a judge or other judicial decision ...”
Article 162 § 2
“The length of detention during the preparatory investigation shall not exceed three months; this period shall run from the date of the suspect's arrest or the defendant's placement in detention. The date on which the prosecutor refers the case to a court shall be taken as the end of that detention period.”
This Article also provides for the possibility of extension of the detention period by the competent court, but such detention may not under any circumstances exceed nine months (which is also the period provided for by the Constitution).
Article 242 § 1
“A judicial remedy is available in respect of an action or decision by an inquiry officer, investigating body, investigator or prosecutor which the individual concerned considers unfounded or unlawful, in the case of (a) an order to discontinue the case, taken by the investigating body, investigator or prosecutor; (b) a finding of no case to answer, reached by the investigating body, investigator or prosecutor.”
Article 256 §§ 1, 2, 4, 6 and 7
“1.  By virtue of an international agreement on mutual judicial assistance, a foreign State may request the extradition of one of its citizens who is in Georgian territory if that individual is suspected of having committed a crime in his or her own country, or if he or she has been convicted of a crime by a court of that country or if he or she has committed a crime against his or her country in Georgian territory.
The extradition request must comply with the requirements laid down in the corresponding international agreement and must emanate from a competent body.
...
If the Georgian Procurator-General considers the extradition request to be lawful and well-founded, he or she shall give instructions for its execution and may, where appropriate, request the assistance of the Georgian Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
...
... If the person whose extradition is requested has been placed under investigation on suspicion of having committed a crime in Georgian territory, his or her extradition may be postponed until such time as judgment is delivered, the sentence has been served or he or she is released for another lawful reason.
In the cases provided for in paragraph 6 of this Article, the Georgian Supreme Court may, at the request of the competent bodies of the foreign State, decide to hand over the latter's citizen on a temporary basis. If an individual extradited in such a way is given a sentence heavier than or equivalent to that which remained to be served in Georgia, he or she shall serve the sentence in his or her own country and shall not be returned to .”
Article 257 § 1
“An alien shall not be extradited if he or she has been granted political asylum in .”
Article 259
“1.  The arrest [and] detention ... of an individual whose extradition is requested shall only be possible if the request is accompanied by a warrant (order, instruction) duly certified by a competent public body and refers to procedural measures restricting his or her rights and freedoms ... guaranteed under the Constitution.
The entity from which the extradition request emanated shall be immediately informed of the execution of the measures mentioned in the preceding paragraph.
A foreign national who has been detained in accordance with an extradition request may be detained for a maximum duration of three months, unless a fresh judicial warrant (order) for extension of the detention is produced.
An individual against whom extradition proceedings have been brought shall be entitled to apply to a court for protection of his or her rights.”
“...in accordance with Article 42 § 1 of the Constitution, everyone has the right to apply to a court for protection of his or her rights and freedoms. Article 259 § 4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure states that a person against whom extradition proceedings have been brought is entitled to defend his or her rights through the courts. Yet the Code of Criminal Procedure does not prescribe the procedure to be followed when examining such a request ... Nonetheless, this shortcoming in the legislation cannot prevent the individual from exercising his or her rights as enshrined in the Constitution and the Code of Criminal Procedure ... The Bench considers that Mr Aliev's request must be examined on the basis of an interpretation by analogy with Article 242 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which states that an action or decision of the inquiry officer, investigator or prosecutor may be challenged before the courts if the individual concerned considers it to be unfounded or unlawful. Given that the decision to extradite Mr Aliev was taken by the Procurator-General's Office, his application must be examined by the Krtsanissi-Mtatsminda Court of First Instance in , which has territorial jurisdiction.”
Article 15 § 4
“The internationally recognised principles and rules of international law and the international treaties to which the  is a party are an integral part of its legal system. Where such international treaties provide for rules different from those in the domestic legislation, the rules of the international treaty shall prevail.”
Article 20 § 2
“Until such time as it is abolished, capital punishment may be provided for by federal law as an exceptional sentence imposed in the event of particularly serious crimes against human life, and the defendant must have the right to have his or her case examined in a court by a jury.”
Article 317
“An attack on the lives of employees of the police or security forces and their close relatives, either for the purpose of obstructing their lawful activities to ensure public order and security or in order to exact revenge for such activities, shall be punishable by a prison term ranging from twelve to twenty years, the death penalty or life imprisonment.”
In accordance with an amendment of 21 July 2004, the last sentence of this Article now reads:
“... shall be punishable by a prison term ranging from twelve to twenty years, life imprisonment or the death penalty.”
The Presidential Decree of 16 May 1996 on the gradual elimination of the death penalty as a result of Russia's membership of the Council of Europe
“In accordance with the Recommendation of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe and in the light of Article 20 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation concerning the provisional nature of the imposition of the death penalty as an exceptional punishment in the event of particularly serious crimes against human life, I hereby order:
(1)  the Government of the Russian Federation to prepare within one month a draft federal law on the Russian Federation's accession to Protocol No. 6 of 22 November 1984 to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of 4 November 1950, with a view to its submission to the State Duma (Federal Assembly);
(2)  the Chambers of the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation to expedite the enactment of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation, the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation and the Code on the Execution of Criminal Sentences; ... to consider, when examining the draft Criminal Code, the question of reducing the number of offences for which the death penalty may be imposed.”
The relevant provisions of the Constitutional Court's judgment of 2 February 1999
“5.  From the entry into force of this judgment and until such time as assize courts are introduced throughout the territory of the Federation, the death penalty may not be imposed either by an assize court or by a bench composed of three professional judges or of a single judge and two lay assessors.”
The Federal Law on the Prosecution Service, dated 17 January 1992
Section 13(1)
“... The prosecutors of the federal subjects of the Russian Federation shall be subordinate to and report to the Procurator-General of the , who shall be entitled to remove them from their posts.”
Section 17(1)
“The Procurator-General shall manage the prosecution service of the Russian Federation and shall issue orders, indications, instructions and provisions concerning the organisation of the prosecution service's activities which shall be binding on all employees of the prosecution service's bodies and establishments.”
Section 32
(Chapter 4 – Supervision by the prosecution service of compliance with the law by the administrative authorities of the entities and establishments responsible for the application of sentences ... and by the authorities responsible for premises used for police custody and detention)
“The supervision shall concern
(a)  the lawfulness of the incarceration of detainees in places of police custody and pre-trial detention, in corrective labour establishments and other bodies and establishments responsible for the application of sentences and of compulsory measures that have been decided by the courts;
(b)  observance of the rights and obligations of persons held in police custody, detainees, convicted prisoners and persons subject to compulsory measures, and compliance with the rules and conditions of their detention as set out in the legislation of the Russian Federation ...”
Section 33
“In the context of his or her duty to supervise compliance with the law, the prosecutor may
(i)  visit the entities and establishments referred to in section 32 above at any time;
(ii)  question those detained in police custody, detainees, convicted prisoners and persons subject to compulsory measures; ...
(iii)  require that the authorities create conditions such as to guarantee the rights of individuals in police custody, detainees, convicted prisoners and persons subject to compulsory measures; supervise the conformity with the law of measures ... taken by the establishments referred to in section 32 above; demand explanations from public employees; prepare objections [protests] and opinions; commence a prosecution or initiate proceedings for administrative offences ...”
Section 34
“The prosecutor's orders or requests with regard to the rules and conditions of detention of persons held in police custody, detainees, convicted prisoners and persons subject to compulsory measures ..., prescribed by law, shall be binding on the authorities ...”
Section 35(2)
“When conducting a criminal prosecution before a court, individual prosecutors take part in the proceedings on behalf of the public prosecution service.”
The Code of Criminal Procedure (“CCP”), in force since 1 July 2002
Article 1 § 3
“The internationally recognised principles and rules of international law and the international treaties to which the Russian Federation is a party are an integral part of the Russian Federation's legislation governing criminal procedure. Where such international treaties provide for rules different from those set out in the present Code, the rules contained in the international treaty shall prevail.”
Article 2 § 3
“Irrespective of the locality in which an offence was committed, proceedings with regard to a criminal case shall be conducted in the territory of the Russian Federation in accordance with the present Code, unless otherwise provided by an international treaty to which the  is a party.”
Article 30
“1.  Criminal cases shall be examined by a court composed of a bench or of a single judge.
In courts of first instance, criminal cases shall be examined by the following compositions:
...
(b)  At the defendant's request, the judge of a federal court and a jury of twelve persons shall examine cases concerning the crimes set out in Article 31 § 3 of this Code. ...”
The crimes set out in Article 31 § 3 of the CCP are, inter alia, those punishable under Articles 205, 209, 317 and 322 § 2 of the Criminal Code (see paragraphs 66 and 71 above).
Article 108 §§ 1 and 5
“1.  Pre-trial detention shall be imposed by a judicial decision on an individual who has been placed under investigation or a defendant accused of committing a crime punishable by more than two years' imprisonment, where another less severe preventive measure cannot be applied.
...
Pre-trial detention may be imposed in the absence of a defendant only if an international search warrant has been issued against him or her.”
Article 109 § 1
“Detention pending the investigation shall not exceed two months.”
This initial period may subsequently be extended in certain circumstances by a court or judicial officer, in particular on account of the complexity of the case; however, the overall length of detention may not in any circumstances exceed eighteen months.
Article 312
“Copies of the judgment shall be issued to the convicted or acquitted individual, his or her counsel and the public prosecution service within five days of its delivery. Within the same time-limit, the civil party, the plaintiff or the defendant in civil proceedings, together with their counsel, may also obtain copies of the judgment, subject to the submission to the court of a written request to that effect.”
The Federal Law of 27 December 2002 amending the Law on the entry into force of the new CCP
“... Article 30 § 2 (b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure shall come into force on 1 July 2002 in the regions of ... Krasnodar and Stavropol ...; ... on 1 January 2007 in the .”
The second date will mark the completion of the introduction of assize courts in the .
Article 56 – Obligation to extradite
“The Contracting Parties undertake, subject to the conditions set out in the present Convention and at the request of one of the Parties, to hand over to each other persons found in their territory for the purpose of criminal prosecution or the enforcement of a judgment delivered against them.
Extradition for the purpose of criminal prosecution shall take place if the act or omission in question is an offence under the law of the requesting Party and that of the requested Party, and if it is punishable by a sentence of imprisonment superior to one year or by a more severe punishment.
Extradition for the purpose of the enforcement of a judgment shall take place if the individual whose extradition is requested has been sentenced to a prison term of more than six months or to a more severe punishment for having committed an act or omission that is an offence under the law of the requesting Party and the requested Party.”
Article 80 – Special arrangements
“Relations concerning questions of extradition and criminal prosecution shall be carried out through the intermediary of the General Procurators (prosecutors) of the Contracting Parties.
Relations concerning the completion of different proceedings or other acts requiring the approval ('sanction') of a prosecutor or a court shall be carried out through the intermediary of the prosecution services' bodies, in accordance with the arrangements decided by the General Procurators (prosecutors) of the Contracting Parties.”
Article 11 – Capital punishment
“If the offence for which extradition is requested is punishable by death under the law of the requesting Party, and if in respect of such offence the death-penalty is not provided for by the law of the requested Party or is not normally carried out, extradition may be refused unless the requesting Party gives such assurance as the requested Party considers sufficient that the death-penalty will not be carried out.”
Article 28 §§ 1 and 2 – Relations between this Convention
and bilateral agreements
“1.  This Convention shall, in respect of those countries to which it applies, supersede the provisions of any bilateral treaties, conventions or agreements governing extradition between any two Contracting Parties.
The Contracting Parties may conclude between themselves bilateral or multilateral agreements only in order to supplement the provisions of this Convention or to facilitate the application of the principles contained therein.”
When depositing the instrument of ratification on 15 June 2001,  made the following reservation:
“ declares that it will not allow the extradition of any person in connection with offences punishable by the death penalty under the requesting Party's legislation.”
Council of Europe
“...
The Parliamentary Assembly notes that the  shares fully its understanding and interpretation of commitments entered into ... and intends:
...
(ii)  to sign within one year and ratify within three years from the time of accession Protocol No. 6 to the European Convention on Human Rights on the abolition of the death penalty in time of peace, and to put into place a moratorium on executions with effect from the day of accession;
...”
“...
With regard to the human rights situation in the Chechen Republic, the Assembly remains distressed by the number of killings of politically active individuals, by repeated disappearances and the ineffectiveness of the authorities in investigating them, as well as by the widespread allegations and indications of brutality and violence against the civilian population in the republic.
The Russian authorities seem unable to stop grave human rights violations in . ... [T]he Assembly can only conclude that the prosecuting bodies are either unwilling or unable to find and bring to justice the guilty parties. The Assembly deplores the climate of impunity which consequently reigns in the  and which makes normal life in the republic impossible.
...”
“...
The mandate of the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe's Assistance Group to  has not been renewed by the Russian Government. The Council of Europe's European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) has complained about the Russian Federation's lack of co-operation with it. The  has yet to authorise the publication of its reports and the recommendations of the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights are implemented with long delays, if at all. The European Court of Human Rights, set up to deal with individual violations of human rights, cannot hope to cope effectively with systematic human rights abuses on the Chechen scale via individual complaints. Lamentably, no  or group of member States has yet found the courage to lodge an interstate complaint with the Court.
...”
“...
The dramatic human rights situation in the  described in the texts adopted by the Assembly in April 2003 has unfortunately not improved significantly since then. The number of 'special operations' or 'sweeps' by security forces has in fact significantly decreased, in particular since the end of 2003. However, arbitrary detentions, often followed by the 'disappearance', torture or severe beatings of detainees and the theft or destruction of property at the hands of security forces (Chechen and federal) but also of certain rebel groups, are still occurring on a massive scale, especially as seen against the background of the small population of the Chechen Republic and the losses already suffered in previous years. ...
...
The Assembly is outraged that serious crimes have been committed against applicants to the European Court of Human Rights and their family members, which have not yet been elucidated. Such acts are totally unacceptable as they may deter applications to the Court, which is the centrepiece of the human rights protection mechanism established by the European Convention on Human Rights.
...”
“... [T]he information gathered by the CPT's delegation in the course of its February/March and April 2000 visits indicated that a considerable number of persons deprived of their liberty in the Chechen Republic since the outset of the conflict had been physically ill-treated by members of the Russian armed forces or law enforcement agencies. ...
...
... [I]n the course of the Committee's most recent visit to the Chechen Republic, in March 2001, numerous credible and consistent allegations were once again received of severe ill-treatment by federal forces; in a number of cases, those allegations were supported by medical evidence. The CPT's delegation found a palpable climate of fear; many people who had been ill-treated and others who knew about such offences were reluctant to file complaints to the authorities. There was the fear of reprisals at local level and a general sentiment that, in any event, justice would not be done. ...
... According to the information gathered during the March 2001 visit, there were clear indications on some of the bodies that the deaths were the result of summary executions; further, certain of the bodies had been identified by relatives as those of persons who had disappeared following their detention by Russian forces. ...
In their reply forwarded on 28 June 2001, the Russian authorities indicate that they are not willing to provide the information requested or to engage in a discussion with the CPT on the matters indicated above; they assert that such matters do not fall within the Committee's purview under the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Such an approach is inconsistent with the object and purpose of the international treaty establishing the CPT and can only be qualified as a failure to cooperate with the Committee.”
“...
On 10 July 2001, the CPT issued a public statement concerning the . ...
Subsequently, some steps forward have been made. ...
...
[However,] in the course of the CPT's visits to the Chechen Republic in 2002 and, most recently, from 23 to 29 May 2003, a considerable number of persons interviewed independently at different places alleged that they had been severely ill-treated whilst detained by law enforcement agencies. The allegations were detailed and consistent, and concerned methods such as very severe beating, the infliction of electric shocks, and asphyxiation using a plastic bag or gas mask. In many cases, these allegations were supported by medical evidence. Some persons examined by the delegation's doctors displayed physical marks or conditions which were fully consistent with their allegations. ...
...”
Human Rights Watch
The reports entitled “Russia/Chechnya – Swept under: Torture, forced disappearances, and extrajudicial killings during sweep operations in Chechnya” (vol. 14, no. 2 (D), February 2002), “Confessions at any cost: Police torture in Russia” (November 1999) and “Welcome to Hell – Arbitrary detention, torture, and extortion in Chechnya” (October 2000) describe acts of torture, especially medical torture, against Chechen prisoners and arbitrary executions. Other prisoners have disappeared without trace. Thus, an entire people was allegedly exposed to a serious threat of extermination. In addition to those observations, the reports contain about sixty interviews with Chechens who had been held in about a dozen “detention centres” across Chechnya and the neighbouring Caucasus regions and had survived torture, rape and ill-treatment. They had been released as a result of bribes paid to Russian soldiers. The reports describe different forms of torture carried out in those centres. The report “Welcome to Hell” presents evidence of the acts of torture and ill-treatment experienced by Chechen prisoners in pre-trial detention centres in the  region. The methods regularly used in those premises include the “live corridor” (the prisoners are beaten as they go through a corridor), the “beating of kneeling and bent-over prisoners” and “beating of naked prisoners with clubs, carried out in shower rooms”. All the Chechen former prisoners who gave evidence to Human Rights Watch used false names and were described using pseudonyms, which were cited in quotation marks.
Amnesty International and the Russian Human Rights Commissioner Group
According to an Amnesty International document published in 2000, the two prisons in which the extradited applicants were initially placed and in which they are currently detained are “filtration camps”. Amnesty International has listed various forms of torture practised in those camps in the context of the conflict which is raging throughout . “Testimonies ... confirm that detainees (both men and women) are raped, tortured with electric shocks and tear gas and beaten with hammers and clubs. Other forms of torture consist in sawing the victim's teeth or striking him or her until the eardrums burst.”
The Russian Human Rights Commissioner Group confirmed this information and submitted extracts from the administrative order under which filtration centres had been temporarily opened in the two establishments in which the applicants were and are detained, the purpose being to check the prisoners' identities and to establish their role in the armed conflict against the army and the armed forces of the Ministry of the Interior (information published by the Russian association Memorial).
The United Nations Special Rapporteur on Torture (, 14 March 2002, §§ 6 and 10; , §§ 1268-310)
The majority of cases brought to the Russian Government's attention concerned individuals detained by the Russian forces in . The acts of torture and ill-treatment reported were, inter alia, the following: imprisonment in a dark cell; blows to the entire body from a hammer or rifle butt; a deep knife wound to the leg; setting of dogs on detainees; forcing the victim to remain in a kneeling position for eight hours; electric shocks; punching; torture consisting of flaying and scalping; broken limbs; severed fingertips or nose; firing at the victim at point-blank range; packing prisoners for several days in unheated parked vehicles; deprivation of nourishment; access to toilets denied; rape or threat of rape against female prisoners; stab wounds to the entire body; eyes torn out; burns to the legs and arms.
Report of 15 September 2004 by the International  Federation for Human Rights
“...
Persecution of Applicants to the European Court of Human Rights
... As the Russian judicial system fails to address the crimes committed in , there remains the possibility of applying to the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) ... At the same time, many applicants have been threatened, harassed, detained, or even forcibly disappeared and killed. Some of the cases, notably that of Lipkhan Bazaeva who is both an activist and an applicant, have already been mentioned. There was a sharp rise in cases of persecution of applicants in 2003 and 2004. This pattern can be explained partly by the fact that there is a growing number of applicants. But even when this is taken into account, the number of attacks appears to have grown disproportionately to the number of applicants – a fact which suggests that persecution of applicants is an emerging trend.
...
Some of the organisations that represent applicants from Chechnya before the ECtHR, namely Memorial, European Human Rights Advocacy Centre, and Chechnya Justice Initiative, have reported other incidents aimed at some of their clients. In letters to the ECtHR they mention 13 cases, with a total of 29 counts of abuse, in which different applicants have been persecuted in connection with their search for justice.
...
All in all, the cases of persecution of ECtHR applicants include both verbal and written threats, sometimes against other family members. In one case an applicant lost his job. In two cases soldiers illegally searched an applicant's house. At least one of the applicants was robbed. In four cases, applicants were beaten. In one case, the applicant went into hiding. In at least two cases the applicants are considering withdrawing their applications to the courts. Two formally withdrew their applications. Most of the threats and beatings were reported in 2003 and 2004. Federal forces are believed to be involved in all of these cases. The organisations representing the applicants claim that notifications about incidents from the ECtHR to the Russian authorities have had a positive effect in some cases, easing the pressure on individual applicants and their families.
...”
The report describes the circumstances in which several applicants, including Zura Bitieva (killed, application no. 57953/00), Marzet Imakaeva (persecuted, application no. 7615/02) and Sharfudin Sambiev (persecuted, application no. 38693/04), were subjected to violence.
“...
Persecution of Foreign Human Rights Defenders
...
The Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) established an office in Znamenskoe, Chechnya in June 2001, but the  refused to extend the mandate of the OSCE Advisory Group when it expired at the end of 2002. While there have been few foreigners inside , some international and humanitarian organisations have maintained offices in Ingushetia. However, a number of the foreign representatives left Ingushetia after the June 2004 attacks. The international presence in Northern Caucasus is becoming increasingly diluted, resulting in the near-absence of witnesses and help from the outside.
...”