The case originated in an application (no. 75460/10) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Ms Hamdiye Akdağ (“the applicant”), on 22 November 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr İ. Akmeşe, a lawyer practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that she had not had a fair trial on account of the denial of access to a lawyer while in police custody and the use by the trial court of her statements allegedly obtained under duress and in the absence of a lawyer.
On 28 May 2015 the Government were given notice of the above-mentioned complaints and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1974 and was serving a sentence in İzmit Prison at the time of lodging of the application.
On 13 November 2003 the applicant was arrested in the vicinity of her house on suspicion of membership of an illegal organisation, namely the PKK/KADEK (the Workers’ Party of Kurdistan). She was in possession of a fake identity card at the time of her arrest.
Subsequently, police officers carried out a search of the house in which the applicant and the other co-accused, İ.A., lived. According to the search and seizure report drafted by the police and signed by the applicant and İ.A., the police searched the applicant’s flat and found the following items; a book with the title Twenty-first Century Women Freedom Manifesto, five pieces of rubber band used for a tourniquet, fourteen pieces of elastic plaster, ten thermometers, five bandages, nine compression bandages, and a bag of cotton balls. İ.A., who was also at the house, was arrested by the police. A paper containing the number “0535 8.. .. ..” , which was later found to have belonged to R.B. (who was the applicant in Ruşen Bayar v. Turkey, no. 25253/08, 19 February 2019), was found on the applicant along with other material.
Her first medical examination upon her arrest was carried out at 10.45 p.m. on the same day and the applicant told the doctor that she had been arrested at approximately 3.30 p.m. and that she had not been ill-treated other than having been yelled at by the police officers. According to the medical report issued in respect of the applicant, there were no signs of violence on the applicant’s body.
The applicant was then taken to the anti-terrorism division of the Istanbul Security Directorate. On 14 November 2003 she was questioned by police officers in the absence of a lawyer. The applicant’s statements to the police were transcribed on printed forms, the first page of which was filled in to indicate, inter alia, that the applicant was suspected of carrying out activities within the PKK/KADEK. The same page also included a printed statement that, inter alia, the person being questioned had the right to remain silent and the right to choose a lawyer. It appears from the form that the applicant refused legal assistance, since the first page of the record includes a printed phrase stating “No lawyer sought” and a box next to it marked with a printed “X”. Moreover, according to the record, the applicant also stated that she did not want a lawyer or to remain silent. She gave a statement of nine pages in length in which she admitted her membership of the PKK/KADEK and gave a detailed account of her involvement and training in the illegal organisation, as well as how she had met R.B. and N.A., two of the co-accused. Every page of the statement form was signed by the applicant.
On 16 November 2003 İ.A. was questioned by the police, but by different police officers from the ones who had questioned the applicant. According to his statement form, which was in the same format as that of the applicant, he wished to be represented by a lawyer. A lawyer was accordingly assigned to him and İ.A. availed himself of his right to remain silent.
On 17 November 2003 at approximately 10.30 p.m., at the end of her police custody, the applicant was once again examined by a doctor. According to the report drawn up in respect of the applicant, she told the doctor that the police had hit her head, threatened to kill and rape her and had driven their car into her as a result of which she had lost consciousness. The doctor noted no signs of lesions while adding that the applicant had subjective pain in her back and on her left leg. The doctor accordingly concluded that there were no signs of violence on the applicant’s body.
On the same day, the applicant was brought before the public prosecutor where she gave statements in the presence of her lawyer. Denying the content of her police statements, the applicant submitted that she had had to sign those statements as a result of violence and coercion by the police. The applicant further complained that she had been ill-treated by the police as described by her in the medical report. The applicant’s lawyer stated that she had no connection with the PKK/KADEK.
Again on the same day, the applicant was brought before the investigating judge where she gave statements in the presence of her lawyer. She once again denied her police statements, alleging that they had been taken under duress and pressure. She complained of the alleged torture she had been subjected to while in police custody. After the questioning was over, the investigating judge remanded the applicant in custody, having regard to the nature of the offence and the state of the evidence.
On 4 December 2003 the public prosecutor at the Istanbul State Security Court filed a bill of indictment, accusing the applicant of being a member of an illegal terrorist organisation under Article 168 of the now defunct Criminal Code, Law no. 765.
On an unknown date the applicant lodged a formal complaint with the Fatih public prosecutor’s office claiming that she had been ill-treated by the police while in custody between 13 and 17 November 2003. On 31 March 2004 Fatih public prosecutor’s office delivered a decision not to prosecute the police officers for lack of evidence.
On 17 March 2004, at the first hearing in the case, the applicant gave evidence in person, submitting that she had not been a member of the illegal organisation and denying once again her police statements, alleging that she had been forced to sign them. She further maintained that she had been forcibly taken by the police to a graveyard and threatened with death. The applicant also mentioned that the police had hit her head against a wall several times and that she had been stripped naked hourly in order to obtain a confession from her. She maintained that her signature under her police statement had been obtained in those circumstances and further alleged that she was illiterate. The applicant further stated that the reason why she had had the fake identity card found on her had been because she had been married to İ.A. and that her family had been against the marriage.
At a hearing held on 22 November 2004 the case against the applicant and her co-accused was joined to another case brought against a number of other people charged with being members of the same illegal organisation and the killing of a certain M.Y. in 1999 on behalf of the organisation.
At the hearing on 5 June 2006 the Istanbul public prosecutor read out his observations on the merits of the case (esas hakkında mütalaa) to the trial court in the absence of the applicant. In his opinion, the public prosecutor advised that the court should find the applicant guilty as charged.
On 19 December 2008, at the eleventh hearing, the applicant’s lawyer submitted that they reiterated their previous defence submissions.
On 13 February 2009, during the last hearing, the applicant’s lawyer reiterated the previous submissions, requesting the applicant’s acquittal and the application of provisions in favour of the applicant.
While the applicant’s trial was pending before the Istanbul State Security Court, those courts were abolished in accordance with Law no. 5190 of 16 June 2004, published in the Official Gazette on 30 June 2004. Therefore, the Istanbul Assize Court acquired jurisdiction over the case.
On 13 February 2009 the Istanbul Assize Court found, inter alia, that on the basis of the applicant’s statements to the police, the applicant had been a member of the PKK/KADEK, and sentenced her to six years and three months’ imprisonment. The trial court listed the following items in the following order in its judgment: a summary of the indictment, the public prosecutor’s observations on the merits of the case (esas hakkında mütalaa), the defence submissions of the defendants, the evidence, the evaluation of evidence and the sentences. The court did not rely on the case file as a whole and listed the evidence in its possession in respect of the accused in detail. It appears that the only relevant item of evidence in respect of the applicant listed in the “evidence” part of the judgment was “the statements of the accused throughout the proceedings”. The relevant parts of the trial court’s judgment in so far as it concerned the applicant read as follows:
“... [The court finds] that the [applicant] and İ.A. were members of the terrorist organisation, that they received military and political training in the organisation’s camps abroad, that they came to Turkey with a view to carrying out organisational activities, that a fake identity card was found on [the applicant], that she had an organisational connection with R.B. and that she lived together with the organisation member İ.A. ...”
According to the reasoned judgment, seven out of fifteen of the accused who had admitted their guilt while giving police statements in the absence of a lawyer had denied those statements either before the public prosecutor or before the investigating judge. Moreover, fourteen of the accused had denied the accusations against them during the trial. However, the reasoned judgment did not contain any examination of the admissibility of those statements.
On 13 February 2009 the applicant’s lawyer lodged an appeal against the decision. In that one-page-long document, it was argued that the applicant’s conviction had been unlawful and “contrary to procedure”. The lawyer further maintained in that appeal statement that the applicant would submit her detailed arguments following the service of the trial court’s reasoned judgment.
On 27 April 2010 the Court of Cassation upheld the conviction. This decision was deposited with the registry of the first-instance court on 25 May 2010.
A description of the relevant domestic law concerning the right to a lawyer may be found in Salduz v. Turkey ([GC] no. 36391/02, §§ 2731, 27 November 2008).
Under Article 135/a of the Code of Criminal Procedure in force at the time of the applicant’s arrest, statements were to be given by the accused of his or her own free will. Methods such as ill-treatment, torture, induced fatigue, the administration of drugs, torment and deception that “impairs the will of the accused” were proscribed. Statements that had been obtained through such methods could not be used in evidence, even if the accused had agreed to their use.
Article 238 of the same Code empowered the criminal courts to refuse to admit any unlawfully obtained evidence. Furthermore, Article 254 of the same Code explicitly stated that evidence that had been obtained unlawfully could not be used by the courts.
Article 148 of the new Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”) (Law no. 5271) in force as of 1 June 2005 reads as follows:
“The statement of the suspect and the accused should be based on his or her own free will. Physical or psychological interference capable of undermining [the free will], such as ill-treatment, torture, the administration of drugs, induced fatigue, torment and deception, duress, threat, or use of other equipment, shall be prohibited.
No benefit that is contrary to law shall be promised.
Statements that were obtained through such methods shall not be used in evidence even if consent has been given [by the accused or the suspect] for their use.
Statements taken by the police in the absence of a lawyer shall not be relied on [for conviction] unless the suspect or the accused verifies them before a judge or a court.
...”