The case originated in an application (no. 67907/16) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Vyacheslav Vyacheslavovich Kolgin (“the applicant”), on 1 November 2016.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms Y. Yefremova, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation with the European Court of Human Rights.
On 20 September 2017 the complaints concerning the applicant’s conditions of detention and compulsory shaving were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1978 and is serving a prison sentence in Khabarovsk.
On 30 July 2004 the Samara Regional Court sentenced the applicant to life imprisonment. On 20 July 2007 the applicant was placed in Correctional Colony No. IK-56.
The Government submitted the following information as regards the personal space afforded to the applicant during his detention in the colony:
The Government further submitted that from 21 October to 11 November 2009, from 14 to 18 December 2013, and from 5 October to 26 December 2016 the applicant had been detained in Correctional Colony No. IK-55.
According to the applicant, the inmates are housed in double or single cells. The double cells measure approximately 18 m² and the single ones approximately 4 m². Since 2007 the applicant has been assigned to different cells, his conditions of detention remaining unchanged.
There is no water supply or sewage system on the colony premises. The inmates are given buckets, to compensate for the lack of a toilet, which they have to empty every morning in a cesspool located some two metres away from the recreation area. Each day the inmates receive 10 litres of river water for their personal needs. They are allowed to take a shower once a week.
The windows in the cells are covered with three layers of metal bars or screens. The cells are not ventilated. The lighting is dim and inadequate.
The food is not fresh, lacks variety and is of poor quality. The milk is often sour, and the fruit juices are diluted with water.
The applicant has been housed in single cell no. 10 since 2010. The temperature in the cell does not exceed +120C during the winter. It is damp and stuffy during the summer. He is confined to his cell 22 hours a day and is entitled to one and a half hours’ outdoor exercise per day.
The recreation area is divided into exercise yards measuring 7 m². The yards are covered with metal bars and screens. There is no exercise equipment.
From July 2007 to December 2016 the applicant was not allowed to grow a beard or to have his hair longer than 0.5 cm. His hair was completely shaved off 2 to 4 times a month, and he had to shave his face 2 to 3 times a week.
On an unspecified date the applicant complained to the prosecutor about the compulsory shaving.
On 13 December 2013 the prosecutor replied that the compulsory shaving of the head and beard to which the applicant had been subjected had been unlawful, and that the prosecutor’s office had informed the administration of the correctional colony where the applicant was serving his prison sentence. The prosecutor also informed the applicant of his right to appeal either to a higher-ranking prosecutor or a court. It appears that the applicant took no further action.
According to the Internal Regulations of Correctional Facilities in force from November 2005 to December 2016 (Section III, paragraph 14), inmates had to keep their hair, beard and moustache short.
According to the Internal Regulations of Correctional Facilities approved by Order No. 295 of the Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation of 16 December 2016 (Section III, paragraph 16), inmates are allowed to grow their hair up to 20 mm long and have beards up to 9 mm long. For medical reasons, the inmates may be allowed to wear longer moustaches or beards.