The case originated in an application (no. 11608/15) against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Hungarian national, Mr Csaba Herbai (“the applicant”), on 2 March 2015.
The applicant was represented by Ms A.K. Soós, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged a breach of his right to freedom of expression under Article 10 of the Convention.
On 15 December 2017 the Government were given notice of the application.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. Taking into account the issues raised in the application, the Court finds it appropriate to allocate the case to a Chamber.
The applicant was born in 1974 and lives in Budapest.
From 2006 the applicant worked as a human resources management expert at Bank O. His tasks included the analysis and calculation of salaries and staffing management. At the material time the applicant’s employer initiated a reform of its remuneration policy, in which the applicant was also involved.
According to the code of ethics of the bank, the applicant was under an obligation not to publish formally or informally any information relating to the functioning and activities of his employer.
In January 2011 the applicant, together with Ms A.N., started a knowledge-sharing website for human resources management-related publications and events. The website also contained a presentation of the applicant with his photograph, describing him as an expert in human resources management and indicating that he worked in the human resources (HR) department of a large domestic bank, without mentioning his employer.
In January 2011 two articles were published on the website. The article “New year, new strategy – Really new? Really a strategy?” was written by Ms A.N. and contained the following passage:
“I was called today in connection with a conference and was asked some very exciting and inspiring questions. How does one prepare a HR strategy? What is the role of HR strategy? Do you have to employ HR professionals to create a HR strategy? Do you know how to link business objectives to HR strategy? We could say that this is a boring issue and these are boring questions, particularly at the beginning of the year, when every portal overwhelms us with articles like homework on this topic, in a partly false belief that creating such a strategy is connected to the beginning of the calendar year in every company. The subject is painfully topical, at the same time. This is only my opinion, not the result of a representative survey or international research carried out by British scientists. Simply, I think that some HR professionals should be taught as regards strategy that the connecting of business objectives and HR strategy is not clear in all organisations. (The reasons are various, but discussing them would use up my ‘character limit’ by itself, so I will not cover this issue.) We read often about problems regarding ‘how HR could be a strategic partner’. This approach is always surprising to me. It is rather like a ‘learn Japanese in two weeks’ course. Both learning Japanese and building strategic partnerships are the result of long-term processes. A responsible professional should not give the impression that one article or one blog entry, or concentrating for five minutes a day, is enough. The process itself cannot be done away with. A detailed knowledge of the organisational structure, the education system and recruiting policy is not enough. We have to be able to break away from the interests of our professional field if the interests of the organisation so require. We have to know the business, the market, our competitors, our service and our products. If someone complains that ‘he is not taken seriously by the management’, I always think about learning Japanese. None of this should be an aim in itself, but the result of hard professional work.. (I would point out that unfortunately we have met people whose cousins worked in a place where even this was unable to achieve the desired outcome.)”
The second article “Sweet 16%” was written by the applicant and contained the following passage:
“How sweet is that big spoonful of jam? – Motivation in the light of tax changes
 A topic which concerns everybody today, and which led us to take the fresh fruit jar off the shelf too: as of 2011, according to the Personal Income Tax Act, all income payable as salary is subject to the 16% tax rate. The numbers indicate that in reality the only people who will benefit from this are those whose monthly earnings exceed HUF 300,000, excluding family allowances. This amount exceeds the current average income level by far. We can see in the enclosed table how net payments will change from 2011. The majority of companies plan to modify their remuneration policies and the level of wage increases, the latter being expected to fall in those jobs where tax change results in positive net income. The other thing that caused my thoughts to race is that tax is payable after rewards and bonuses, just as it is payable after salary. This may also mean that bonuses will gain in importance. Certainly, I have to say from a professional point of view that rewarding achievements by means other than fixed wages results in achievements and their fluctuation becoming more traceable. On the other hand, this trend runs counter to the professional efforts of recent years aimed at restricting the proportion of bonus payments and fixing remuneration systems in a more responsible manner.
Further unanswered questions leave a bitter taste in our mouth after the first sweet mouthful. Following the changes, how will all this follow inflation as regards real net salaries? How committed and motivated will employees remain in the light of the changes? Will it matter to employees whether changes are decided at State or company level? What impact will different rates of salary increase and wage development have? My opinion may be surprising in certain respects and I have some further exciting comments to make as well, which I would like to share with you in the course of our discussions. So I look forward to your opinions and comments.”
The applicant’s employment was terminated on 11 Februar  2011 for breaching his employer’s confidentiality standards. The bank argued that the applicant’s conduct in providing educational services in the field of human resources management had infringed its economic interests. Moreover, given the nature of his position, the applicant was in possession of information whose publication would have interfered with the bank’s business interests.
The applicant instituted proceedings before the Budapest Labour Court challenging his dismissal.
On 26 June 2012 the Budapest Labour Court dismissed his action, finding that the website and the content of the articles constituted a breach of the duty of mutual trust. It pointed out that the applicant operated the website and that the question whether he was the author of the impugned articles was irrelevant for the court’s assessment. It also found it established that the applicant’s conduct had jeopardised Bank O.’s business interests, in breach of Article 3 § 5 of the Labour Code (see paragraph 20 below), irrespective of whether actual damage had occurred. The court found that the applicant had revealed information relating to his employment, since the knowledge shared on the website had necessarily been acquired during his employment at Bank O.
The applicant appealed, arguing that he could not be held liable for the publication of articles written by others and that he did not operate the website. Furthermore, he had not sought to reveal the business secrets of his employer but to engage in professional discussions.
On 26 March 2013 the Budapest High Court upheld the applicant’s appeal. The High Court considered that it was irrelevant who had written the impugned articles, since the applicant featured as an expert on the website and was thus necessarily associated with the articles. Nonetheless, the articles had discussed human resources policies in general terms that could not be linked to Bank O. The High Court also found that the knowledge-sharing element of the website did not mean that the applicant had intended to reveal information acquired through his work. It concluded that the applicant’s conduct had not jeopardised his employer’s business interests and that his dismissal for breach of trust had therefore not been lawful.
On 3 September 2014 the Kúria upheld a request for review made by the bank, endorsed the findings of the first-instance court and observed that the applicant’s conduct could endanger his employer’s business interest (see paragraph 14 above). It concluded that the similarities between the website and the applicant’s tasks at his workplace demonstrated that he had provided information about current policies at his workplace and that he had intended to share knowledge acquired there about issues relevant to his tasks, in breach of his employer’s code of ethics.
The applicant lodged a constitutional complaint, maintaining that his activities concerned the exercise of his right to freedom of expression, which had not been taken into consideration by the courts.
The decision of the Constitutional Court, issued on 26 June 2017, contained the following passages:
“... Article 8 § 3 of the Labour Code, as currently in force, explicitly mentions the restriction on the right to freedom of expression. Accordingly, ‘the employee may not exercise his or her right to freedom of expression by gravely infringing or jeopardising the employer’s reputation and justified business and organisational interests’. Furthermore, Article 103 § 3 of the former Labour Code, as well as Article 8 § 4 of the current one, prohibits the publication of any information which the employee acquires through his or her employment and whose publication would have negative consequences for the employer or any third person. These general employment obligations may justify the restriction of employees’ right to freedom of expression, even if it is exercised outside the workplace and working hours. ... Thus, in employment the right to freedom of expression may be subject to tighter restrictions and it does not protect material published by employees if the sole intention is to convey comments tarnishing their employer’s dignity and business reputation or its market and commercial valuation, or to convey injurious comments concerning the employer’s private or family life. The freedom does not extend to opinions that are published with the aim of destroying business or causing any other harm. Furthermore, an employee’s opinions are not protected by the right to freedom of expression if their aim is to criticise, question or undermine the values and value-based policies of his or her employer. This also flows from the secrecy and duty of loyalty characterising employment relations, according to which the employee contributes effectively to the achievement of the employer’s goals. The expression of opinions infringing the duty of loyalty cannot entail the protection of fundamental rights based on the general clauses of labour law.
At the same time, freedom of expression is at the core of a democracy based on the rule of law. Therefore, the freedom of those who seek to exercise their right in the context of employment may only be restricted in compliance with and while respecting the values of the Fundamental Law, based on the necessity and proportionality test applicable to the restriction of fundamental rights. ... The right to freedom of expression of employees may be restricted if the restriction is absolutely necessary for a reason related to the person’s employment and if it is proportionate to the aim pursued. ... Therefore, when assessing the protection of opinions, it is necessary to consider (1) whether the expression in question relates to a matter of public or professional interest, (2) whether the expression is a statement of fact or a value judgment, (3) whether the expression caused damage or negatively influenced the employer’s reputation, (4) whether the person who exercised his or her right to freedom of expression acted in good faith, (5) the gravity of the measure applied by the employer ...
Based on the above, in the present constitutional complaint the Constitutional Court will examine whether the conduct and expression in question are protected under Article IX (1) of the Fundamental Law, that is to say, whether in the present case there is an issue concerning fundamental rights. According to the settled practice of the Constitutional Court it is necessary to examine whether the opinion has public characteristics and is linked to a public interest, that is to say, whether it contributes to a debate on public matters. In this context the manner and circumstances of publication, the subject-matter and context of the opinion, the type of medium used, the event underlying the expression, and as further elements the content, style, topicality and aim of the expression, need to be assessed ...
Based on the facts as established in the course of the labour proceedings, the Constitutional Court finds that the conduct in question related only to questions concerning human resources management, that is to say questions concerning a specific profession and addressing professionals. The aim of the website and of the articles published was “knowledge-sharing”, targeting a limited circle, namely the human resources experts of competing companies. ... Having regard to the above, the Constitutional Court finds that the conduct complained of in the labour proceedings, the content of the website and the articles are mainly of a professional nature and do not disclose any public link which would enable the conduct to be characterised clearly as a discussion of matters of public interest. Therefore, the conduct complained of in the labour proceedings and the published articles are not protected by the right to freedom of expression enshrined in Article IX (1) of the Fundamental Law. Given that the conduct in question is not protected by the fundamental right to freedom of expression, its restriction is not to be assessed on the basis of the labour-law standards prohibiting the infringement of the employer’s legitimate business interests. Accordingly, in the present case the Constitutional Court dismisses the constitutional complaint for lack of any connection between the fundamental right relied on and the standards applicable in labour proceedings.
...”
Act no. XXII of 2012 on the Labour Code, in force at the material time, provided as follows:
Article 3
“(5) In the employment relationship, employees shall not engage in any conduct which would jeopardise the legitimate economic interests of the employer, unless so authorised by a legal regulation. ...”
Article IX of the Fundamental Law provides as follows:
“1.  Everyone shall have the right to freedom of speech. ...”