The case originated in an application (no. 16032/07) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Mr Velyo Nikolaev Velev (“the applicant”), on 5 March 2007.
The applicant was represented by Ms E. Syarova, a lawyer practising in Stara Zagora. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Kotseva, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged that he was not allowed to pursue his education while in Stara Zagora Prison, in breach of Article 2 of Protocol No. 1, and that he was treated as a “recidivist” prior to a final conviction in his case, in breach of Article 6 § 2 of the Convention.
On 14 December 2010 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1977 and lives in Stara Zagora. In 2003 he was convicted of a fraud offence and served a sentence of imprisonment in Stara Zagora Prison from 11 February 2003 to 9 August 2004. On 1 October 2004 he was arrested on suspicion of unlawful possession of firearms. Between 29 November 2004 and 20 April 2007 he was detained on remand in Stara Zagora Prison, where he claimed to have been detained with “recidivist” prisoners (see paragraph 20 below).
As he had never finished his secondary education, the applicant requested to be enrolled in the school operating inside Stara Zagora Prison. In August 2005 he submitted a written request to the governor of the Stara Zagora Prison, asking to be enrolled for the 2005/06 school year. He received no reply before the school year began on 15 September 2005, so he wrote again to the governor on 29 September 2005 and also to the Ministry of Education and the Prosecutor’s Office (in Bulgaria, the Prosecutor is the authority competent to oversee the lawful execution of pretrial and post-conviction detention). The applicant received a letter from the Prosecutor, dated 6 October 2005, which said that the prison administration had taken due account of the possibility for the applicant to study, in view of his previous sentence. The Prosecutor further stated that the applicant’s assertion regarding refused access to education had not been confirmed. The applicant also received a reply, dated 24 October 2005, from the Ministry of Education. The letter stated that individuals deprived of their liberty (лишени от свобода) were entitled to continue their education in prison and made no specific reference to remand prisoners.
In the meantime, on 19 October 2005 the applicant sent another request to the prison governor, the Ministry of Education and the Appellate Prosecutor. On 26 October 2005 the applicant filed a new request with the prison governor, again asking to be enrolled in the prison school for the 2005/06 school year. Referring to the letter of 24 October 2005, the applicant argued that the Ministry of Education had recognised his right to access to education in prison. On 7 December 2005 he received a reply signed by the Head of the Execution of Punishments Directorate of the Ministry of Justice, rejecting his request. The letter stated, inter alia:
“It was established that [the applicant] has not yet been convicted. Once convicted, he is to be transferred to a prison for recidivists.
The inclusion of recidivists in the educational and work programmes in a prison for non-recidivists would lead to a breach of the requirement that different categories of inmates are to be kept apart and are to participate separately in correctional programmes ...”
On 21 December 2005 the applicant appealed against the refusal to enrol him in the school, claiming that in the absence of a second sentence of imprisonment he could not be treated as а “recidivist”. In his written pleadings he relied explicitly on the right to education as guaranteed by Article 53 of the Constitution and by Article 2 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention, as well as on Rule 77 of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, which provided, inter alia, that “[p]rovision shall be made for the further education of all prisoners capable of profiting thereby”. In the applicant’s opinion the Execution of Punishments Act 1969 (see paragraphs 15-18 below) imposed the same obligation on the authorities to provide access to education to prisoners detained on remand as the obligation to provide such access to sentenced prisoners. The refusal pursued no legitimate aim and was contrary to the National Education Act 1991 and the United Nations Convention against Discrimination in Education (published in the Official Gazette in 1963). During the hearing he indicated that other persons in his situation were allowed to study and that the prison authorities had not shown any legal ground for their refusal. The prison governor admitted that there had previously been a practice of providing access to the school, but that this had been discontinued because of concerns about the influence of “recidivists” on “non-recidivists”. The applicant had been refused access as he was to be treated as a “recidivist” within the meaning of the Execution of Punishments Act 1969 (see paragraph 20 below) and could not attend the school because this would bring him into contact with non-recidivists.
In a judgment of 24 March 2006, the Stara Zagora Regional Court allowed the applicant’s appeal and ordered the governor to include him in the prison’s educational programme. It found, in particular, that the refusal of the prison governor was based on the assumption that the applicant was a “recidivist” and that since the Stara Zagora Prison was a prison for “nonrecidivists”, it was the duty of the prison administration to exclude him from programmes involving other inmates, most of whom were “nonrecidivists”. The court held that the applicant could not be considered a “recidivist”, as defined by section 158 of the Execution of Punishments Act because, although he had previously received a sentence of imprisonment, the current set of proceedings against him were still pending and he had not yet been convicted and sentenced a second time. The rule requiring that “recidivists” be kept separately from “non-recidivists” in prison was, therefore, inapplicable.
The prison governor appealed against that judgment. He argued that, in accordance with the principle for differentiated treatment of the various categories of prisoner, the applicant was accommodated in the group of those remand prisoners who, if convicted, would fall within the category of “recidivists”. Moreover, the Stara Zagora Prison was a prison for “non-recidivists” and the accommodation of “recidivists”, including remand prisoners treated as such, was exceptional.
Before the examination of the appeal, on 9 August 2006 the applicant requested the governor to enrol him in the prison school for the new school year, starting 15 September 2006. As he received no reply to his request, on 21 September 2006 he filed a similar request with the Execution of Punishments Directorate of the Ministry of Justice.
On 26 September 2006 the Supreme Administrative Court gave a final judgment in respect of the applicant’s complaint about exclusion from the school. Before the Supreme Administrative Court, the prosecutor (who intervenes in all Supreme Court proceedings) was of the view that the decision of the Stara Zagora Regional Court was correct and that the prison governor’s appeal should be dismissed. The prosecutor further expressed the view that the grounds for the cassation appeal were unclear and based on an incorrect interpretation of the applicable law, contrary to the correct interpretation given by the first-instance court in the decision appealed against. In its decision the Supreme Court noted that before the 2002 amendments, the Execution of Punishments Act imposed an obligation for the mandatory education of all prisoners under 40 years of age. The current provision envisaged mandatory education only for persons under the age of 16; for those aged 16 and over there was an obligation on the State to make education available for prisoners who wished to take part. However, convicted prisoners had a right under domestic law to access education only where they had been sentenced to one year or more of imprisonment, to ensure that they would have the possibility of completing a school year (see paragraphs 15-19 below). The Supreme Court concluded:
“[T]he right to education (whether mandatory or voluntary) is envisaged and regulated in the legislation of the Republic of Bulgaria solely in regard of persons deprived of liberty as a result of a final conviction [лишаване от свобода] and not in regard of those deprived of liberty pursuant to a measure of remand [задържане под стража].”
It followed that the question whether the prison authorities unlawfully considered the applicant to be a “recidivist” was irrelevant.
Referring to that judgment, on 6 November 2006 the Execution of Punishments Directorate replied to the applicant’s requests of 9 August and 21 September 2006, informing him that he would not be enrolled in the prison school for the year 2006/07.
Subsequently, the applicant was convicted and sentenced to imprisonment in respect of the firearms offence. He was removed from Stara Zagora Prison on 20 April 2007 and transferred to Pazardjik Prison to serve his sentence. The Government informed the Court that the applicant did not file any requests to take part in educational activities while at that prison. However, in his observations to the Court, the applicant stated that he did not file a request because there was no school at Pazardjik Prison. In addition, he sent the Court documents which indicated that at least one prisoner considered a “recidivist” had participated successfully in the education programme at Stara Zagora Prison. The applicant was released from Pazardjik Prison on 27 July 2008.
During the period in question, access by prisoners to education was governed by the Execution of Punishments Act 1969 (in force until June 2009 – “the 1969 Act”); the implementing regulations to the 1969 Act; Ordinance no. 2 of 19 April 1999 on the status of remand prisoners (in force until 2007 – “the Ordinance”); the National Education Act 1991 (“the 1991 Act”); and the implementing regulations to the 1991 Act. It should be noted that before 2002 the status of remand prisoners was regulated by ordinances issued by the Minister of Justice. In 2002 such rules were incorporated into the 1969 Act. It appears that the Ordinance continued to be operative until 2006 when the implementing regulations to the 1969 Act were supplemented with provisions regulating in more detail the status of remand prisoners.
Before 2002 education in prison was mandatory for prisoners under 40 years of age (section 39(1) of the 1969 Act) but only where they had been sentenced to one year or more of imprisonment (section 47(1) of the implementing regulations to the 1969 Act). Section 39(1) of the 1969 Act was repealed in 2002 but the provision in the implementing regulations remained operative.
The relevant provisions provided for three different regimes of access to education. Prisoners aged between 14 and 18, accommodated in “correctional houses” rather than prisons, were entitled to attend classes. Education was mandatory for prisoners aged 16 or under (see section 39(3) of the 1969 Act and section 7(1) of the 1991 Act). Older convicted prisoners were entitled to request inclusion in the educational programmes and the prison administration was duty-bound to provide such (section 39(4) of the 1969 Act and section 75(1) of the implementing regulations to the 1969 Act). At the time of admittance to the prison institution the prison authorities were required to make an assessment as to the individual needs of the prisoner as regards education (section 66a(1)(3) of the 1969 Act). Prisoners who were engaged in educational activities and did not work were entitled to have the time spent in school deducted from their overall sentence based on the same rules as working days (section 103(4) of the 1969 Act).
Section 128 of the 1969 Act stipulated that in the absence of other provisions, the provisions of the 1969 Act concerning convicted prisoners were applicable to prisoners detained on remand. A similar provision was contained in the implementing regulations to the 1969 Act (section 168).
The newly enacted Execution of Punishments and Pre-Trial Detention Act 2009 (“the 2009 Act”) contained similar provisions. It stipulated that the inclusion in educational programmes of convicted prisoners under 16 years of age was mandatory (section 162(1) of the 2009 Act). The administration could provide educational programmes for prisoners above that age (section 162(2)). The inclusion of remand prisoners in educational programmes was “encouraged” (section 257(2)). Finally, the time spent in school was to be deducted from the overall sentence based on the same rules as those for working days (section 178(4)).
At the relevant time, section 158(1) of the 1969 Act provided that, for its purposes, “recidivists” would mean:
“(a)  persons who have been sentenced two or more times to imprisonment for intentional offences, which did not require one cumulative punishment ..., if they have actually served a sentence of imprisonment;
(b)  persons who have been convicted of an offence qualifying as dangerous recidivism.”
Section 12 of the 1969 Act required that “recidivists” serve their sentences in separate institutions. Section 8a(3) provided that “correctional activities in respect of different categories of prisoners [would] be carried out separately”. “Recidivists” within the meaning of that law could be transferred to other prisons only in exceptional cases if they had reformed and there was no danger of negatively influencing other prisoners (section 12(2) of the 1969 Act). Remand prisoners who had previously been sentenced to a term of imprisonment and were not rehabilitated were accommodated separately from other remand prisoners (section 130б(1)(5) of the 1969 Act). The 2009 Act contains similar provisions.
The European Prison Rules are recommendations of the Committee of Ministers to member States of the Council of Europe as to the minimum standards to be applied in prisons. States are encouraged to be guided by the Rules in their legislation and policies, and to ensure wide dissemination of the Rules to their judicial authorities and to prison staff and inmates.
The 1987 European Prison Rules were adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on 12 February 1987. They contained the following provisions, inter alia, in relation to untried prisoners:
“11.1.  In allocating prisoners to different institutions or regimes, due account shall be taken of their judicial and legal situation (untried or convicted prisoner, first offender or habitual offender, short sentence or long sentence), of the special requirements of their treatment, of their medical needs, their sex and age.
...
In principle, untried prisoners shall be detained separately from convicted prisoners unless they consent to being accommodated or involved together in organised activities beneficial to them.
...
Without prejudice to legal rules for the protection of individual liberty or prescribing the procedure to be observed in respect of untried prisoners, these prisoners, who are presumed to be innocent until they are found guilty, shall be ... treated without restrictions other than those necessary for the penal procedure and the security of the institution.
...
Untried prisoners shall, whenever possible, be offered the opportunity to work but shall not be required to work. Those who choose to work shall be paid as other prisoners. If educational or trade training is available untried prisoners shall be encouraged to avail themselves of these opportunities.”
On 13 October 1989 the Committee of Ministers adopted its Recommendation on education in prison. The Preamble stated:
“Considering that the right to education is fundamental;
Considering the importance of education in the development of the individual and the community;
Realising in particular that a high proportion of prisoners have had very little successful educational experience, and therefore now have many educational needs;
Considering that education in prison helps to humanise prisons and to improve the conditions of detention;
Considering that education in prison is an important way of facilitating the return of the prisoner to the community;
Recognising that in the practical application of certain rights or measures, in accordance with the following recommendations, distinctions may be justified between convicted prisoners and prisoners remanded in custody;
Having regard to Recommendation No. R (87) 3 on the European Prison Rules and Recommendation No. R (81) 17 on adult education policy,
...”
The Recommendation continued as follows, inter alia:
“1.  All prisoners shall have access to education, which is envisaged as consisting of classroom subjects, vocational education, creative and cultural activities, physical education and sports, social education and library facilities; ...
All those involved in the administration of the prison system and the management of prisons should facilitate and support education as much as possible; ...
Every effort should be made to encourage the prisoner to participate actively in all aspects of education; ...
The funds, equipment and teaching staff needed to enable prisoners to receive appropriate education should be made available.”
On 11 January 2006 the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted a new version of the European Prison Rules, noting that the 1987 Rules “need[ed] to be substantively revised and updated in order to reflect the developments which ha[d] occurred in penal policy, sentencing practice and the overall management of prisons in Europe”. The 2006 Rules contain the following basic principles:
“Basic principles
All persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated with respect for their human rights.
Persons deprived of their liberty retain all rights that are not lawfully taken away by the decision sentencing them or remanding them in custody.
Restrictions placed on persons deprived of their liberty shall be the minimum necessary and proportionate to the legitimate objective for which they are imposed.
Prison conditions that infringe prisoners’ human rights are not justified by lack of resources.
Life in prison shall approximate as closely as possible the positive aspects of life in the community.
All detention shall be managed so as to facilitate the reintegration into free society of persons who have been deprived of their liberty. ...
Scope and application
...
2  In principle, persons who have been remanded in custody by a judicial authority and persons who are deprived of their liberty following conviction should only be detained in prisons, that is, in institutions reserved for detainees of these two categories.
...
Allocation and accommodation
...
8  In deciding to accommodate prisoners in particular prisons or in particular sections of a prison due account shall be taken of the need to detain:
untried prisoners separately from sentenced prisoners;
male prisoners separately from females; and
young adult prisoners separately from older prisoners.
9  Exceptions can be made to the requirements for separate detention in terms of paragraph 8 in order to allow prisoners to participate jointly in organised activities, but these groups shall always be separated at night unless they consent to be detained together and the prison authorities judge that it would be in the best interest of all the prisoners concerned.
...
Education
1  Every prison shall seek to provide all prisoners with access to educational programmes which are as comprehensive as possible and which meet their individual needs while taking into account their aspirations.
2  Priority shall be given to prisoners with literacy and numeracy needs and those who lack basic or vocational education.
3  Particular attention shall be paid to the education of young prisoners and those with special needs.
4  Education shall have no less a status than work within the prison regime and prisoners shall not be disadvantaged financially or otherwise by taking part in education.
5  Every institution shall have a library for the use of all prisoners, adequately stocked with a wide range of both recreational and educational resources, books and other media.
6  Wherever possible, the prison library should be organised in co-operation with community library services.
7  As far as practicable, the education of prisoners shall:
be integrated with the educational and vocational training system of the country so that after their release they may continue their education and vocational training without difficulty; and
take place under the auspices of external educational institutions.
...
Untried prisoners
...
Approach regarding untried prisoners
1  The regime for untried prisoners may not be influenced by the possibility that they may be convicted of a criminal offence in the future.
2  The rules in this part provide additional safeguards for untried prisoners.
3  In dealing with untried prisoners prison authorities shall be guided by the rules that apply to all prisoners and allow untried prisoners to participate in various activities for which these rules provide.
...
Access to the regime for sentenced prisoners
If an untried prisoner requests to be allowed to follow the regime for sentenced prisoners, the prison authorities shall as far as possible accede to this request.”