The case originated in two applications (nos. 54424/14 and 43797/16) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Russian nationals, Mr Aleksey Vladimirovich Starkov and Mr Vladislav Anatolyevich Tishchenko (“the applicants”), on 14 July 2014 and 13 July 2016 respectively.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 2 February 2018 notice of the complaints concerning the fairness of the administrative proceedings was given to the Government, and the remainder of the applications was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1982 and lives in Shirokiy Buyerak, Saratov Region.
On 12 August 2013 the police stopped the applicant and subjected him to a breathalyser test. They prepared an administrative record accusing him of drink-driving.
On an unspecified date the justice of the peace of Circuit no. 1 of the Volsk District of the Saratov Region opened a trial against the applicant. He denied the charges. He claimed that he had undergone a breathalyser test which had shown that he was sober and that no attesting witnesses had been present during the test. He asked the court to summon two police officers, Bar. and Bazh., and the attesting witnesses, L. and Zh., for questioning. The justice of the peace agreed to summon the police officers but refused to summon the attesting witnesses. When questioned, both police officers stated that they had tried to stop the applicant for speeding. He had ignored them and they had pursued his car. The car had stopped after colliding with another vehicle. The police officers had taken the applicant to the police station, where he had undergone a breathalyser test which had shown that he was drunk.
On 12 November 2013 the justice of the peace found the applicant guilty of drink-driving, ordered him to pay a fine of 30,000 Russian roubles and suspended his driving licence for a year and eleven months. The justice of the peace based her findings on the material in the administrative case file and the statements made by the police officers. The applicant appealed, noting, inter alia, that the justice of the peace had refused to obtain the attendance of the attesting witnesses and that, as a result, he had been deprived of the opportunity to contest the allegations against him.
On 5 December 2013 the Volsk District Court of the Saratov Region held an appeal hearing. The court granted the applicant’s request to question witnesses L. and Zh. and summoned them to the next hearing. The court reasoned that it was impossible to examine the case without questioning them. It appears that the court adjourned several subsequent hearings because of the witnesses’ failure to appear.
On 20 January 2014 the District Court upheld the judgment of 12 November 2013 on appeal. The attesting witnesses summoned by the court had failed to appear at the hearing and the appellate court proceeded with the examination of the case in their absence.
The applicant was born in 1972 and lives in Volsk, Saratov Region.
On 17 October 2015 a traffic police officer, M., drew up an administrative-offence record which indicated that the applicant had refused to undergo a breathalyser test in Kovdor, Murmansk Region. M. prepared the record in the presence of two attesting witnesses, B. and Mak.
On an unspecified date the justice of the peace of Circuit no. 5 of the Volsk District of the Saratov Region opened a trial against the applicant. The applicant claimed that the police officer had not asked him to undergo a medical examination. In support of his position, he asked the court to question the police officer who had prepared the administrative-offence record and the attesting witnesses. The justice of the peace asked her counterpart in the Murmansk Region to question the witnesses, noting that their statements were necessary for the “comprehensive, complete and objective” consideration of the applicant’s case.
On 28 December 2015 the justice of the peace in Kovdor questioned M., but B. and Mak. did not appear for questioning.
On 26 January 2016 the justice of the peace found the applicant guilty as charged, ordered him to pay a fine of RUB 30,000 and withdrew his driving licence for a year and nine months. The justice of the peace referred to the statement made by M. and the material in the administrative case file. The applicant appealed.
On 4 March 2016 the Volsk District Court of the Saratov Region upheld the judgment of 26 January 2016 on appeal.