.  The case originated in two applications (nos. 25794/13 and 28151/13) against the Republic of Malta lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Somali nationals, Mr Burhaan Abdullahi Elmi and Mr Cabdulaahi Aweys Abubakar (“the applicants”), on 17 April 2013.
.  The applicants were represented by Dr M. Camilleri and Dr K. Camilleri, lawyers practising in Valletta. The Maltese Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Dr P. Grech, Attorney General.
.  The applicants alleged that their detention was arbitrary and unlawful, and that they had not had a remedy to challenge the lawfulness of that detention. They further complained about the conditions of detention. They relied on Articles 3 and 5 §§ 1 and 4.
.  On 28 August 2014 the applications were communicated to the Government.
.  The applicants were born in 1996 and 1995 respectively. At the time of the introduction of the application the two applicants were detained in Safi Barracks Detention Centre, Safi, Malta.
.  Mr Burhaan Abdullahi Elmi entered Malta in an irregular manner by boat on 16 August 2012. Upon arrival, he was registered by the immigration police and given an identification number (12U-029). During the registration process the immigration authorities asked the applicant to provide his personal details, including name, nationality, and age. He informed them that he was born in 1996 and therefore was sixteen years old. The Government claimed that he was seventeen years old. Although no interpreter was present the applicant was helped by some other irregular immigrants who had arrived with him and who could speak English.
He was then presented with two documents in English, one containing a Return Decision and the other a Removal Order. The Return Decision stated that he was a prohibited immigrant by virtue of Article 5 of the Immigration Act (Chapter 217 of the Laws of Malta) because he was in Malta “without means of subsistence and liable to become a charge on public funds”. The Return Decision also informed the first applicant that his stay was being terminated and of the possibility to apply for a period of voluntary departure. The Removal Order was based on the consideration that the applicant’s request for a period of voluntary departure had been rejected. It informed him that he would remain in custody until removal was affected and that an entry ban would be issued against him. The two documents further informed him of the right to appeal against the Decision and Order before the Immigration Appeals Board (“the IAB”) within three working days.
The first applicant claimed that the contents of the decision in English were not explained to him, and that he could not understand the language. According to the Government, in practice the immigration police inform the migrants verbally in English about their right to appeal, and the migrants translate for each other.
He was further provided with an information leaflet entitled “Your entitlements, responsibilities and obligations while in detention” in Arabic, a language he did not understand. According to the Government the first applicant did not request a booklet in another language.
In accordance with Article 14 (2) of the Immigration Act (see Relevant domestic law), the first applicant was detained. He was originally detained in Warehouse 2 at Safi Barracks, and in 2013 was moved to Block B.
Mr Cabdulaahi Aweys Abubakar entered Malta in an irregular manner by boat on 31 August 2012. Upon arrival, he was registered by the immigration police and given an identification number (12W-062). During the registration process the immigration authorities asked the second applicant to provide his personal details, including name, nationality, and age. He informed them that he was born in 1995 and therefore was seventeen years old.
He was then presented with two documents in English, one containing a Return Decision and the other a Removal Order. The Return Decision stated that he was a prohibited immigrant by virtue of Article 5 of the Immigration Act (Chapter 217 of the Laws of Malta) because he was in Malta “without means of subsistence and liable to become a charge on public funds” and “without leave granted by the principal Immigration Officer”. The Return Decision also informed the second applicant that his stay was being terminated and of the possibility to apply for a period of voluntary departure. The Removal Order was based on the consideration that the applicant’s request for a period of voluntary departure had been rejected. It informed him that he would remain in custody until removal was affected and that an entry ban would be issued against him. The two documents further informed him of the right to appeal against the Decision and Order before the Immigration Appeals Board (“the IAB”) within three working days.
The second applicant claimed that the contents of the decision in English were not explained to him, and that he could not understand the language. According to the Government, in practice the immigration police inform the migrants verbally in English about their right to appeal, and the migrants translate for each other.
He was further provided with an information leaflet entitled “Your entitlements, responsibilities and obligations while in detention” in Arabic, a language he did not understand. According to the Government the second applicant did not request a booklet in another language.
In accordance with Article 14 (2) of the Immigration Act (see Relevant domestic law), the second applicant was detained. He was originally detained in Warehouse 2 at Safi Barracks and in January 2013 was moved to Block B.
A few days following Mr Burhaan Abdullahi Elmi’s arrival he was called for an information session provided by the Staff of the Office of the Refugee Commissioner. He was assisted in submitting the Preliminary Questionnaire (PQ), thereby registering his wish to apply for asylum under Article 8 of the Refugees Act, Chapter 420 of the Laws of Malta (see Relevant domestic law, below). He stated on the form that he was sixteen years old.
A few days following Mr Cabdulaahi Aweys Abubakar’s arrival he was called for an information session provided by the Staff of the Office of the Refugee Commissioner. He was assisted in submitting the PQ, thereby registering his wish to apply for asylum. He stated on the form that he was born in 1995 and was seventeen years old.
In Mr Burhaan Abdullahi Elmi’s case, on 31 August 2012 he was referred to AWAS for age assessment. Within a few weeks of his arrival, three people from AWAS interviewed him. After the interview they informed him that as they could not confirm his minor age through the interview they would send him for a further age verification (FAV) test  this would be an X-ray of the bones of the wrist. He was taken for the FAV test shortly after his interview. The first applicant claimed that, some weeks later, in or around October 2012, he was informed verbally by AWAS staff that he was found to be a minor and that he would be released shortly.
Until the date of the lodging of the application, that is eight months after his arrival in Malta, Mr Burhaan Abdullahi Elmi had not received a written decision informing him of the outcome of the ageassessment procedure, and was still in detention.
In Mr Cabdulaahi Aweys Abubakar’s case, on 18 September 2012 he was referred to AWAS for age assessment. He was interviewed by three people from AWAS in the third week of September 2012. After the interview they informed him that as they could not confirm his minor age through the interview they would send him for a FAV test. He was taken for the FAV test on 8 February 2013, five months after his interview with AWAS. The second applicant claimed that, some weeks later, in March 2013, he was informed verbally by AWAS staff that he was found to be a minor and that he would be released shortly.
Until the date of the lodging of the application, that is almost eight months after his arrival in Malta, Mr Cabdulaahi Aweys Abubakar had not received a written decision informing him of the outcome of the ageassessment procedure, and was still in detention.
In the meantime both Mr Cabdulaahi Aweys Abubakar and members of the Jesuit Refugee Service who visited him in detention contacted AWAS on a number of occasions to inquire about the case, but no reply was forthcoming.
.  Mr Burhaan Abdullahi Elmi claims to have been held in very difficult conditions of detention with adult men of various nationalities. In Warehouse 2 and Block B, of Safi Detention Centre, physical conditions were basic and he often lacked the most basic necessities, including clothing, particularly shoes, which were only replaced every four months. Recreational activity was limited, and the yard was taken over by adult males, making it difficult for a young person like him to play with them. Educational activities were virtually non-existent. There was a lack of information, difficulties communicating with the outside world, and obstacles in obtaining the most basic services. Moreover, the centre was overcrowded and lacked protection from abuse and victimisation. Fights often broke out between men of different origins, nationalities or tribes, and he also referred to an episode where he had been beaten up by a fellow detainee. Noting there was no privacy or security, Mr Burhaan Abdullahi Elmi stressed that he felt very insecure in detention, and that his food was often stolen by detainees as was his blanket. He explained that Warehouse 2 was worse than Block B, it was like a big hall of people, hundreds of people, and he had a bunk bed in this big warehouse. He considered that the conditions in Warehouse 2 were very similar to those in Warehouse 1, which had been documented in a number of reports, including two CPT reports of 2007 and 2011. The first applicant also stated that he had difficulty communicating with a doctor in the absence of an interpreter and that he suffered from dizziness and eye problems.
.  Mr Cabdulaahi Aweys Abubakar’s narration about the conditions of detention in Warehouse 2 and Block B are similar to those referred to by the first applicant. Mr Cabdulaahi Aweys Abubakar also noted that in the first two weeks of his detention he had had stomach pains, but no doctor was available, nor was an ambulance called. He alleged that he had headaches and rashes on his scalp; however, the detention authorities would not provide him with the shampoo prescribed by the doctor. He noted that in October 2012 the detention authorities had not taken him to a hospital appointment; it had had to be rescheduled to March 2013. On that date, the doctor prescribed medication, however, up to the date of the introduction of the application (17 April 2013) this had not been forthcoming. He also referred to an incident in which he had been beaten up by a fellow detainee who had allegedly also previously attacked another detainee with a knife. He noted that when he arrived in detention he was given two bed sheets, a blanket, a T-shirt, and two pairs of underwear, but no shoes, not even flipflops. The second applicant further explained that they were fed chicken every day and that he was unable to keep in touch with his relatives, as the five-euro phone card distributed to them every two months only allowed four minutes of talk time to Somalia.
.  The Government informed the Court that following the lodging of the application with the Court, on 19 April 2013 Mr Burhaan Abdullahi Elmi was released from detention under a care order and placed in an open centre for unaccompanied minors. He subsequently left Malta before the termination of his asylum proceedings; indeed the last day of registration at the open centre was 2 August 2013. In the absence of any further contact with the Office of the Refugee Commissioner, on 31 August 2013 the applicant’s asylum claim was implicitly “withdrawn as discontinued”.
. It appears that the first applicant absconded and went to Germany and was held by the German authorities, who in turn requested the Maltese authorities to take him back in terms of the Dublin Regulation. Following the acceptance of that request on 7 May 2014 the Maltese authorities were informed by the German authorities that return was suspended pending proceedings in Germany.
.  In a signed declaration sent to the Court by his legal representatives the first applicant admitted to being in Schonbach, Germany, as he was waiting there for the outcome of the judicial proceedings as to whether he would be sent back to Malta in terms of the Dublin II Regulation to have his asylum claim determined.
.  The Government informed the Court that following the lodging of the application with the Court, on 24 April 2013 Mr Cabdulaahi Aweys Abubakar was released from detention under a care order and placed in an open centre for unaccompanied minors. He was granted subsidiary protection on 14 September 2013.
.  The relevant articles of the above-mentioned Acts can be found in Aden Ahmed v. Malta (no. 55352/12, §§ 31-35, 23 July 2013).
According to the Irregular Immigrants, Refugees and Integration Policy Document, issued by the Ministry for Justice and Home Affairs and the Ministry for the Family and Social Solidarity, in 2005:
 “Irregular immigrants who, by virtue of their age and/or physical condition, are considered to be vulnerable are exempt from detention and are accommodated in alternative centres”.
The document contains an inclusive list of those categories of migrants considered vulnerable, which includes: “unaccompanied minors, persons with disability, families and pregnant women”. With specific reference to unaccompanied minors and age assessment, the policy document states that:
“Unaccompanied children and minors will be placed under state custody in terms of the Children and Young Persons (Care Order) Act (Chapter 285). This ensures that an unaccompanied minor is given the same treatment as a Maltese minor. ... The detention of minors should be no longer than what is absolutely necessary to determine their identification and health status. Interviews are to be carried in a ‘child friendly’ manner.
Unfortunately there will be cases where individuals make false claims about their age in order to benefit from the terms and conditions of a Care Order. In order to ensure, as far as possible, that:
(a) Care Orders are only issued in respect of true minors;
(b) provisions for minors are not abused, and
(c) actual minors are not deprived of the accommodation and services to which they are entitled by virtue of their age and the degree of vulnerability associated with it, Ministry for Justice and Home Affairs in consultation with the Ministry for the Family and Social Solidarity shall, in those cases where there is good reason to suspect the veracity of the minority age claimed by the immigrant, require the individual concerned to undertake an age verification test as soon as possible after arrival”.
In order to give effect to this policy, a procedure known as the AgeAssessment Procedure was developed and implemented first by the Refugee Service Area within Aġenzija Appoġġ (the National Agency for children, families and the community) and later by AWAS (formerly OIWAS), with a view to assessing claims to minor age. Although AWAS is not formally charged with the responsibility for this procedure by the law which constitutes it (see below) in practice the said agency has full responsibility for this procedure.
In practice, from the information available, it appears that the AgeAssessment Procedure consisted of a number of different phases. Individuals were referred to the Agency for the Welfare of Asylum Seekers (AWAS) by the Immigration Police (where they declare to be minors on arrival) or the Refugee Commissioner (where they declare to be minors in their PQ). Following referral, an initial interview is conducted by one member of AWAS staff. Where this interview is inconclusive, a second interview is conducted by a panel of three persons known as the AgeAssessment Team (AAT).
Where the panel is convinced that the individual concerned is not a minor, the minority age claim is rejected. Where a doubt remains, s/he is referred for a Further Age Verification (FAV) test, which essentially consists of an X-ray of the bones of the wrist. Although the AAT is not bound by the results of the test, in practice, it would appear that in most cases where it is resorted to the result will determine the outcome of the assessment.
If the individual concerned is found to be a minor, a care order is issued, the individual is released from detention and placed in an appropriate non-custodial residential facility, and a legal guardian is appointed to represent the minor. Once a guardian is appointed the asylum interview is carried out, and during the said interview the minor is assisted by a legal guardian. If the individual’s claim to minor age is rejected, AWAS informs the Refugee Commissioner so that his office can proceed with the refugee status determination procedure.
In so far as relevant, Regulation 6 of the Agency for the Welfare of Asylum Seekers Regulation, Subsidiary Legislation 217.11, reads as follows:
 “(1) The function of the Agency shall be the implementation of national legislation and policy concerning the welfare of refugees, persons enjoying international protection and asylum seekers.
(2) In the performance of its functions, the Agency shall:
(a) oversee the daily management of accommodation facilities either directly or through subcontracting agreements;
(b) provide particular services to categories of persons identified as vulnerable according to current policies;
(c) provide information programmes to its clients in the areas of employment, housing, education, health and welfare services offered under national schemes;
(d) act as facilitator with all public entities responsible for providing services to ensure that national obligations to refugees and asylum seekers are accessible;
(e) promote the Government’s policy and schemes regarding resettlement and assisted voluntary returns;
(f) maintain data and draw up reports that are considered relevant for its own function and to provide statistics to appropriate policy-making bodies;
(g) advice the Minister on new developments in its field of operation and propose policy or legislation required to improve the service given and fulfil any legal obligations in respect of its service users;
(h) encourage networking with local voluntary organisations so as to increase the service standards as well as academic research;
(i) work with other public stakeholders and, where possible, offer its services to asylum seekers accommodated in other reception centres not under its direct responsibility; and
(j) implement such other duties as may be assigned to it by the Minister or his representative.”
.  Regulation 15 of the Procedural Standards in Examining Applications for Refugee Status Regulations Subsidiary Legislation 420.07  Legal Notice 243 of 2008, as applicable at the time of the present case (prior to amendments in 2014) laid down some basic procedural safeguards applicable when minors are interviewed, including the provision of information about the asylum procedure, assistance with preparation for the interview and presence of the representative during the interview. Its paragraph (2) dealt with the use of medical procedures to determine age within the context of an application for asylum. In so far as relevant it read as follows:
“(1) In relation to an unaccompanied minor falling within the provisions of article 13(3) of the Act, as soon as possible, and not later than thirty days from the issue of the care order under that article:
(a) it shall be ensured that the appointed representative of the unaccompanied minor is given the opportunity to inform the unaccompanied minor about the meaning and possible consequences of the personal interview and, where appropriate, how to prepare himself for the personal interview. The representative shall be present at the interview and may ask questions or make comments within the framework set by the person who conducts the interview;
(b) where an unaccompanied minor has a personal interview on his application for asylum, that interview is to be conducted and the decision prepared by a person who has the necessary knowledge of the special needs of minors.
(2) Medical examinations to determine the age of unaccompanied minors within the framework of any possible application for asylum may be carried out.
Provided that:
(a) unaccompanied minors are informed prior to the examination of their application for asylum, and in a language which they may reasonably be supposed to understand, of the possibility that their age may be determined by medical examination. This shall include information on the method of examination and the possible consequences of the result of the medical examination for the examination of the application for asylum, as well as the consequences of refusal on the part of the unaccompanied minor to undergo the medical examination which may include the rejection of his claim that he is a minor;
(b) unaccompanied minors and their representatives consent to carry out the determination of the age of the minors concerned;
(c) the decision to reject an application from an unaccompanied minor who refused to undergo this medical examination shall not be based solely on that refusal:
Provided that an unaccompanied minor who has refused to undergo such a medical examination shall not prevent the determining authority from taking a decision on the application for asylum and that the best interests of the minor shall be a primary consideration in any such decision.”
Article 15 of the Reception of Asylum Seekers (Minimum Standards) Regulations, Subsidiary Legislation 420.06 – Legal Notice 320 of 2005, states that:
“an unaccompanied minor aged sixteen years or over may be placed in accommodation centres for adult asylum seekers”.
.  Part IV of Subsidiary Legislation 217.12, Common Standards and Procedures for Returning Illegally Staying Third-Country Nationals Regulations, Legal Notice 81 of 2011 (Transposing Directive 2008/115/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on common standards and procedures in member States for returning illegally staying third-country nationals, aka the Return Directive) in so far as relevant, is set out in Aden Ahmed (cited above, §§ 31-35).
.  Under European Union law, in particular Article 24 of The Reception Conditions Directive provides guidance on the type of accommodation to be provided to unaccompanied minors, which must be with adult relatives, with a foster family, in reception centres with special provisions for minors, or in other suitable accommodation. Detention of unaccompanied minors is not fully prohibited but is only allowed in exceptional circumstances and never in prison accommodation (Article 11 (3) of the Recast Directive). The directive considers that a ‘minor’ means a third-country national or stateless person below the age of 18 years; it also notes that applicants aged sixteen and over, but under the age of eighteen and therefore still minors, may be placed in accommodation centres for adult asylum seekers, but only if it is in the best interests of the child.
.  In so far as relevant the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, of 20 November 1989, ratified by Malta in 1990, reads as follows:
 “For the purposes of the present Convention, a child means every human being below the age of eighteen years unless under the law applicable to the child, majority is attained earlier.”
“1. States Parties shall respect and ensure the rights set forth in the present Convention to each child within their jurisdiction without discrimination of any kind, irrespective of the child’s or his or her parent’s or legal guardian’s race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national, ethnic or social origin, property, disability, birth or other status.
States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to ensure that the child is protected against all forms of discrimination or punishment on the basis of the status, activities, expressed opinions, or beliefs of the child’s parents, legal guardians, or family members.”
“1. In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private social welfare institutions, courts of law, administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.
States Parties undertake to ensure the child such protection and care as is necessary for his or her well-being, taking into account the rights and duties of his or her parents, legal guardians, or other individuals legally responsible for him or her, and, to this end, shall take all appropriate legislative and administrative measures.
States Parties shall ensure that the institutions, services and facilities responsible for the care or protection of children shall conform with the standards established by competent authorities, particularly in the areas of safety, health, in the number and suitability of their staff, as well as competent supervision.”
“States Parties shall ensure that:
(a) No child shall be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Neither capital punishment nor life imprisonment without possibility of release shall be imposed for offences committed by persons below eighteen years of age;
(b) No child shall be deprived of his or her liberty unlawfully or arbitrarily. The arrest, detention or imprisonment of a child shall be in conformity with the law and shall be used only as a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time;
(c) Every child deprived of liberty shall be treated with humanity and respect for the inherent dignity of the human person, and in a manner which takes into account the needs of persons of his or her age. In particular, every child deprived of liberty shall be separated from adults unless it is considered in the child’s best interest not to do so and shall have the right to maintain contact with his or her family through correspondence and visits, save in exceptional circumstances;
(d) Every child deprived of his or her liberty shall have the right to prompt access to legal and other appropriate assistance, as well as the right to challenge the legality of the deprivation of his or her liberty before a court or other competent, independent and impartial authority, and to a prompt decision on any such action.”
In Recommendation Rec(2003)5 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, to member States, on measures of detention of asylum seekers, adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 16 April 2003 at the 837th meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies, the Committee of Ministers recommended, in particular in respect of minors, that:
“20. As a rule, minors should not be detained unless as a measure of last resort and for the shortest possible time.
Minors should not be separated from their parents against their will, nor from other adults responsible for them whether by law or custom.
If minors are detained, they must not be held under prison-like conditions. Every effort must be made to release them from detention as quickly as possible and place them in other accommodation. If this proves impossible, special arrangements must be made which are suitable for children and their families.
For unaccompanied minor asylum seekers, alternative and non-custodial care arrangements, such as residential homes or foster placements, should be arranged and, where provided for by national legislation, legal guardians should be appointed, within the shortest possible time.”
.  In Recommendation 1985 (2011) of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, of 7 October 2011, entitled “Undocumented migrant children in an irregular situation: a real cause for concern”, the Parliamentary assembly considered that undocumented migrant children are triply vulnerable: as migrants, as persons in an undocumented situation and as children. They recommended that member States refrain from detaining undocumented migrant children, and protect their liberty by abiding by the following principles:
“9.4.1. a child should, in principle, never be detained. Where there is any consideration to detain a child, the best interest of the child should always come first;
4.2. in exceptional cases where detention is necessary, it should be provided for by law, with all relevant legal protection and effective judicial review remedies, and only after alternatives to detention have been considered;
4.3. if detained, the period must be for the shortest possible period of time and the facilities must be suited to the age of the child; relevant activities and educational support must also be available;
4.4. if detention does take place, it must be in separate facilities from those for adults, or in facilities meant to accommodate children with their parents or other family members, and the child should not be separated from a parent, except in exceptional circumstances;
4.5. unaccompanied children should, however, never be detained;
4.6. no child should be deprived of his or her liberty solely because of his or her migration status, and never as a punitive measure;
4.7. where a doubt exists as to the age of the child, the benefit of the doubt should be given to that child;”
Prior to the above recommendation, in Resolution 1707 (2010) 28 January 2010, the Parliamentary Assembly, called on member states of the Council of Europe in which asylum seekers and irregular migrants are detained to comply fully with their obligations under international human rights and refugee law, and encouraged them to abide by a number of guiding principles, inter alia, that vulnerable people should not, as a rule, be placed in detention and specifically that unaccompanied minors should never be detained.
. The Report by Thomas Hammarberg, Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe following his visit to Malta from 23 to 25 March 2011, 9 June 2011, paragraphs 19-20, reads as follows;
“19. At the end of their detention, migrants, including refugees, beneficiaries of subsidiary protection, asylum seekers and persons whose asylum claims have been rejected, are accommodated in open centres around Malta. Conditions prevailing in these centres vary greatly, with adequate arrangements reported in the smaller centres that cater for some vulnerable groups, such as families with children or unaccompanied minors, and far more difficult conditions in the bigger centres. As mentioned above, when the Commissioner’s visit took place the number of irregular arrivals had been very low for over 18 months and the 2011 arrivals from Libya had not yet started. As a result, the vast majority of migrants had moved out of the detention centres and were living in open centres, with the respective populations numbering at 49 and 2 231 respectively. The Commissioner visited the detention centre in Safi, and three open centres - the Hal-Far tent village, the Hangar Open Centre in Hal-Far and Marsa.
At the time of the visit the material conditions in the Safi detention centre, where all 49 of the migrant detainees were kept, appeared to be considerably better than those in open centres. Although a number of issues remained to be addressed, including those regarding the detainees’ access to a diversified diet and water other than from the tap, the premises visited, including the dormitories, toilets and showers had been recently refurbished. The only female detainee of the centre was accommodated in a separate facility. The Commissioner wishes to note however, that in accordance with the mandatory detention policy referred to above, most of the persons (approximately 1 100) who have arrived from Libya since his visit have been placed in detention centres. This is naturally bound to have a significant impact on the adequacy of the conditions in these centres.”
.  The Report to the Maltese Government on the visit to Malta carried out by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) from 19 to 26 May 2008, 17 February 2011), in so far as relevant reads as follows:
“52. In accordance with Maltese policy on administrative detention of foreigners under aliens’ legislation, all foreigners arriving illegally in Malta are still detained for prolonged periods, in the case of asylum seekers until such time as their request for refugee status is determined (normally 12 months) and for irregular immigrants for up to a maximum of 18 months. In practice, however, some may spend even longer periods in detention. The only declared exceptions to this general rule concern persons deemed to be vulnerable because of their age and/or physical condition, unaccompanied minors and pregnant women ...
The situation found in the detention centres visited by the delegation had not substantially improved since the CPT’s previous visit in 2005. Indeed, many of the problems identified in the report on that visit still remain unresolved. In several parts of the detention centres, the combined effects of prolonged periods of detention in poor, if not very poor, material conditions, with a total absence of purposeful activities, not to mention other factors, could well be considered to amount to inhuman and degrading treatment.
material conditions
...
At Safi Barracks Detention Centre, which at the time of the visit accommodated a total of 507 immigration detainees, living conditions for detainees had slightly improved in comparison to the situation observed by the CPT in 2005.
At Warehouse No. 1, living conditions were less cramped than when last visited by the CPT, and the toilet facilities were new and clean. That said, the Committee has strong reservations as regards the use of converted warehouses to accommodate detainees. This should only be seen as a temporary - and short term - solution.
B Block has been refurbished since the CPT’s last visit. The sanitary facilities have been renovated and a large exercise area is at the disposal of the immigration detainees. However, conditions were still difficult in certain rooms, where immigration detainees were sleeping on mattresses on the floor.
Surprisingly, poor conditions of detention were observed in the new C Block. Living conditions were cramped, access to natural light was insufficient and ventilation very poor. Further, access to running water was limited, as well as access to hot water, the latter being unavailable for prolonged periods.
In addition, the internal regulation in force at Safi Barracks provided for the compulsory closing of the doors in B and C Blocks every afternoon at 5 p.m., thereby preventing access to the outdoor yard. This exacerbated significantly the already far from ideal living conditions in these blocks.”
The Report to the Maltese Government on the visit to Malta carried out by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) from 26 to 30 September 2011, published on 4 July 2013, in so far as relevant in connection with Safi barracks, reads as follows:
“44. At the time of the visit, Safi Detention Centre was accommodating a total of 506 male adult detainees (236 in Warehouse No. 1, 113 in Warehouse No. 2 and 124 in Block B).
In keeping with the Government’s Detention Policy, no unaccompanied minors were held in either of the two detention centres visited. Upon issuance of a care order by the Minister of Social Policy, unaccompanied minors were always transferred to a juvenile institution. Single women were always accommodated separately from male detainees.
...
As was the case in 2008, a number of detainees complained about disrespectful behaviour and racist remarks by detention officers (in particular in the Warehouses at Safi Detention Centre). The CPT reiterates its recommendation that the Maltese authorities remind all members of staff working in detention centres for foreigners that such behaviour is not acceptable and will be punished accordingly.
...
At both [Lyster and] Safi Detention Centres, material conditions have improved since the 2008 visit. ... At Safi Barracks, additional renovation work had been carried out in Block B. It is noteworthy that all foreign nationals received personal hygiene products on a regular basis and were also supplied with clothes and footwear.
However, material conditions of detention were still appalling in the two Warehouses at Safi Barracks. In particular, at Warehouse No. 1, foreign nationals were being held in extremely crowded conditions and the sanitary facilities consisting of seven mobile toilets (without a flush) and seven mobile shower booths, located in the outdoor exercise yard, were in a deplorable state. In fact, the Warehouses are not suitable for accommodating persons for prolonged periods, but should only be used in the event of an emergency.
The CPT recommends that the Maltese authorities take the necessary measures to ensure that all immigration detainees currently being held in the two Warehouses at Safi Barracks are transferred as soon as possible to Ta’ Kandja Detention Centre and that both Warehouses are in future only used for shortterm detention in emergency situations.
...
At Safi Detention Centre, conditions of detention in the two warehouses were further exacerbated by the total lack of any organised activities. The situation was slightly better, but far from satisfactory in Block B, where detainees could play football in the exercise yard (surrounded by high walls), which was accessible from 8.30 a.m. to 7 p.m.
The CPT calls upon the Maltese authorities to introduce a regime providing purposeful activities to foreign nationals held at Safi [and Ta’ Kandja Detention] Centres.
...
Medical and nursing services in detention centres for foreigners were provided by two separate privately-run companies. There was a pool of doctors ensuring the presence of one doctor from Mondays to Fridays (including public holidays), for five hours per day at Safi [and four hours per day at Lyster Barracks]. Further, a nurse was present in each detention centre from Mondays to Fridays from 8 a.m. to 3 p.m. In addition, at Safi Barracks, a nurse from the local health-care service came to the establishment to administer medication requiring supervision in the evenings and at weekends.
The CPT must stress that, given the size of the inmate populations, the current arrangements for the provision of health care were clearly insufficient to ensure that detainees’ health problems were dealt with in a timely and effective manner. The delegation was overwhelmed by complaints from detainees about delays in seeing a doctor (up to several days) and, subsequently, in receiving prescribed medicines (up to one week). In practice, only a limited number of requests (usually five) per detention block were forwarded by detention officers to the nurse on duty on a first-come firstserved basis. This was described by many detainees as source of constant tension among themselves. ...
In the two Warehouses at Safi Barracks, the delegation observed that a significant number of detainees were lying in bed all day in total apathy. Given that nurses never entered the detention areas, the likelihood was great that detainees in need of urgent psychological support remained undetected for a long time. Regrettably, both centres were still not being visited by a psychologist and a psychiatrist.
Another major shortcoming was the lack of systematic medical screening of detainees upon admission to a detention centre. The delegation was informed by health-care staff that, on arrival at the port, all foreign nationals had undergone a chest X-ray, but no further screening was performed at the detention centres. In this regard, the CPT wishes to recall that systematic medical screening is not only an essential means of protecting detainees and staff alike (in particular, with regard to transmissible diseases) but also an important safeguard against ill-treatment. ...
As regards contact with the outside world, the CPT welcomes the fact that, in both detention centres visited, foreign nationals could receive telephone calls from the outside. They were also were provided with telephone cards free of charge on a regular basis, although these were limited to a total of 5€ every two months.”
In their report the CPT noted that, at Safi Detention Centre, attempts were made by the management to provide misleading information and to hide from the delegation a significant number of complaints which had been lodged by foreign nationals.
.  In a report by the International Commission of Jurists (“ICJ”) entitled “Not here to stay”, Report of the International Commission of Jurists on its visit to Malta on 2630 September 2011, May 2012, which assessed migration and asylum practice in Malta (at the time of the Libyan crisis), the ICJ expressed concern that the Safi Barracks detention centres, including B-Block, were located on two military bases – a situation at odds with international law and standards. The ICJ report concluded that the accumulation of poor conditions of detention, brought the situation in the Safi Barracks detention centre beyond the threshold of degrading treatment, in violation of Malta’s international human rights obligations under Article 3 of the Convention.
They considered that a lesser, though still worrisome, situation of overcrowding existed in B-Block of the Safi Barracks at the time of the ICJ visit. While this centre was provided with open cells, these were overcrowded with bunk beds, and the only privacy was that which had been tentatively achieved through hanging blankets from the top of the bunks. In their view in B-Block, the kitchen and the bathroom appeared rather dirty.
They noted, inter alia, that in the Warehouse the number of toilets and showers appeared to the delegation to be insufficient in comparison to the number of people detained. The migrants detained in Warehouse One had no facilities for cooking, mainly due to the structure of the detention centre, which did not allow for a kitchen, big enough for all detainees, to be installed.
Other relevant extracts from their report read as follows:
“There is a lack of leisure facilities in the detention centres visited. In Warehouse One, the only entertainment was provided by a single television in the main common room and by the recreation-yard. In B-Block, there was also a recreationyard, although of rather limited dimensions, and the detainees expressly complained of the lack of means of recreation, claiming that they had only one ball at their disposal. No books seemed to be present in the detention facilities.” ...
“The detainees in Warehouse One also complained about the clothing provided to them. According to them, clothes were given to them through charity and some of them were wearing very worn out t-shirts.” ...
“ [the ICJ] considers that in Safi Barracks, the accumulation of poor conditions of detention, including sanitary conditions, together with the apparent existence of cases of psychological instability, with the lack of leisure facilities, the overcrowded conditions and the mandatory length of 18 months of detention brought, at the time of the visit, the situation in the detention centre beyond the threshold of degrading treatment, and therefore in violation of Article 3 ECHR, Articles 1 and 4 EU Charter, Article 7ICCPR and Article 16 CAT.”
Bridging Borders, a JRS Malta report on the implementation of a project to provide shelter and psychosocial support to vulnerable asylum seekers between June 2011 and June 2012, highlights the fact that not all medication prescribed by medical personnel in detention is provided free by the Government health service. In fact the said report notes that during the lifetime of the project the organisation purchased medication for 130 detainees.
Care in Captivity, a more recent JRS Malta report on the provision of care for detained asylum seekers experiencing mental health problems (research period December 2013 to June 2014), documented several obstacles to quality health care including: lack of availability of interpreters; lack of attendance for follow-up appointments following discharge to detention (in seven out of seventy-four cases); and failure to dispense prescribed psychotropic medication in some cases. It held that:
“In this regard, the current system where, after discharge from the ASU ward, the responsibility for continuity of care, in terms of attendance of hospital appointments and dispensation of medication, falls under detention health care providers and custodial staff appears not to be operating effectively.”
.  In so far as relevant, extracts from a report by Human Rights Watch in 2012 called “Boat-ride to Detention”, reads as follows:
“Children lack adequate information about the age determination process (including whether documents are accepted and whether there is an appeal). Some migrants who request an age determination procedure are seemingly ignored: interviewees reported telling authorities they were minors but never receiving age determination. Other children never request an age determination because they lack information on the procedure.”
“The government should do more to provide children with reliable information about the age determination procedure. Children receive no guidance on the content of the procedure, whether documents will be useful, or whether they can appeal. Malta has taken considerable steps in providing information to migrants about the process for asylum, including by conducting information sessions to every incoming migrant. It could easily do the same for the age determination process.”
A 2014 report issued by Aditus, a local NGO entitled “Unaccompanied Minor Asylum-Seekers in Malta: a technical Report on Ages Assessment and Guardianship Procedures”, reads as follows:
“The procedural information provided to persons undergoing age assessment is extremely limited which further excludes the applicant from active participation in the process.”
“Under the old procedure [2012] persons were not adequately informed of the possibility of appeal... persons were also typically not informed of the reasons for a negative decision”
“Most experts agree that age assessment is not a determination of chronological age but rather an educated guess. There are risks that due to the inaccuracy of age assessment techniques, persons claiming to be minors may have their age misassessed”
.  The relevant extracts of General Comment no.6 (2005) of the Committee on the Rights of the Child, entitled “Treatment of unaccompanied and separated children outside their country of origin” read as follows:
“61. In application of article 37 of the Convention and the principle of the best interests of the child, unaccompanied or separated children should not, as a general rule, be detained. Detention cannot be justified solely on the basis of the child being unaccompanied or separated, or on their migratory or residence status, or lack thereof. Where detention is exceptionally justified for other reasons, it shall be conducted in accordance with article 37(b) of the Convention that requires detention to conform to the law of the relevant country and only to be used as a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time. In consequence, all efforts, including acceleration of relevant processes, should be made to allow for the immediate release of unaccompanied or separated children from detention and their placement in other form of appropriate accommodation....
In the exceptional case of detention, conditions of detention must be governed by the best interests of the child and pay full respect to article 37(a) and (c) of the Convention and other international obligations. Special arrangements must be made for living quarters that are suitable for children and that separate them from adults, unless it is considered in the child’s best interests not to do so. Indeed, the underlying approach to such a program should be “care” and not “detention”. Facilities should not be located in isolated areas where culturally-appropriate community resources and access to legal aid are unavailable. Children should have the opportunity to make regular contact and receive visits from friends, relatives, religious, social and legal counsel and their guardian. They should also be provided with the opportunity to receive all basic necessities as well as appropriate medical treatment and psychological counselling where necessary. During their period in detention, children have the right to education which ought, ideally, to take place outside the detention premises in order to facilitate the continuance of their education upon release. They also have the right to recreation and play as provided for in article 31 of the Convention. In order to effectively secure the rights provided by article 37(d) of the Convention, unaccompanied or separated children deprived of their liberty shall be provided with prompt and free access to legal and other appropriate assistance, including the assignment of a legal representative.”
In their report “20 years of combatting torture” 19th General Report of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) 1 August 2008 - 31 July 2009, the CPT remarked as follows:
“97. The CPT considers that every effort should be made to avoid resorting to the deprivation of liberty of an irregular migrant who is a minor. Following the principle of the “best interests of the child”, as formulated in Article 3 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, detention of children, including unaccompanied and separated children, is rarely justified and, in the Committee’s view, can certainly not be motivated solely by the absence of residence status.
When, exceptionally, a child is detained, the deprivation of liberty should be for the shortest possible period of time; all efforts should be made to allow the immediate release of unaccompanied or separated children from a detention facility and their placement in more appropriate care. Further, owing to the vulnerable nature of a child, additional safeguards should apply whenever a child is detained, particularly in those cases where the children are separated from their parents or other carers, or are unaccompanied, without parents, carers or relatives.
As soon as possible after the presence of a child becomes known to the authorities, a professionally qualified person should conduct an initial interview, in a language the child understands. An assessment should be made of the child’s particular vulnerabilities, including from the standpoints of age, health, psychosocial factors and other protection needs, including those deriving from violence, trafficking or trauma. Unaccompanied or separated children deprived of their liberty should be provided with prompt and free access to legal and other appropriate assistance, including the assignment of a guardian or legal representative. Review mechanisms should also be introduced to monitor the ongoing quality of the guardianship.20 years of combating torture: CPT General Report 2008-20
Steps should be taken to ensure a regular presence of, and individual contact with, a social worker and a psychologist in establishments holding children in detention. Mixed-gender staffing is another safeguard against ill-treatment; the presence of both male and female staff can have a beneficial effect in terms of the custodial ethos and foster a degree of normality in a place of detention. Children deprived of their liberty should also be offered a range of constructive activities (with particular emphasis on enabling a child to continue his or her education).”