The case originated in two applications (nos. 10780/07 and 54004/07) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”). The first application (no. 10780/07) was lodged by three Russian nationals, Mr Zufar Karsheyevich Achilov, Mr Vladimir Viktorovich Ivanov and Mr Gagik Eduardovich Avanesyan (“the applicants”), on 1 February 2007. Further complaints were lodged on 11 November 2007, 5 September 2008, 14 February 2009, 16 October 2009 and 2 September 2011. The first applicant was represented by Mr S. Bogdanov and then by Ms S. Nugayeva and Ms A. Soboleva. The third applicant was represented by Mr V. Kosorukov. As of May 2019 the second applicant was represented by Mr S. Bogdanov.
The second application (no. 54004/07) was lodged by Mr Vladimir Viktorovich Ivanov on 14 October 2007.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 14 November 2011 and 13 January 2012 the Government were given notice of the applications.
Mr Achilov was born in 1958 and is detained in Saratov. Mr Ivanov and Mr Avanesyan were born in 1959 and 1965 respectively; their current whereabouts are not known to the Court.
On 11 April 2006 Mr Ivanov notified the Gelendzhik town administration of his intention to hold a public meeting at 11 a.m. on 22 April 2006 on the steps of a local cinema, followed at 1 p.m. by a march to protest against corruption among public officials. The first and third applicants were designated as the persons assisting the event organiser (уполномоченные лица).
On 15 April 2006 the town mayor wrote to Mr Ivanov stating that the cinema building (including its steps) was a municipal institution and that the consent of its owner should therefore have been obtained. Moreover, the march was due to go through an area in the vicinity of a court, which was prohibited by the Public Events Act (PEA). Lastly, the event organiser should have specified in the request how he intended to ensure public safety and, if necessary, provide medical assistance during the public event. The mayor therefore requested Mr Ivanov to refrain from holding the event.
On 18 April 2006 the first and second applicants wrote to the mayor’s office stating that the requirements imposed by the mayor were unlawful and that the event would proceed as planned.
On 21 April 2006 the acting officer of the town housing committee lodged a criminal complaint with the police indicating that leaflets calling on people to take part in the rally on 22 April 2006 had been placed on the walls of municipal buildings. A pre-investigation criminal inquiry was initiated immediately in relation to unspecified criminal offences.
According to the applicants, on 22 April 2006 they were “invited” to the local police station for interviews as part of this pre-investigation inquiry. The police issued summonses under Article 73 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“Circumstances to be proven in criminal proceedings”) for interviews to be held at 10.30 a.m. on 22 April 2006. Apparently, the applicants were handed those summonses when they were already in the police station on that date.
According to the applicants, they were kept there for three hours until the end of the time allotted for the public event. The doors of the police station were locked and were guarded by two armed officers. No arrest record was drawn up. According to the Government, the applicants left the police station after the end of their interviews.
On 8 June 2006 the applicants sought the institution of criminal proceedings against the police officers concerned and the town administration. They alleged that the public officials’ actions constituted the ingredients of a number of criminal offences such as impeding a public event, abuse of power and unlawful arrest or detention (Articles 149, 286 and 301 of the Criminal Code). They stated as follows in their criminal complaint:
“We distributed information across the town inviting people and mass media outlets to the public event ... However, it did not happen because the event organiser [the second applicant] and the persons assisting the organiser [the first and third applicants] were invited for an interview (беседа) with Chief Police Officer F. at 10.30 a.m. and then were held in the police station until 1.30 p.m. It happened as follows:
At 10.20 a.m. the bus carrying the equipment for the public event approached the cinema building ... Officer D. approached [the first and second applicants] and suggested that they drive in the bus to the police station in order to attend an interview with Chief Officer F. in relation to the forthcoming public event. [The second applicant] agreed and drove to the police station, counting on D.’s assurances that the interview would not take long. During the interview F. required [the applicants] to produce written statements in relation to a recent complaint from the local housing committee concerning the suspicion that [the applicants] had damaged the walls of municipal buildings ... [The first and second applicants] denied the accusations ... We were then interviewed until 11 a.m. and expressed our wish to leave in order to take part in the public event. However, the chief officer stated that we would be interviewed again and therefore had to stay in the police station. We protested and insisted on being released ... We went down from the fourth to the first floor and attempted to leave the building. However, the entrance was guarded by officers with guns who closed the door ... Chief Officer F. then said that he was busy and told us to wait in the lobby ... A further interview was then carried out and ended at 11.56 a.m. Afterwards, the guards again refused to let us leave the building without properly documented summonses ... It then took an hour and a half for F. to prepare them ... We received them at 1.40 p.m. and left the building ...”
On 11 June 2006 an investigator issued a decision not to prosecute the public officials concerned.
The applicants sought judicial review of this decision under Article 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. On 28 June 2006 the Gelendzhik Town Court of the Krasnodar Region upheld the refusal. On 2 August 2006 the Krasnodar Regional Court upheld that decision on appeal.
On 23 April 2007 Mr Achilov held a solo demonstration in front of the local legislature building. He had several placards, one of which stated “Down with Putin and Tkachev!”. He was arrested and spent the night in the police station. On 24 April 2007 a justice of the peace found him guilty of the offence of minor hooliganism under Article 20.1 of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”) and sentenced him to two days’ administrative detention. The judgment read as follows:
“[The applicant] called openly for the overthrow of the Head of the State and the Governor of the Krasnodar Region; he spoke loudly and behaved defiantly; he tried to hit a police officer with a placard; he resisted the officers and grabbed their uniforms; he did not respond when spoken to and tried to run away. He thereby disrespected public order.
[The applicant] pleaded guilty.
His guilt is confirmed by the officers’ reports, their statements and the arrest record.”
The applicant served his sentence.
In May 2007 the applicant also lodged a criminal-law complaint alleging that public officials had impeded the public event of 23 April 2007. He received no reply.
The applicant appealed against the judgment of 24 April 2007, arguing that he had not used any offensive language and had not behaved in an unruly manner. On 10 May 2007 the Leninskiy District Court of Krasnodar set aside the judgment of 24 April 2007 and discontinued the proceedings because the trial court “had not taken proper account of the nature of the offence or aggravating or mitigating circumstances”.
The applicant then brought civil proceedings seeking, inter alia, 450,000 Russian roubles (RUB) in compensation for non-pecuniary damage with regard to the impeding of the demonstration by the police, his prosecution in the above-mentioned administrative proceedings and his deprivation of liberty, and conditions of pre-trial and post-trial detention. His statement of claim reads as follows:
“I was placed in a cell in which I then remained until the trial, in conditions that clearly violated the regulations on the detention of persons for administrative offences (Government Decree No. 627 of 15 October 2003). In particular, the regulations require that where the administrative arrest lasts for more than three hours a detainee is to be provided with food or access to parcels from the next-of-kin and with a bed (when kept overnight) ... I was unable to receive any such parcels ... no food or even water was provided, no bed was provided, so that I had to sleep on a cold bench during the night ... After the trial I was placed for another day in the temporary detention centre ... in breach of the regulations requiring the provision of individual beds and bedding, outdoor exercise for at least one hour ...
I therefore request: compensation in respect of non-pecuniary damage in the amount of 150,000 Russian roubles for each of the three counts mentioned above ...”
By a judgment of 18 January 2008 the Gelendzhik Town Court awarded the applicant RUB 10,000 (approximately 270 euros (EUR) at the time). The court held as follows:
“The applicant lodged a claim in respect of pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage ... He considers that his prosecution for an administrative offence and the sentence of detention caused him physical and mental suffering ...
Article 1100 of the Civil Code provides for compensation in respect of nonpecuniary damage where damage was caused as a result of the application of a sentence of administrative detention ... Thus, having regard to Article 1070 § 1 of the Civil Code, the respondent should pay the claimant compensation in the amount of RUB 10,000, that is, the amount as calculated under Article 1101 of the Civil Code in view of the claimant’s physical and mental suffering and the actual circumstances of the case.”
The applicant appealed. On 13 May 2008 the Krasnodar Regional Court upheld the judgment.
Mr Achilov informed the town administration of his intention to hold a group static demonstration in front of the building of the town administration on 9 May 2007, which is a public holiday.
On 4 May 2007 the administration wrote to him indicating that on the same date, at the same time and within the same area there would be a military march and a meeting of secondary school pupils. The administration suggested that the applicant hold the event on a square in another area.
However, the applicant decided that he would hold a solo demonstration, thus making it unnecessary to obtain approval from the local administration.
When the applicant approached the town administration building and raised his placard, he was approached by police officers who tried to take the placard away from him. He was then taken to the police station.
On 9 May 2007 a justice of the peace sentenced the applicant to seven days’ administrative detention for resisting a lawful order. The court considered that the applicant had not stopped demonstrating despite the order from the police, had not complied with their order to follow police officers to the police station and had grabbed the officers’ uniforms trying to escape.
In separate proceedings on the same day, having read out the text of Article 20.2 of the CAO and summarised various statements, the same judge convicted the applicant under Article 20.2 of the CAO and sentenced him to a fine of RUB 1,000.
The applicant appealed, stressing that he had held a solo demonstration and thus could not be found liable for breaching the Public Events Act or refusing to cease the lawful solo demonstration. On 23 May 2007 the Gelendzhik Town Court upheld the applicant’s conviction under Article 19.3 of the CAO in a summary manner. On 1 June 2007 the Town Court upheld the conviction under Article 20.2 of the CAO, stating that after receiving the reply of 4 May 2007 the applicant should have responded to the town administration’s proposal of an alternative venue; instead, “he had held a demonstration at a venue that had not been authorised”.
The applicant also brought civil court proceedings claiming compensation on account of his detention and conditions of detention. On 23 March 2009 the  dismissed his claim. On 12 May 2009 the Regional Court upheld the judgment.
On 6 August 2007 Mr Achilov and Mr Ivanov lodged a notification with the Gelendzhik town administration, indicating their intention to hold a static demonstration (“picket”, пикетирование) involving between 10 and 50 people on 10 August 2007 from 7 a.m. to 11 p.m. on the pavement in front of the local prosecutor’s office, with the aim of expressing their dissatisfaction with the prosecutors’ service.
On 6 August 2007 Mr Kh., the Gelendzhik town mayor, sent them a letter indicating that they “should refrain from staging the picket” because of the ongoing works (apparently, roadworks) at that location; given that the pavement was adjacent to the roadway it was not possible to ensure the public’s safety.
According to the applicants, they inspected the venue and did not see any ongoing reconstruction works there (see also paragraph 36 below). They therefore decided to hold the demonstration as planned.
It appears that on 8 August 2007 the mayor’s office wrote to Mr A., chief officer of the Department of the Interior of Gelendzhik, informing him of the allegedly unlawful demonstration and asking him to take the appropriate measures. Mr A. instructed officer V. to take the appropriate measures.
On 10 August 2007 the first and second applicants, as well as some other persons, started to hold a “picket” in front of the town prosecutor’s office. This public event was immediately dispersed by the police (see paragraph 35 below).
In October 2007 the first and second applicants sought the institution of criminal proceedings against officers A. and V. under Article 149 of the Criminal Code (unlawfully impeding a public event) in so far as officer V. had not applied the procedure for terminating a public event in accordance with sections 15 to 17 of the Public Events Act; had removed and torn apart three posters and had trampled on three placards that contained messages criticising the prosecutor’s office; and had ordered that Mr Ivanov and another person be arrested and taken to the police station.
On 15 October 2007 an investigator refused to bring criminal proceedings. The relevant parts of the decision read as follows:
“It follows from [the applicants’] complaint that they held a static demonstration on 10 August 2007 ... By a letter of 6 August 2007 the town administration had advised against it in view of the reconstruction works (which actually started the day after the administration’s letter) ...
Officer A. stated that he had received a notification from the town administration indicating that ... it had recommended to [the applicants] that they refrain from holding the static demonstration because of the reconstruction works near the building housing the prosecutor’s office. He therefore considered that holding the demonstration near this building would endanger public safety (общественный порядок) ... He instructed officer V. to take measures aimed at preventing the demonstration; this meant having a talk with [the applicants] and pointing out that it was not desirable to hold this type of public event near public buildings such as the town administration building or the prosecutor’s office, in the interests of public safety ... He gave no instructions to V. as to any forcible termination of the demonstration ...
Officer V. stated that ... he had received no direct order to prevent the demonstration. He saw his unit’s task as ensuring public safety during the demonstration ... When he arrived at the venue he saw roadworks going on in the immediate vicinity of the demonstrators ... The demonstrators were standing in the road, impeding traffic and the reconstruction works ... He warned [the second applicant] that it was not acceptable to block the traffic and the reconstruction works. [The second applicant] replied in a rude manner. V. then ordered that the placards containing insulting statements concerning the prosecutor and the staff of the prosecutor’s office be removed, in order to put an end to the breach of public order. [The second applicant] and some others attempted to prevent this ... V.’s statement is confirmed by the available video material.”
On 20 August 2008 the Regional Court took a final decision on judicial review upholding this refusal.
When the police tried to arrest Mr Ivanov on 10 August 2007, he entered the building housing the prosecutor’s office at 9.20 a.m., ran into an office and broke a chair there. He was told to leave the building but did not comply.
According to the applicant, he entered the building with the aim of talking to a deputy prosecutor and sat down on a chair which happened to be in need of repair and which broke.
The applicant was then arrested and was accused of the offence under Article 20.2 § 2 of the CAO of organising a demonstration that had not been approved by the town administration (see paragraph 31 above), and an offence under Article 20.1 of the CAO on account of his subsequent unruly conduct in the building housing the prosecutor’s office (see paragraph 37 above).
Several officials of the prosecutor’s office submitted statements describing the applicant’s unruly conduct at the premises of the prosecutor’s office. The acting town prosecutor also indicated in his statement that there had been reconstruction works in front of the building, which had entailed the presence of special equipment.
By a judgment of 10 August 2007 a justice of the peace convicted the applicant under Articles 20.1 and 20.2 of the CAO and sentenced him to fifteen days’ detention and a fine of RUB 1,000 respectively. As regards Article 20.2 of the CAO the justice of the peace considered that, as specified by the mayor, the pavement had been not suitable for a public event and thus the demonstration had been in breach of section 8 of the Public Events Act, which stated that a public event could be held at “locations that were suitable for the purpose of a given demonstration and where it would not endanger the safety of its participants”.
The applicant appealed. On 17 August 2007 the Gelendzhik Town Court of the Krasnodar Region upheld the judgment on both charges.
On 27 February 2011 the first applicant and some others carried out an “inspection” concerning timber processing and alleged misuse of timber. According to the applicant, he was in possession of a passport and a “human-rights defender” card. Having observed the unlawful cutting of timber, they called the police. Several police officers arrived. According to the domestic authorities, the police requested the applicant to present his identity card; he refused, using offensive language; he then “failed to comply with the repeated requests to cease his unlawful conduct and to follow the police officers to the police station”. The police considered that the applicant had thereby committed the offence of failure to comply with a lawful police order under Article 19.3 of the CAO. The police decided to apply the administrative arrest procedure and took the applicant to the police station.
On 28 February 2011 a justice of the peace found that the applicant had committed the offence and sentenced him to seven days’ administrative detention. On 2 March 2011 the Tuapsinskiy District Court of the Krasnodar Region held an appeal hearing and reduced the applicant’s sentence to five days.
Mr Achilov complained to the district prosecutor’s office about the conditions of his detention. In March 2011 the prosecutor’s office replied that the police department was in charge of the detention centre and that the prosecutor’s office “had issued a warning requiring the officials in charge of the detention centre to be subjected to disciplinary penalties”.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law and judicial practice, see Novikova and Others v. Russia, nos. 25501/07 and 4 others, §§ 47-86, 26 April 2016; Lashmankin and Others v. Russia, nos. 57818/09 and 14 others, §§ 216-312, 7 February 2017; Tsvetkova and Others v. Russia, nos. 54381/08 and 5 others, §§ 60-75, 10 April 2018; and Navalnyy v. Russia [GC], nos. 29580/12 and 4 others, §§ 43-48, 15 November 2018.