The case concerns the dismissal of the applicant, an expert working in a public institute, following the declaration of a state of emergency in Turkey, as well as the subsequent judicial review of that measure.
The applicant was born in 1982 and lives in Bingöl. He was represented by Mr I. Yılmaz, a lawyer practising in Bingöl.
The Government were represented by their Agent.
On 20 December 2010 the applicant began working as an expert at the Ankara Development Agency (Ankara Kalkınma Ajansı; “the Ankara Agency”), on the basis of a permanent employment contract governed by the Labour Code (Law No. 4857).
Established under Law No. 5449 of 25 January 2006, the Ankara Agency is a public-law entity responsible for coordinating the regional activities of public and private bodies. Its legal status is subject to private-law regulations.
The Government stated that development agencies such as the one in question are entities set up under Law No. 5449 with a view to promoting cooperation in the implementation of regional development policies at local level among the public sector, the private sector and non-governmental organisations. They explained that the agencies have access to extensive public resources in order to pursue that aim; they are public-law entities operating under the coordination of the Ministry of Industry and Technology; in that framework, using the funds and budget earmarked for the purposes of regional development, the agencies provide backing for development-oriented activities and projects.
The Government added that the decision-making body of the Ankara Agency was its governing board, chaired by the Governor of Ankara, and that its secretariat general was its executive body. The governing board approved proposals presented by the secretariat general for supporting programmes, projects and activities, as well as the requisite assistance for individuals and institutions.
The Government also explained that the Ankara Agency was a strategic institution in terms of both its power to determine regional development policies and its substantial budget (totalling 64,020,161.13 euros (EUR) for 2018); nonetheless, it was largely subject to private-law provisions; for that reason its employees were not civil servants and held employee status within the meaning of the Labour Code; at 31 December 2018 the Ankara Agency had been operating with a staff of 64 persons, including its secretary general and 28 experts like the applicant; the experts working in the Ankara Agency discharged important duties such as monitoring, assessing and supervising projects and activities supported by the Agency, as well as reporting on such activities.
The Government added that the Ankara Agency signed employment contracts with its employees, that the latter’s duties were governed by the Labour Code, the provisions of the employment contract and the Regulations on Development Agencies, and that under the applicable legislation the governing board was responsible for recruitment and dismissal.
During the night from 15 to 16 July 2016 a group of persons belonging to the Turkish armed forces launched a coup d’état aimed at overthrowing democratically elected Parliament, Government and President of the Republic. During that night of violence more than 250 individuals were killed and over 2,500 injured.
On 20 July 2016 the Government declared a state of emergency for a three-month period starting on 21 July 2016. This state of emergency was subsequently extended every three months by the Council of Ministers chaired by the President.
On 21 July 2016 the Turkish authorities notified to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe a derogation to the Convention in respect of Article 15.
During the state of emergency the Council of Ministers, chaired by the President, enacted thirty-seven emergency legislative decrees (nos. 667 to 703) pursuant to Article 121 of the Constitution. Section 4 (1) (g) of one of those instruments, Legislative Decree No. 667, which was published in the Official Gazette on 23 July 2016, required all bodies answerable to a ministry to dismiss any staff considered as belonging, affiliated or linked to (“üyeliǧi, mensubiyeti, iltisakı veya irtibatı”) terrorist organisations or to organisations, structures or groups which the National Security Council had established as being involved in activities prejudicial to the State’s national security (those entitles are referred to hereafter as “illegal structures”).
The Government explained that Emergency Legislative Decree No. 667 had introduced a special procedure for the state of emergency facilitating the dismissal of individuals working in public institutions who were affiliated or linked with illegal structures. The Government stated that the main aim of that measure had been to protect the public institutions from the influence of such structures and to prevent the latter from using public resources and installations. They submitted that the aim of the procedure had been to combat terrorism effectively and to defend the principles of democracy.
On 26 July 2016 the governing board of the Ankara Agency met to assess the situation of its employees. At the end of the meeting, the decision was taken to terminate the employment contracts of six persons, including the applicant, pursuant to section 4 (1) (g) of Emergency Legislative Decree No. 667, on account of their belonging to structures posing a threat to national security or of their affiliation or links with such structures.
On 12 August 2016 the applicant was notified of the decision concerning the termination of his employment contract. The decision merely stated that the contract had been terminated pursuant to section 4 (1) (g) of Emergency Legislative Decree No. 667.
The Government presented before the Court the declaration of termination of the applicant’s employment by the Ankara Agency as sent to the social security office. The section of the declaration concerning the reason for the termination of employment contained the reference code “22”, which the Government explained meant that the applicant had been dismissed for “other reasons”. The Government specified that in the document on the termination of employment the reasons for the termination of the relevant worker’s employment were indicated by choosing one of thirty-six possible codes. They added that the reference code “29”, for example, corresponded to “termination of employment by the employer on account of conduct on the employee’s part incompatible with the rules of morality and goodwill”.
On 14 August 2016 the applicant applied to the Ankara Labour Court (“the Labour Court”) to set aside the decision to terminate his contract. Before that court he argued, in particular, that his dismissal had not been based on any valid reason and had therefore been unfair and invalid. Moreover, he submitted that his employer had not complied with the dismissal procedure laid down in Article 19 of the Labour Code and Article 435 of the Code of Obligations. He argued that under the aforementioned provisions his employer should have given him written notice of termination of contract, clearly and specifically stating the grounds of dismissal. Lastly, he claimed compensation equivalent to four months’ salary.
On 1 September 2016 the Labour Court decided to supplement the case file. It requested, in particular, documents concerning the applicant’s employment contract and other information on the termination of the latter (including the notice of termination of contract and any defence submissions by the applicant).
On 4 October 2016 the applicant wrote to the Ankara Agency asking it to send him the reason for the termination of his employment contract.
On 5 October 2016 the applicant submitted a supplementary memorial to the Labour Court, reiterating his pleas concerning the lack of valid notification of his termination of employment. Furthermore, he challenged the lawfulness of the termination of his employment contract and submitted that he had been dismissed for no valid reason. As regards the provision relied upon to justify his dismissal, that is to say section 4 (1) (g) of Emergency Legislative Decree No. 667, he categorically denied having any kind of link with the FETÖ/PDY (“Fetullahist Terrorist Organisation/Parallel State structure”), which the Turkish authorities considered as an armed terrorist organisation which had premediated the failed military coup. He also described it as a terrorist organisation, submitting that his employer had deliberately circumvented the applicable legal provisions in order to deprive him of the minimum procedural safeguards, such as accepting his defence submissions. He considered that his dismissal had amounted to a breach of his right to presumption of innocence in that it had been based on a subjective assessment that he had links with the terrorist organisation in question. In particular, he submitted that his employer had been unable to provide any explanation or criterion for considering him as someone linked to a terrorist organisation. In his view, the fact that the assessment in question had been left to the arbitrary discretion of the secretary general of the Ankara Agency showed that he had suffered an injustice. The applicant considered that in its observations in response (no copy of which was supplied to the Court by the parties), the Ankara Agency had claimed that it had not needed any evidence in order to make the assessment in question. The applicant stated that such an approach was contrary to his constitutional rights. He also pointed out the following: he had never met any of the members of the Agency’s governing board, and consequently the only administrative officer who could have made such an assessment was the secretary general; yet the latter would have required specific information in order to form his opinion; the fact was that there was no evidence – such as the fact of holding a bank account in the Asya Bank, membership of an association, a foundation, a trade union, or some kind of body affiliated to the structure in question, or again a subscription to certain publications – capable of justifying the assessment in question; that being the case, in the absence of any such evidence, the fact of making such an assessment could only be described as arbitrary and manifestly unfair. Finally, the applicant requested a hearing of the secretary general of the Ankara Agency and the gathering of the evidence on which the assessment in question had been based.
By letter of 20 October 2016 the Ankara Agency informed the applicant that it was a public-law entity, even though it was subject to the rules of private law, and that its governing board, which had decided to terminate the contract in question, was competent to terminate employment contracts.
On 25 October 2016 the Labour Court held a public hearing. On that occasion it heard two witnesses for the applicant.
The first witness, S.A.E., said that he was not among the six employees dismissed. His statement might be summarised as follows: he had worked with the applicant for six years and had never noted any activities relating to the reasons given for the termination of the applicant’s contract; he had no information on the reasons why the employer had made the assessment in question; he had never noted any links between the applicant and the FETÖ/PDY terrorist organisation; and he did not believe that the applicant had any sympathies for the said illegal structure.
The second witness, A.A., made the following statement: he had worked temporarily with the applicant for one-and-a-half years before going back to his own department in 2014; during his period of professional cooperation with the applicant he had never noted the latter’s involvement in activities suggesting an affiliation with the illegal structure in question; he had no information on how the governing board had reached the impugned assessment.
By judgment of the same day, the Labour Court dismissed the applicant’s request on the grounds that the termination of the employment contract had been lawful. In that regard, it held that that measure had been ordered by a competent body, namely the governing board of the Ankara Agency, pursuant to Article 4 (1) (g) of Emergency Legislative Decree No. 667, which had been enacted in the framework of the state of emergency following the failed military coup of 15 July 2016.
The relevant parts of that judgment read as follows:
“... The defendant employer is an agency ... set up under Law No. 5449. It is essential that ... persons with links to illegal organisations should not be employed in public institutions. It is undisputed that pursuant to Law No. 5449 the governing board of the [defendant] agency has power to terminate employment contracts .... At its meeting on 26 July 2016 the governing board ... decided to terminate the employment contracts of six persons, including the applicant, pursuant to section 4 (1) (g) of the emergency legislative decree .... The appeal must be rejected inasmuch as the termination of the employment contract [should be considered as] a valid termination on the grounds that it was ordered by the governing board of the defendant agency, which is competent in matters of termination of contract, under the provisions of Emergency Legislative Decree No. 667 adopted following the declaration of the state of emergency after the failed military coup perpetrated by the FETÖ/PDY organisation on 15 July 2016” (“Davacının hizmet akdi 15/07/2016 tarihinde FETÖ/PDY örgütü tarafından meydana getirilen silahlı darbe kalkışması sonrasında ilan edilen olağanüstü hal kapsamında çıkarılan 667 sayılı KHK hükümlerine dayanılarak ve davalı ajansın feshe yetkili yönetim kurulunca fesih edilmekle, bu şekildeki fesihte KHK’ye göre geçerli bir fesih olmakla davanın reddine karar verilerek ... ).”
Even though the Government submitted that the Labour Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal on the grounds that “the termination of the applicant’s employment had been based on the provisions relating to termination with a valid reason (geçerli neden) as set out in Article 18 of the Labour Code [Law No. 4857]”, the Court observes that it transpires from that court’s judgment that it had not relied in its reasoning, even implicitly, on that provision of the Code.
On 23 November 2016 the applicant appealed to the Ankara Regional Court (“the Regional Court”). Reiterating the arguments which he had put to the court of first instance, he complained, first of all, about the lack of reasoning in the judgment of 25 October 2016 delivered by the Labour Court, and secondly, submitted that his dismissal had been unfair and invalid because it had not been based on a valid reason. Moreover, he argued that his dismissal as ordered on the basis of Emergency Legislative Decree No. 667 was not only likely to damage his reputation but had also been arbitrary. He took the view that the impugned measure, which had been ordered on account of the alleged existence of links with a terrorist organisation, had been imposed on him in the absence of any conviction and was therefore incompatible with the presumption of innocence.
On 24 March 2017 the Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the judgment of 25 October 2016. The relevant parts of the Regional Court’s judgment read as follows:
“... Having examined the dispute on the basis of the case file, our court must dismiss the appeal because it transpires from the parties’ submissions and the documents presented in support [of the latter] that the termination of the employment contract had been based on a valid reason (geçerli neden) [inasmuch as] the applicant’s contract had been terminated pursuant to Emergency Legislative Decree No. 667 issued following the failed military coup of 15 July 2016; section 4 of the Legislative Decree, headed ‘measures relating to civil servants’, provides as follows: persons ‘considered as belonging, affiliated or linked to terrorist organisations or to organisations, structures or groups whose involvement in activities prejudicial to the State’s national security had been established by the National Security Council’ will be excluded from the ‘civil service ... on the approval of the departmental director’ and will no longer be employed directly or indirectly in the civil service ...”.
On 21 April 2017 the applicant appealed on points of law. In his appeal, reiterating the arguments which he had put to the first- and second-instance courts, he submitted that the employment contract had been terminated arbitrarily and without any valid reason owing to an unfounded assessment by the secretary general of the Ankara Agency. Furthermore, he complained of the lack of reasoning of the judicial decisions given against him.
By judgment of 15 June 2017 the Court of Cassation upheld the judgment of the Regional Court, considering that it had complied with the law and the relevant procedural rules.
On 21 August 2017 the applicant lodged an individual appeal with the Constitutional Court contesting his dismissal. In his application form he first of all complained of a violation of his right to a fair trial. On that point he stated the following:
– the termination of his employment contract, which he considered had been ordered without any valid reason and on the basis of Emergency Legislative Decree No. 667, was incompatible with the “no punishment without law” principle;
– administrative instruments adopted during the state of emergency should include measures valid only for the duration of the state of emergency; yet that had not been the situation in the present case. The applicant stated the following: “in the present case, the situation which I faced because of the personal opinion expressed by the secretary general [of the Ankara Agency] produced consequences which exceeded the framework of the state of emergency, and my situation involves an important and vital issue that affects my and my family’s life and will continue to affect it for a lifetime” (“Bu somut olayda genel sekreterin şahsi kanaatiyle karşı karşıya kaldığım bu durum OHAL’le sınırlı bir işlem ve eylemden öte ömür boyu benim ve ailemin hayatını etkileyen önemli ve hayati bir konudur”);
– the impugned measure infringed his right to a fair trial. In that regard, the applicant cited paragraphs 2 (presumption of innocence) and 3 (a) and (b) (rights of the defence) of Article 6 of the Convention. He submitted in particular that he had been dismissed without any opportunity to present defence submissions, and that he had at no stage benefited from an investigation into the “charges” against him. Moreover, he challenged the impartiality of Judge Y.T., a member of the Labour Court, because he had allegedly stated at the 25 October 2016 hearing that he had dismissed all similar appeals which he had had to adjudicate. Furthermore, the applicant affirmed that he had never been informed of the “charges” against him.
Moreover, referring to Articles 48 (right to work) and 70 (right to enter the civil service and prohibition of discrimination in entering the civil service) of the Constitution, as well as to Article 1 § 2 of the European Social Charter, the applicant submitted that he had been totally and definitively prohibited from re-entering the civil service and that his right to work had therefore been violated.
Lastly, the applicant explained that he had suffered negative discrimination in his attempts to find other employment on account of his dismissal as ordered in the wake of the failed military coup. He argued that he had suffered violations not only of his right to work but also of his and his family’s right to life, and complained in particular that his rights had been infringed. He specified that he had been branded a “traitor” and a “terrorist”, and that that situation was preventing him from continuing his life in society.
By decision of 10 May 2018 (no. 2017/32309), the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s individual appeal. First of all, it reclassified the applicant’s complaints to examine them in the light of the right to a fair trial and the right to work. Secondly, it declared them inadmissible, those concerning the right to a fair trial as being manifestly ill-founded, and those concerning the right to work as being incompatible ratione materiae with the provisions of the Constitution.
The Constitutional Court’s decision read as follows:
“The appeal concerns an allegation that the right to a fair trial and the right to work have been violated.
Complaints concerning the [alleged] lack of reasoning and the right to have the requisite facilities and time for preparation of one’s defence in the framework of the right to a fair trial
The appeal was examined in the framework of the jurisdiction of the Constitutional Court and in the light of the information and documents presented. It should be concluded that, manifestly, no violation of those rights could was found, taking the proceedings as a whole.
Complaint concerning the right to proceedings complying with the fairness principle (hakkaniyete uygun yargılanma) in the framework of the right to a fair trial
The allegations set out in the appeal concern the courts’ appraisal of the evidence and the interpretation of the rules of law; inasmuch as no manifest error of appreciation (bariz takdir hatası) or fact constituting an obvious instance of arbitrary action (açık keyfilik oluşturan bir husus) had been established, the allegations amounted to a ‘legal remedy category’ (kanun yolu şikayeti [essentially corresponding to ‘fourth instance’-type complaints]).
Complaint concerning the right to work
Pursuant to section 45 (1) of Law No. 6216 establishing the Constitutional Court and its rules of procedure, if an individual remedy is to be examined, the right [relied upon] ... must be protected by the Constitution and safeguarded by the European Convention on Human Rights and the Protocols thereto as ratified by Turkey.
It follows that the right relied upon in the individual application does not fall within the ambit of the protection afforded by the Constitution and the Convention ....
In the light of the foregoing considerations, the court decides to dismiss the complaints concerning a fair trial as manifestly ill-founded ... [and] the complaints concerning the right to work as being incompatible ratione materiae ...”
On 30 July 2016 the Ankara prosecutor’s office launched an investigation against 95 persons, including the applicant, on charges of belonging to an armed terrorist organisation.
On 5 September 2018 the Ankara prosecutor’s office gave a discontinuance decision in respect of the applicant and the other 94 persons concerned by the investigation on the grounds that there was insufficient evidence to justify the requisite suspicions in order to bring criminal proceedings. To that end it noted, inter alia, that the concerned persons had been neither users of the ByLock communication application nor members or leaders of associations or societies suspected of supporting the criminal organisation in question, and that they did not hold bank accounts with the Bank Asya.
The relevant provisions of the Turkish Constitution as in force at the material time read as follows:
Article 15
“In times of war, mobilisation, a state of emergency, the exercise of fundamental rights and freedoms may be partially or entirely suspended, or measures derogating from the guarantees embodied in the Constitution may be taken to the extent required by the exigencies of the situation, as long as obligations under international law are not violated.
Even under the circumstances indicated in the first paragraph, the individual’s right to life, the integrity of his/her corporeal and spiritual existence shall be inviolable except where death occurs through acts in conformity with law of war; no one shall be compelled to reveal his/her religion, conscience, thought or opinion, nor be accused on account of them; offences and penalties shall not be made retroactive; nor shall anyone be held guilty until so proven by a court ruling.”
Article 120: Declaration of a State of Emergency on Account of Widespread Acts of Violence and Serious Deterioration of Public Order
“In the event of the emergence of serious indications of widespread acts of violence aimed at the destruction of the free democratic order established by the Constitution or of fundamental rights and freedoms, or serious deterioration of public order because of acts of violence, the Council of Ministers, meeting under the chairmanship of the President of the Republic, after consultation with the National Security Council, may declare a state of emergency in one or more regions or throughout the country for a period not exceeding six months.”
Article 121: Rules Relating to the States of Emergency
“In the event of a declaration of a state of emergency under the provisions of Articles 119 and 120 of the Constitution this decision shall be published in the Official Gazette and shall be submitted immediately to the Turkish Grand National Assembly for approval. If the Turkish Grand National Assembly is in recess, it shall be summoned immediately. The Assembly may alter the duration of the state of emergency, extend the period for a maximum of four months each time at the request of the Council of Ministers, or may lift the state of emergency.
The financial, material, and labour obligations which are to be imposed on citizens in the event of the declaration of state of emergency under Article 119, and, applicable according to the nature of each kind of state of emergency, the procedures as to how fundamental rights and freedoms shall be restricted or suspended in line with the principles of Article 15, how and by what means the measures necessitated by the situation shall be taken, what sort of powers shall be conferred on public servants, what kind of changes shall be made in the status of officials, and the procedure governing emergency rule shall be regulated by the Law on State of Emergency.
During the state of emergency, the Council of Ministers, meeting under the chairmanship of the President, may issue decrees having force of law on matters necessitated by the state of emergency. These decrees shall be published in the Official Gazette, and shall be submitted to the Turkish Grand National Assembly on the same day for approval; the time limit and procedure for their approval by the Assembly shall be indicated in the Rules of Procedure.”
The relevant parts of Emergency Legislative Decree No. 667, which came into force on 23 July 2016, read as follows:
Article 4
(1)  Persons considered as belonging, affiliated or linked to terrorist organisations or structures, formations or groups which the National Security Council has determined are involved in activities prejudicial to the national security of the State (Terör örgütlerine veya Milli Güvenlik Kurulunca Devletin milli güvenliğine karşı faaliyette bulunduğuna karar verilen yapı, oluşum veya gruplara üyeliği, mensubiyeti veya iltisakı yahut bunlarla irtibatı olduğu değerlendirilen):
...
(g)  personnel employed in all kinds of posts, positions and status (including workers) in institutions affiliated or related to a ministry, are dismissed from the civil service upon the proposal of the head of unit, with the approval of the director of the recruitment department (Bir bakanlığa bağlı, ilgili veya ilişkili diğer kurumlarda her türlü kadro, pozisyon ve statüde (işçi dahil) istihdam edilen personel, birim amirinin teklifi üzerine atamaya yetkili amirin onayıyla kamu görevinden çıkarılır.)
...
(2)  Persons dismissed in accordance with the first paragraph cannot be employed in the civil service again, and may not be assigned such duties either directly or indirectly ....” (Birinci fıkra uyarınca görevine son verilenler bir daha kamu hizmetinde istihdam edilemez, doğrudan veya dolaylı olarak görevlendirilemezler ...)
Under Law No. 6749 enacted on 18 October 2016 and published in the Official Gazette on 29 October 2016, Legislative Decree No. 667 was approved by the National Assembly, thus becoming law.
The legal status of employment contracts is governed by the Labour Code (Law No. 4857 of 22 May 2003). The provisions of the Civil Servants Law (Law No. 657) are inapplicable to employees, including those working in public institutions.
The Labour Code provides essentially for two modes of termination of employment contracts by the employer: termination with a valid reason (geçerli nedenle fesih) and termination with a just reason (haklı nedenle fesih).
Termination with a valid reason, commonly known as “valid termination” (geçerli fesih), is governed by Articles 17-21 of the Labour Code. It is subject to specific formal requirements: issuing notice of termination in writing, stating the reasons for the dismissal in clear and precise language and gathering the observations of the employee in question concerning the reason given (section 19 (1) and (2) of the aforementioned law). Furthermore, in cases of valid termination, the employer is required to grant the employee severance pay and a length-of-service indemnity (kıdem ve ihbar tazminatı).
Termination with a just reason, commonly known as “just termination” (haklı fesih), is governed by section 25 of the aforementioned law. While a person cannot be dismissed for a valid reason without asking the employee to submit his observations in defence, recourse by the employer to termination of contract in accordance with the conditions set out in section 25 (II) is not subject to that requirement (section 19 (2) of the aforementioned law). In order to explain the differences between the two modes of contract termination, the Government referred to a leading judgment adopted by the plenary assembly of the civil chambers of the Court of Cassation on 12 April 2017 (E.2014/7-2461, K.2017/719). The relevant parts of that judgment read as follows:
“... Termination with a just reason and termination with a valid reason are regulated separately in Law No. 4857, and the reasons used for the two types of termination are different .... The valid reason is set out in section 18 of Law No. 4857, and even though such reason is not as serious as a just reason, a valid reason is based on the employee’s conduct, lack of competence or corporate requirement. Unlike termination with a valid reason, termination with a just reason is set forth in separate terms for the employee and the employer: section 24 of Law No. 4857 regulates the employee’s right to terminate [the contract] immediately for a just reason, while section 25 of that Law deals with the employer’s right to terminate the employment contract immediately for a just reason. Contrary to [the case of] valid termination, the cases in which contracts can be terminated for a just reason are individually listed in the aforementioned provisions. Moreover, although the employer is not required to grant the employee severance pay and a length-of-service indemnity in the event of termination of employment with a just reason, the employee is entitled to severance pay and a length-of-service indemnity in cases of termination of employment with a valid reason”.
According to the Government, an action seeking re-entry into previous employment is a declaratory action (tespit davası) capable of establishing the contract termination regime (valid reason or just reason). Thus in practice the amounts payable in respect of severance pay and length-of-service indemnity could be claimed by means of separate proceedings before the Labour Court.
The relevant provisions of the Labour Code read as follows:
Article 1: Purpose and scope
“The purpose of this Law is to regulate the working conditions and work-related rights and obligations of employers and employees working under an employment contract.
With the exception of those cited in Article 4, this Law shall apply to all the establishments and to their employers, employer’s representatives and employees, irrespective of the subject matter of their activities.”
Article 17: Notice of termination
“Before terminating a continual employment contract made for an indefinite period, a notice to the other party must be served by the terminating party.
The contract shall then terminate:
...
in the case of an employee whose employment has lasted for more than three years, at the end of the eighth week following the serving of notice to the other party.
These are minimum periods and may be increased by contracts between the parties.
...”
Article 18: Justification of termination with a valid reason (Feshin geçerli sebebe dayandırılması)
“The employer who terminates the contract of an employee engaged for an indefinite period, who is employed in an establishment with thirty or more workers and who meets a minimum seniority of six months, must depend on a valid reason for such termination connected with the capacity or conduct of the employee [in question] or based on the operational requirements of the establishment or service...
...”.
Article 19: Procedure in termination
“The notice of termination shall be given by the employer in written form including the reason for termination, which must be specified in clear and precise terms.
The employment of an employee engaged under a contract with an open-ended term shall not be terminated for reasons related to the worker’s conduct or performance before he is provided an opportunity to defend himself against the allegations made. The employer’s right to break the employment contract in accordance with Article 25/II of the Labour Law (for serious misconduct or malicious or immoral behaviour of the employee) is, however, reserved.”
Article 20: Procedure of appeal against termination
“The employee who alleges that no reason was given for the termination of his employment contract ... shall be entitled to lodge an appeal against that termination with the labour court within one month of receiving the notice of termination. ...
The burden of proving that the termination was based on a valid reason shall rest on the employer. However, the burden of proof shall be on the employee if the latter claims that the termination was based on a reason different from the one presented by the employer.”
Article 21: Consequences of termination without a valid reason
“If the court or the arbitrator concludes that the termination is unjustified because no valid reason has been given or the alleged reason is invalid, the employer must re-engage the employee in work within one month. If, upon the application of the employee, the employer does not re-engage him in work, compensation of not less than four months’ wages and not more than eight months’ wages shall be paid to him by the employer.
In its verdict ruling the termination invalid, the court shall also designate the amount of compensation to be paid to the employee in case he is not re-engaged in work.
....”
Article 25: The breaking of the employment contract by the initiative of the employer (summary termination) (haklı nedenle)
“The employer may break the contract, whether for a definite or indefinite period, before its expiry or without having to comply with the prescribed notice periods, in the following cases:
For reasons of health
...
For immoral, dishonourable or malicious conduct or other similar behaviour
(a)  If, when the contract was concluded, the employee misled the employer by falsely claiming to possess qualifications or to satisfy requirements which constitute an essential feature of the contract, or by giving false information or making false statements;
...
(e)  If the employee commits a dishonest act against the employer, such as a breach of trust, theft or disclosure of the employer’s trade secrets;
...”.
Section 375 § 1 (i) of the CCP reads as follows:
“1. The reopening of proceedings may be requested for the following reasons:
(...)
(i) Where the European Court of Human Rights has issued a final judgment finding that the [final domestic] decision has been made in breach of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms or its additional protocols (...)”
The Government referred to a decision given by the Constitutional Court on 25 December 2018 (Mehmet Akif Günder, no. 2018/4268). The case giving rise to that decision concerned the termination of the employment contract of a researcher employed at the Turkish Institute of Scientific and Technical Research (“TÜBİTAK”) ordered under Article 25 of the Labour Code. In its decision the Constitutional Court declared the appeal before it inadmissible as manifestly ill-founded.
The relevant parts of that decision read as follows:
“24.  The termination of an employment contract by an employer on account of the loss or serious deterioration of the requisite trust for continuing the work relationship with his employee is, in practice, referred to as ‘reasonable suspicion termination’ (makul şüphe feshi). In the instant case, in its judgment of 2 February 2017 the court of first instance examined the arguments put forward by the appellant on the necessity of objectively proving the existence of circumstances linked to the situation in question which are incompatible with morality and good faith, or other similar circumstances as exhaustively listed in Article 25 II of Law No. 4857. In the judgment in question, the court of first instance pointed out that even though, according to the relevant case-law, the employer was required to rely on objective facts and evidence if the termination was to be valid, a more flexible approach should be adopted in the particular circumstances of the case in issue. It was noted that Turkey was experiencing an exceptional and extraordinary situation following the failed military coup of 15 July 2016 perpetrated by FETÖ/PDY. The court of first instance thus concluded that the projects being developed by TÜBİTAK had been linked to national security and that this also [involved] military activities which were confidential [by definition], and that by its very nature, the institute could not have been expected to continue to work with individuals deemed liable to cause [some degree of] vulnerability in security terms. The court of first instance [dismissed the appellant’s case] and concluded that the conditions had been met for a valid termination (geçerli fesih). [In so doing it had regard to the importance of the institute in question and of the researcher’s duties] ...
It is incumbent on the trial courts (derece mahkemeleri) to interpret the law. In the present case, as regards disputes concerning labour law, it is not for the Constitutional Court to consider whether the interpretation and assessment of the courts geared to determining the reasons for the termination describable as just and valid had complied with the relevant legislation. In that connection, the allegations put forward by the appellant concerned the assessment of the evidence by the courts and the interpretation of the legal rules; inasmuch as no manifest error of appreciation (bariz takdir hatası) or factor amounting to a clearly arbitrary act (açık keyfilik oluşturan bir husus) were established, the allegations fell into the ‘legal remedy category’ (kanun yolu şikayeti).
In the light of the foregoing considerations, the appeal must be dismissed as manifestly ill-founded, without proceeding to examine the other admissibility criteria. For the reasons set out above, this part of the appeal must be declared inadmissible.
...”
On 25 September 2020 the Government presented three judgments delivered by the Constitutional Court on 2 July 2020: Emin Arda Büyük, no. 2017/28079, Berrin Baran Eker, no. 2018/23568, and C.A.(3), no. 2018/10286.
The case giving rise to the Emin Arda Büyük and Berrin Baran Eker judgments had concerned the termination of the employment contracts of a medical secretary at the Adnan Menderes University (E.A. Büyük) and an employee (B.B. Eker) of the Kayapınar municipality in Diyarbakır. The termination of the employment contracts had been based on the employers’ assessment that the appellants had maintained links with an illegal structure within the meaning of section 4 of Emergency Legislative Decree No. 667. In those judgments the Constitutional Court had found a violation of the right of access to a tribunal on the grounds that the courts trying the case had failed, in particular, to consider whether the dismissal had been based on a valid reason. The Constitutional Court had acknowledged that the fact of maintaining a link with an illegal structure constituted valid grounds for dismissal for the purposes of section 4 of Emergency Legislative Decree No. 667. It considered, however, that the facts put forward as valid grounds of dismissal should have been scrutinised in detail by the courts in question during the judicial proceedings. Affirming that the courts in question had not considered whether all the conditions had been fulfilled for valid termination of contract, the Constitutional Court found that the appellants’ right of access to a tribunal had been infringed.
As regards the C.A.(3) judgment, the case also concerned the termination of a municipal employee’s contract pursuant to Article 25 II of the Labour Code (termination for suspicion) following disciplinary proceedings. The courts hearing the case dismissed the appellant’s appeals on the basis of specific factual evidence (in particular, the fact that the appellant had been one of the leaders of an association dissolved under the Emergency Legislative Decree). Moreover, the appellant had subsequently been convicted of belonging to a terrorist organisation.
In its judgment, the Constitutional Court held that even though the appellant’s dismissal had amounted to an interference with the right to respect for private life secured under Article 8 of the Convention, that interference had been justified and necessary in a democratic society. It accordingly observed that the suspicion in question had been based on material facts and that the termination of the employment contract had been deemed necessary by the competent courts after an individual examination of the appellant’s situation. Furthermore, it noted that the judicial decisions had comprised relevant and sufficient reasoning such as to convince the court that the interference corresponded to a pressing social need. Moreover, pointing out that the appellant had not been subject to any restrictions preventing him from applying for a job in the private sector, it found that the interference had been proportionate.
In Turkish law the concept of “termination for suspicion” is one of the extraordinary methods available to an employer in order to terminate an employment contract. This concept, which has come to constitute a reason for termination of contract, was developed by the Court of Cassation on the basis of Article 25 II (e) of the Labour Code. “Termination for suspicion” is defined as termination of an employment contract by an employer on account of a loss or serious deterioration of the requisite trust for maintaining a work relationship between the employer and the employee. Furthermore, according to the Court of Cassation, the existence of a suspicion must be based on objective facts and events liable to destroy the requisite trust for maintaining the employment contract, and the employer must endeavour to clarify the circumstances linked to the situation in question.
The Government presented several judgments of the Court of Cassation delivered after the failed military coup of 15 July 2016 concerning the concept of “termination for suspicion”.
The case giving rise to the judgment delivered on 19 November 2018 by the 9th Civil Chamber of the Court of Cassation concerned the termination on 17 October 2016 of an employment contract pursuant to Article 18 of the Labour Code. At first instance, the Labour Court had declined jurisdiction to examine the action to set aside the termination under section 16 of Emergency Legislative Decree No. 675. Subsequently, the Regional Court had overturned the first-instance judgment and decided to set aside the termination in question for lack of grounds of termination. In so doing it had stated, in particular, that the notice of termination had failed to point out that the termination was based on the Emergency Legislative Decree. The case had then been brought before the Court of Cassation.
Having assessed the case, the Court of Cassation decided to overturn the Regional Court’s judgment, considering that the impugned measure was an instance of “termination for suspicion” based on the Labour Code.
The relevant parts of the judgment of the Court of Cassation read as follows:
“According to the case file, on 17 October 2016 the appellant’s contract was terminated on the following grounds: ‘it has been decided to terminate [the contract] on the basis of section 18 of Law No. 4857’. However, in his observations in reply, counsel for the employer stated that the contract had been terminated in the framework of the legislative decrees and decisions of the Commission issued in the context of the state of emergency. According to the arguments put forward by counsel for the employer, there had been sufficient evidence on the plaintiff’s relations, links and/or affiliation with [the terrorist organisation] FETÖ/PDY and [that evidence] justified the termination of the said contract by the employer on the basis of suspicions. The employer in question could not have been expected to continue to employ a worker suspected of having relations, links or contacts with FETÖ/PDY. It should also be acknowledged that the perpetuation of the contract had become intolerable and that it would have run counter to the principles of good faith to expect the employer in question to maintain the employment contract when the employee [was the subject] of such suspicions, and that, for that reason, the employer was entitled to terminate the contract. The action must therefore be rejected, inasmuch as the termination met the conditions governing termination for suspicion and had been based on a valid reason.”
The case giving rise to the judgment delivered on 5 November 2018 by the 9th Civil Chamber of the Court of Cassation concerned the termination on 29 July 2016 of an employment contract pursuant to Emergency Legislative Decree No. 667. At first instance the Labour Court had declined jurisdiction to assess the application to set aside the termination under section 16 of Emergency Legislative Decree No. 675. Subsequently the Regional Court had overturned the first-instance judgment and decided to nullify the termination in question for non-compliance with the provisions of the Labour Code. The case had then been brought before the Court of Cassation.
Having assessed the case, the Court of Cassation decided to overturn the judgment of the Regional Court on the grounds that the impugned measure had been an instance of “termination for suspicion” based on the Labour Code.
The relevant parts of the judgment of the Court of Cassation read as follows:
“... Even though the criminal proceedings against the appellant led to a discontinuance decision, according to the arguments put forward by counsel [for the employer], there had been sufficient evidence on the plaintiff’s relations, links and/or affiliation with [the terrorist organisation] FETÖ/PDY and [that evidence] justified the termination of the said contract by the employer on the basis of suspicions. The employer in question could not have been expected to continue to employ a worker suspected of having relations, links or contacts with FETÖ/PDY. It should also be acknowledged that the perpetuation of the contract had become intolerable and that it would have run counter to the principles of good faith to expect the employer in question to maintain the employment contract when the employee [was the subject] of such suspicions, and that, for that reason, the employer was entitled to terminate the contract. The action must therefore be rejected, inasmuch as the termination met the conditions governing termination for suspicion and had been based on a valid reason.”
The case giving rise to the judgment delivered on 5 March 2018 by the 22nd Civil Chamber of the Court of Cassation concerned the termination on 27 September 2016 of the employment contract of an employee recruited by an electricity distribution company pursuant to section 4 (1) (e) and (f) of Emergency Legislative Decree No. 667, as decided after payment of the length-of-service indemnity and severance pay. At first instance the Labour Court had declined jurisdiction to assess the application for annulment of the termination pursuant to section 16 of Emergency Legislative Decree No. 675. Subsequently the Regional Court had overturned the first-instance judgment and decided to annul the termination in question for noncompliance with the provisions of the Labour Code. The case was then brought before the Court of Cassation.
Having assessed the case, the Court of Cassation decided to overturn the judgment of the Regional Court on the grounds that the impugned measure had been an instance of “termination for suspicion” based on the Labour Code.
The relevant parts of the judgment of the Court of Cassation read as follows:
“According to the case file, the present case concerns termination for suspicion. In this mode of termination the employer’s suspicions about his employee lead to a deterioration in mutual trust between the employer and the employee. A suspicion deteriorating the trust-based relationship is a suspicion linked to the employee’s character, whose compatibility with his post as required for maintaining the employment contract [evaporated] on account of a suspicion which the employer considered intolerable. The suspicion is justified by serious, important and concrete facts rendering the employee incompatible with his work, which cannot be performed without the trust-based relationship; consequently, termination for suspicion is a mode of termination bound up with the employee’s capacities.
Even though the employee’s conduct, which constitutes the grounds of termination, could not be proved conclusively, it should be accepted that, as shown by the witness statements, the existence of suspicion was established, such that the work relationship could not be perpetuated by the employer. Consequently, it has not been established that the termination of the employment contract was based on a just reason (haklı neden), but it must be accepted that it was based on a valid reason (geçerli neden) ...”
On 12 December 2016 the Venice Commission made public its opinion as adopted at its 109th plenary session (9-10 December 2016), concerning Legislative Decrees Nos. 667 to 676 enacted in the framework of the state of emergency (Opinion on Emergency Decree Laws nos. 667-676 adopted following the failed coup of 15 July 2016 (CDL-AD(2016)037)).
In its opinion, having described the factual context of the attempted coup d’état of 15 July 2016, the Venice Commission analysed the raisons d’être of the emergency legislative decrees in question. The relevant parts of the opinion read as follows:
“67. ... Dismissals of public servants are said to concern persons ‘considered to be a member of, or have a relation, connection (link) or contact with terrorist organisations or structure/entities or groups established by the National Security Council as engaging in activities against the national security of the State’. These broad formulas show that the emergency measures may be applied to all organisations which represent a threat to the national security, and not only the Gülenist network.
There is no doubt that the State is not only permitted but even required to take energetic measures against all terrorist organisations, irrespective of their political platforms, religious affiliations or ethnic composition, as long as these measures are consistent with the State’s domestic and international law obligations ...”
It also transpires from the aforementioned Opinion that “[s]ince the adoption of the emergency decree laws, more than 100,000 public servants have been dismissed .... It is not entirely clear how many public servants were dismissed by decisions taken at the lower level, i.e. by the relevant administrative entities or judicial bodies under Decree Law no. 667, and how many were mentioned directly in the lists appended to the subsequent decree laws.”
In its opinion the Venice Commission analysed the aims of the measures geared to dismissing civil servants, judges, prosecutors and public-service employees as ordered under the Emergency Legislative Decrees. The relevant parts of the opinion read as follows:
“81.  ... Articles 3 and 4 of Decree Law no. 667 provide for the dismissal of judges and other public servants, to be implemented by decisions of relevant judicial bodies or administrative entities ...
Given the nature of the conspiracy which led to the coup of 15 July 2016, the Venice Commission understands the need to conduct a swift purge of persons clearly implicated in the coup from the State apparatus. Any action aimed at combating the conspiracy would not be successful if some of the conspirators are still active within the judiciary, prosecution service, police, army, etc.
However, the same result may be achieved by employing temporary measures, and not permanent ones. The risk of a repeated coup may be significantly reduced if the supposed Gülenists, as a precautionary measure, were suspended from their posts, and not dismissed ...”
Moreover, in its opinion the Venice Commission examined the criteria used in assessing possible links between individuals and illegal structures. In substance, the Venice Commission considered that those criteria, which were aimed at evaluating any links between a person and an illegal structure and determining the point in time when any reasonable and well-informed person ought to have realised that maintaining his relationship with such structure was clearly unacceptable, should be foreseeable. It also considered that it was incumbent on the national courts to conduct judicial review of those criteria.
The relevant parts of the Opinion read as follows:
“103.  The criteria used to assess the links of the individuals to the Gülenist network have not been made public, at least not officially. The Venice Commission rapporteurs were informed that dismissals are ordered on the basis of an evaluation of a combination of various criteria, such as, for example, making monetary contributions to the Asya bank and other companies of the ‘parallel state’, being a manager or member of a trade union or association linked to Mr Gülen, using the messenger application ByLock and other similar encrypted messaging programmes. In addition, the dismissals may be based on police or secret service reports about relevant individuals, analysis of social media contacts, donations, web-sites visited, and even on the fact of residence in student dormitories belonging to the ‘parallel state’ structures or sending children to the schools associated with Mr Gülen. Information received from colleagues from work or neighbours and even continuous subscription to Gülenist periodicals are also mentioned amongst those many criteria which are used to put names on the ‘dismissals lists’”.
...
Disciplinary liability, or any other similar measure, should be foreseeable; a public servant should understand that he/she is doing something incompatible with his/her status, in order to be disciplined for it. Hence, it is important to establish a moment in time at which a reasonable and well-informed person – and public servants should be reasonable and well-informed – must have understood that their continued connections with the Gülenist network were clearly unacceptable.
The obvious difficulty in the situation at hand is that, according to the Turkish authorities, for many years the Gülenist network had two faces: it was at the same time a secret organisation using questionable methods to gain influence within the State, and a network of lawfully operating associations and projects. The Turkish authorities seem to depart from a sweeping presumption that the ‘lawful incarnation’ of the Gülenist network had always been merely a façade, and that all those who ever collaborated with or participated in any project affiliated with Mr Gülen knew about the real purposes and methods of the organisation.
...
It is important to define, on the basis of objective facts, the moment in time when, if ever, the Gülenist network as a whole (or any parts thereof) became an organisation ‘meaningful connections’ with which became incompatible with the obligation of loyalty required from public servants. In addition, it is important to define the moment in time when this should have become clear to all public servants. ... The Turkish courts, in turn, should review whether the position of the Government on this point is objectively justified.
The next question is the intensity of the connections which a public servant needed to maintain with the Gülenist network or its aspects in order to be dismissed. The Decree Laws speak of ‘relation, connection or contact’, ‘membership, affiliation or connection’, etc. Those broad definitions imply that any sort of link to the Gülenist network may lead to dismissal.
The Turkish authorities explained that the assessment of this “intensity” is based on a number of factual elements present in each case. Thus, only such links which amount to ‘membership’ may lead to criminal prosecution. The authorities refer to Article 314 of the Criminal Code, which addresses membership in a criminal organisation. According to the Turkish authorities, the difference between being a member of a criminal organisation and having ‘connections’, ‘contacts’, ‘relations’ etc. depends on the number of criteria fulfilled by a person and is defined by the administrative entities applying the emergency decree laws. ...
...
The Venice Commission acknowledges that the connection required to justify suspensions (or even dismissals) may be less intensive than the one required for defining a person as a ‘member’ of a criminal organisation. ‘Membership’ requires an ‘organic relationship’ with the criminal organisation. Removal of a public servant (temporary or permanent) may require a weaker connection to the criminal organisation.
Still, this connection should be meaningful – i.e. it should raise objective doubts in his or her loyalty, and exclude any innocent, accidental, etc. contacts. The Venice Commission recommends amending the wording of the decree laws accordingly: a dismissal may be ordered only on the basis of a combination of factual elements which clearly indicate that the public servant acted in a way which objectively cast serious doubts on his or her loyalty to the democratic legal order ...”
As regards the decision-making process, the Venice Commission criticised the lack of individualised reasoning and drew attention to the effectiveness of ex post facto judicial review.
“140. In sum, the Venice Commission concludes that the decision-making process which led to the dismissals of public servants was deficient in the sense that the dismissals were not based on individualised reasoning, which made any meaningful ex post judicial review of such decisions virtually impossible ...”
On 24 July 2001, at its 1950th meeting, the United Nations Steering Committee on Human Rights adopted a general comment on the state of emergency.
The relevant parts of this text (available at the following address: ) read as follows:
“1.  Article 4 of the Covenant is of paramount importance for the system of protection for human rights under the Covenant. On the one hand, it allows for a State party unilaterally to derogate temporarily from a part of its obligations under the Covenant. On the other hand, article 4 subjects both this very measure of derogation, as well as its material consequences, to a specific regime of safeguards. The restoration of a state of normalcy where full respect for the Covenant can again be secured must be the predominant objective of a State party derogating from the Covenant ...
Measures derogating from the provisions of the Covenant must be of an exceptional and temporary nature ...
...
...States parties may in no circumstances invoke article 4 of the Covenant as justification for acting in violation of humanitarian law or peremptory norms of international law, for instance by taking hostages, by imposing collective punishments, through arbitrary deprivations of liberty or by deviating from fundamental principles of fair trial, including the presumption of innocence.
...
Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Covenant requires a State party to the Covenant to provide remedies for any violation of the provisions of the Covenant. This clause is not mentioned in the list of non-derogable provisions in article 4, paragraph 2, but it constitutes a treaty obligation inherent in the Covenant as a whole. Even if a State party, during a state of emergency, and to the extent that such measures are strictly required by the exigencies of the situation, may introduce adjustments to the practical functioning of its procedures governing judicial or other remedies, the State party must comply with the fundamental obligation, under article 2, paragraph 3, of the Covenant to provide a remedy that is effective.
It is inherent in the protection of rights explicitly recognized as non-derogable in article 4, paragraph 2, that they must be secured by procedural guarantees, including, often, judicial guarantees. The provisions of the Covenant relating to procedural safeguards may never be made subject to measures that would circumvent the protection of non-derogable rights. Article 4 may not be resorted to in a way that would result in derogation from non-derogable rights. ...
Safeguards related to derogation, as embodied in article 4 of the Covenant, are based on the principles of legality and the rule of law inherent in the Covenant as a whole. As certain elements of the right to a fair trial are explicitly guaranteed under international humanitarian law during armed conflict, the Committee finds no justification for derogation from these guarantees during other emergency situations. The Committee is of the opinion that the principles of legality and the rule of law require that fundamental requirements of fair trial must be respected during a state of emergency. Only a court of law may try and convict a person for a criminal offence. The presumption of innocence must be respected. In order to protect non-derogable rights, the right to take proceedings before a court to enable the court to decide without delay on the lawfulness of detention, must not be diminished by a State party’s decision to derogate from the Covenant.
...”
Article 24 of the European Social Charter (revised), came into force in respect of Turkey on 2007, provide as follows:
Article 24 – The right to protection in cases of termination of employment
“With a view to ensuring the effective exercise of the right of workers to protection in cases of termination of employment, the Parties undertake to recognise:
the right of all workers not to have their employment terminated without valid reasons for such termination connected with their capacity or conduct or based on the operational requirements of the undertaking, establishment or service;
the right of workers whose employment is terminated without a valid reason to adequate compensation or other appropriate relief.
To this end the Parties undertake to ensure that a worker who considers that his employment has been terminated without a valid reason shall have the right to appeal to an impartial body.”
The relevant provisions of the International Labour Organisation Convention on Termination of Employment, 1982 (No. 158) which came into force in respect of Turkey on 4 January 1995 are as follows (see also Termination of Employment Recommendation, 1982 (no. 166)):
Article 4
“The employment of a worker shall not be terminated unless there is a valid reason for such termination connected with the capacity or conduct of the worker or based on the operational requirements of the undertaking, establishment or service.”
Article 8
“1. A worker who considers that his employment has been unjustifiably terminated shall be entitled to appeal against that termination to an impartial body, such as a court, labour tribunal, arbitration committee or arbitrator. ...”
On 21 July 2016 the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the Council of Europe sent the Secretary General of the Council of Europe the following notice of derogation:
“I communicate the following notice of the Government of the Republic of Turkey.
On 15 July 2016, a large-scale coup attempt was staged in the Republic of Turkey to overthrow the democratically-elected government and the constitutional order. This despicable attempt was foiled by the Turkish state and people acting in unity and solidarity. The coup attempt and its aftermath together with other terrorist acts have posed severe dangers to public security and order, amounting to a threat to the life of the nation in the meaning of Article 15 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
The Republic of Turkey is taking the required measures as prescribed by law, in line with the national legislation and its international obligations. In this context, on 20 July 2016, the Government of the Republic of Turkey declared a State of Emergency for a duration of three months, in accordance with the Constitution (Article 120) and the Law No. 2935 on State of Emergency (Article 3/1b). ...
The decision was published in the Official Gazette and approved by the Turkish Grand National Assembly on 21 July 2016. Thus, the State of Emergency takes effect as from this date. In this process, measures taken may involve derogation from the obligations under the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, permissible in Article 15 of the Convention.
I would therefore underline that this letter constitutes information for the purposes of Article 15 of the Convention. The Government of the Republic of Turkey shall keep you, Secretary General, fully informed of the measures taken to this effect. The Government shall inform you when the measures have ceased to operate.
...”
The notice of derogation was withdrawn on 8 August 2018, following the end of the state of emergency.
The present judgment is an important one in the context of the problems that have arisen in the respondent State regarding measures taken in the wake of the attempted coup of July 2016. I am in full agreement with the judgment in terms of the outcome, as well as most of the reasons for it. On the following points, however, I have reservations concerning the reasoning adopted in the judgment. The following issues and concerns relating to Articles 6 and 8 are interlinked.
Article 6
Under Article 6, the applicant complains in essence of the lack of effective judicial review of the decision taken by the Agency, his employer, to dismiss him on the grounds of his alleged links with an organisation classified as “terrorist”. The applicant’s grievances concerning the judicial review conducted in his case are closely connected with the fact that the dismissal itself was of a summary nature. The underlying reasons were neither specified nor substantiated, and the applicant was given no opportunity to respond to the allegation that he had links with a terrorist organisation. Under such circumstances, the very basis of the subsequent judicial review process was highly problematic. The applicant was not in a position to know exactly what he was being charged with, or on what grounds and on the basis of what evidence. Normally, there is a specific basis for a judicial review in the factual and legal elements invoked in the decision, the arguments and the evidence relied on to justify it, as well as the procedural materials underpinning the decision. In the present case there was little more than an announcement of dismissal by reference to the Emergency Legislative Decree, which itself was very imprecise (see paragraph 10 below).
Despite this anomalous situation, the present judgment is structured along the usual lines of an analysis set out in the Court’s case-law for assessing the adequacy of judicial review. Thus, the Chamber first addresses – very succinctly – the characteristics of the judicial review from the point of view of the requirements of full jurisdiction, an adversarial procedure and the equality of arms, concluding that those basic tenets of fair proceedings were, in principle, “sufficiently satisfied” (see paragraph 140 of the judgment).
In my view, this approach is not quite suited to the present circumstances. For the reasons already mentioned, it is obvious that the above requirements – full jurisdiction, adversarial procedure and equality of arms – were only satisfied in a purely formal sense, as a matter of abstract theory. This is hardly consonant with the Court’s general guiding principle, namely upholding rights that are real and not only illusory, and might well lead to misunderstandings. At this juncture, it is even specifically stated that the applicant was not prevented from having access to the case file regarding evidence submitted. The trouble is, however, that the file lacked anything that could have served to elucidate the specific facts or the evidence relied on to justify the dismissal, and thus to help the applicant discern what exactly he should challenge and how.
Although the Chamber subsequently carries out a more substantive analysis of the manner in which the judicial review was conducted, concluding that the right to effective judicial review was violated – a finding with which I fully agree – I consider that in this particular case it would have been better, and better suited to the overall situation and context of the judicial review proceedings, to dispense with the statements set out in paragraph 140. In the specific circumstances, they are more or less void of substance. The crux of matter is the actual weakness of the judicial review that took place.
Article 8
In its examination of the applicant’s complaints under Article 8, the Chamber follows the usual methodology in addressing the questions of whether the infringement was lawful, had a legitimate aim and met the requirements of necessity/proportionality. As regards the first limb, the Chamber concludes, albeit not firmly, that the requirements of “lawfulness” as such were not infringed (see paragraphs 206-209 of the judgment). My reservations concern this part of the analysis. In my view, the standard criteria relating to the “quality of the law” were not met in the present case. While I can understand the reasons why the Chamber has found it appropriate to pursue the assessment “all the way through”, I nonetheless consider that a more rigorous review should have been undertaken in terms of the “lawfulness” test, in line with the Court’s case-law. The latter has established general principles regarding the assessment of the “quality of the law” which are pertinent in the present context but are neither mentioned nor addressed in the judgment.
In particular, the Court has consistently held that for domestic law to meet the qualitative requirements, it must afford a measure of legal protection against arbitrary interference by public authorities with the rights guaranteed by the Convention. In matters relating to fundamental rights, it would be contrary to the rule of law, one of the basic principles of a democratic society as enshrined in the Convention, for the legal discretion granted to the executive to be expressed in terms of an unfettered power. Consequently, the law must indicate with sufficient clarity the scope of any such discretion and the manner of its exercise (see, for instance, Rotaru v. Romania [GC], no. 28341/95, § 55, ECHR 2000-V, Regner v. the Czech Republic GC, no. 35289/11, § 60, ECHR 2017, Navalnyy v. Russia ([GC], nos. 29580/12 and 4 others, § 115, 15 November 2018, and Beghal v. the United Kingdom, no. 4755/16, § 88, 28 February 2019, and the references therein). Accordingly, the Court has considered that its examination of whether the requirements of the “quality of the law” are satisfied must include an analysis of whether the impugned powers are sufficiently circumscribed and whether their exercise is subject to adequate legal safeguards against abuse (Gillan and Quinton v. the United Kingdom, no. 4158/05, § 87, ECHR 2010, Beghal , cited above, § 109).
More specifically, the Court has conducted its assessment of the “quality of the law” by reviewing the relevant regulatory framework from the point of view of the scope of the accorded powers, the extent of the discretion, the existence of elements curtailing the exercise of the powers, the availability of judicial review, and the existence of independent oversight of the use of the powers (see, in the context of anti-terrorism measures, Beghal, cited above, where the Court engaged in a detailed analysis of each of these issues).
It is also worth mentioning that in the latter judgment, the Court stated that the absence of criteria circumscribing the exercise of discretion is likely to render difficult any meaningful judicial review of the decisions taken (ibid., §§ 103 and 105).
In the present case, it is notable that the relevant provision of the Emergency Legislative Decree No. 667 is worded very vaguely as far as the grounds for dismissal are concerned (see paragraph 33 of the judgment). It covers anyone “considered” to have “links” with “terrorist organisations or structures, formations or groups” determined by the National Security Council as being ”involved in activities prejudicial to the national security of the State”, imposing the dismissal of all such persons from their civil service posts or other public sector jobs. It is difficult to see how such a legal basis for measures that entailed dramatic and, in principle, permanent consequences for the individuals concerned could be considered consonant with the standards developed in the Court’s case-law.
In this context, it is worth observing that the Venice Commission, in its opinion on the impugned Emergency Decrees (cited in paragraph 50 of the present judgment), also expressed concerns regarding the formulation of the relevant provisions, and recommended that they should be amended so that a dismissal could only be ordered on the basis of a combination of factual elements which clearly indicated that the public servant had acted in a way which objectively cast serious doubts on his or her loyalty to the democratic legal order (see the conclusion in paragraph 131 of the opinion).
The Venice Commission also noted, similarly the Court’s findings in Beghal (see above), that the fact that the dismissals were not based on individualised reasoning made any meaningful ex post judicial review of such decisions virtually impossible (see paragraph 141 of the opinion, cited in paragraph 51 of the present judgment).
Furthermore, as regards the judicial review and the relevant requirements of independence, one should not lose sight of the fact that all the members of the judiciary were themselves subject to the threat of dismissal under the same emergency measures. In sum, the quality of the legal framework, including the relevant safeguards, appears highly problematic from the point of view of the established Convention standards.
As already mentioned at the outset, I can well understand, and agree with, the Chamber’s desire in this case to carry out an examination of all the elements of the requirements arising under the second paragraph of Article 8. Nonetheless, I take the view that the Chamber should not have dispensed with a proper analysis of the first criterion, that of “lawfulness”, in particular the requirements of “the quality of the law” as set out in the Court’s established case-law. In other words, the present judgment should have taken care to avoid any misconceptions regarding the relevant standards and their applicability. In this context, it is also important to recall that any derogation under Article 15 of the Convention can only justify deviations from normal Convention standards to the extent “strictly required” by the exigencies of the situation.
I respectfully disagree with the Court’s decision to award the applicant a sum in respect of non-pecuniary damage under Article 41, as the domestic law (Article 375 § 1 (i) of the Code of Civil Procedure) allows for such reparation to be made by reopening the proceedings, in respect of which the Court has found the violation of the Convention. Consequently, the present judgment constitutes in itself sufficient just satisfaction for any non-pecuniary damage sustained.