The case originated in an application (no. 25555/10) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Mr Igor Pascari (“the applicant”), on 26 April 2010.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr V. Zamă, a lawyer practising in Chisinau. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Apostol.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the courts had determined a criminal charge against him in proceedings in which he had not been involved.
On 15 September 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1983 and lives in Chisinau.
The applicant is a bus driver. On 14 August 2009 he was involved in an accident with a car in which no one was injured. According to the findings of the police, the driver of the other vehicle involved in the accident, P.C., had changed lanes without paying attention to the applicant’s bus, which had been overtaking it in the other lane. The applicant had not had enough time to brake and had hit P.C.’s car on the rear left side. On the same date the chief inspector of the traffic police issued a decision finding P.C. responsible for the accident under Article 242 § 1 of the Traffic Code (see paragraph 12 below), fined him 800 Moldovan lei (MDL) (the equivalent of 50 euros (EUR)) and gave him five penalty points.
.  On an unspecified date P.C. contested that decision.
.  By a judgment of 29 September 2009 the Anenii Noi District Court dismissed P.C.’s objection and upheld the decision of the chief inspector of the traffic police. The applicant was not involved in the proceedings. Only P.C. and the police officer who had been present at the site of the accident were present and the latter opposed P.C.’s objection. P.C. challenged the District Court’s decision.
.  On 19 November 2009, the Bender Court of Appeal reversed the decision of the first-instance court, finding the applicant guilty of causing the accident. The court found that the applicant had not kept a safe distance between his bus and the vehicle in front of him and stated as follows:
“... according to article 49 of the Route Code, the driver of a vehicle shall keep a safe distance between his vehicle and the vehicle in front of him, in such a manner as to avoid collision in case of sudden braking by the foregoing vehicle.
These rules were not observed by the driver of the vehicle which was behind, namely by the driver of the bus [...], Mr Igor Pascani, and by no means by Mr P.C.”
The applicant was again not involved in the proceedings and only found out about them at a later date. Under domestic law he was not able to challenge the Court of Appeal’s decision.
.  As a result of the above judgment and based on its conclusions, on 22 January 2010 the chief inspector of the traffic police issued a new decision by which he found the applicant guilty of the breach of Article 49 of the Traffic Code causing the accident of 14 August 2009. The operative part of the decision stated as follows:
“...Pascari Igor is declared guilty of having committed the offence provided by Article 242 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Offences (CAO), however, according to Article 30 § 3 of the CAO no sanction shall be applied in view of the statutory limitation period.”
.  It appears from the documents submitted by the parties that following the accident the owner of the bus recovered the cost of its repairs from P.C.’s insurance company. After the judicial proceedings in which the applicant was found responsible, P.C. attempted to recover the cost of the repairs of his car from the other party’s insurance company. However, it appears from the case file that the company suspended payment until the case has been finally determined by the Court.
According to Article 242 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Offences (CAO), a breach of traffic rules which only causes damage is punishable by a fine of MDL 800 and five penalty points.
.  According to article 49 of the Route Code, the driver of a vehicle shall keep a safe distance between his vehicle and the vehicle in front of him, in such a manner as to avoid collision in case of sudden braking by the foregoing vehicle.
In accordance with Article 36 of the CAO, when drivers have a total number of fifteen penalty points against them their licence can be suspended for between six months and one year.