The case originated in an application (no. 24209/94) against the  lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Y.F. (“the applicant”), on 13 May 1994.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr S. Tanrıkulu, a lawyer practising in . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) did not appoint an Agent for the purposes of the proceedings before the Court. The President of the Chamber acceded to the applicant's request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
Relying on Article 8 of the Convention, the applicant complained that the forced gynaecological examination of his wife constituted a breach of her right to respect for her private life.
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
The application was allocated to the First Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1. Mr R. Türmen, the judge elected in respect of , withdrew from the case (Rule 28). The Government accordingly appointed Mr F. Gölcüklü to sit as an ad hoc judge (Article 27 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 29 § 1).
By a decision of 29 February 2000 the Chamber declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1). The Chamber, after having consulted the parties, decided that no hearing on the merits was required (Rule 59 § 2 in fine).
On 1 November 2001 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). This case was assigned to the newly composed Fourth Section.
The applicant was born in 1951 and lives in Bingöl.
On 15 October 1993 the applicant and two days later his wife, Mrs N.F., were taken into police custody in Bingöl on suspicion of aiding and abetting an illegal terrorist organisation, namely the PKK (Workers' Party of Kurdistan).
Mrs F. was held in police custody for four days, during which period she was allegedly kept blindfolded. The police officers allegedly hit her with truncheons, insulted her verbally and threatened her with rape.
On 20 October 1993, following her detention in police custody, Mrs F. was examined by a doctor, who reported that there were no signs of ill-treatment on her body. On the same day she was taken to a gynaecologist for a further examination. The police requested that the report should indicate whether she had had vaginal or anal intercourse while in custody. Despite her refusal, Mrs F. was forced by the police officers to undergo a gynaecological examination. The police officers remained on the premises while Mrs F. was examined behind a curtain. The doctor reported that she had not had any sexual intercourse in the days preceding the examination.
On the same day Mrs F. was taken to the Bingöl public prosecutor's office, where she complained about her forced gynaecological examination. The public prosecutor did not record her complaints and ordered her release.
On 28 October 1993 the public prosecutor at the  charged the applicant and his wife with aiding and abetting members of the PKK.
On 23 March 1994 the  acquitted the applicant and his wife for lack of evidence.
On 9 February 1995, the applicant and his wife complained to the Bingöl public prosecutor about their ill-treatment while in police custody. They further complained that Mrs F. had been forced to undergo a gynaecological examination without her consent.
The police officers denied the allegations in statements made before the Bingöl public prosecutor. They submitted that it had been necessary for a gynaecological examination to be performed in order to determine whether Mrs F. had been sexually assaulted while in police custody. They further submitted that the examination had been performed with her consent.
On 5 October 1995 the Bingöl public prosecutor decided not to prosecute the police officers for lack of evidence. The applicant and his wife appealed.
On 29 November 1995 the  quashed the public prosecutor's decision on the ground that there had been insufficient examination of the evidence in the investigation file.
On 19 December 1995 the Bingöl public prosecutor charged three police officers with, inter alia, violating Mrs F.'s private life by forcing her to undergo a gynaecological examination.
On 16 May 1996 the  acquitted the defendant police officers on the ground that the complainants had not provided sufficient convincing evidence in support of their allegations. The court held that the police officers had had no intention of subjecting the applicant's wife to degrading and humiliating treatment when they made her undergo a gynaecological examination, but were trying to protect themselves against a possible accusation of rape. The applicant and his wife appealed.
On 7 May 1997 the Court of Cassation upheld the Bingöl Assize Court's judgment.
The right to physical integrity is protected by the Constitution. Article 17 § 2 provides:
“Save in the case of medical necessity and in circumstances defined by law, violation of physical integrity shall be prohibited; human beings shall not be subjected to scientific or medical experiments.”
Article 66 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides an exception to this rule. It lays down:
“...
During the preliminary investigation, medical examinations may be performed at the request of the public prosecutor.”
Article 1 of the Regulation of 13 August 1999, which amended Article 8 of the Regulation of 1 October 1998 concerning the arrest, detention and questioning of suspects, provides that persons under arrest shall be bodysearched before being taken into custody. Body searches of female detainees must be performed by a female officer or a woman designated for that purpose.
According to Circular no. 2000/93 issued by the Ministry of Justice on 20 September 2000, which repealed Circulars nos. 6058, 6065, 6068, 6070 and 6090, medical personnel shall respect fundamental human rights and freedoms and rules on privacy when conducting medical examinations and tests. The doctor must see and examine the patient personally and must not rely on another person's statement in his or her report.
Medical examinations must be performed under appropriate conditions and out of the hearing and sight of members of the security forces. Persons required to undergo a medical examination must be seen on premises to which only medical personnel are admitted and undress in readiness for the examination after being given the necessary information. 