The case originated in two applications (nos. 75225/13 and 77311/13) against the Republic of Malta lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two companies registered in Malta, B. Tagliaferro & Sons Limited and Coleiro Brothers Limited (“the applicant companies”), on 28 November 2013.
The applicant companies were represented by Dr I. Refalo and Dr S. Grech, and Dr P. Lofaro and Dr M. Simiana, respectively, all lawyers practising in Valletta. The Maltese Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Dr P. Grech, Attorney General.
The applicant companies alleged, in particular, that their property had been expropriated without satisfying the public interest requirement. Furthermore, to date they had not been paid any compensation for the property. They also complained that given the Constitutional Court’s failure to give redress, including adequate compensation, constitutional redress proceedings could not be considered as an effective remedy for the purposes of Article 13 in conjunction with Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
On 29 May 2015 the applications were communicated to the Government and observations were received by the parties. Following a request by the Court, in 2018 the parties submitted factual information concerning new developments which occurred after the filing of their submissions. The applicant companies also submitted updated just satisfaction claims which were accepted by the Court pursuant to Rule 54 § 2 (c) and in respect of which the Government also sent their comments in reply.
The first applicant company, B. Tagliaferro & Sons Limited, is a company registered in Malta in 1966 and is situated in Valletta. The second applicant company, Coleiro Brothers Limited, is also a company registered in Malta in 1966 and it is situated in Marsa.
In 1993 each applicant company was the owner of a one third undivided share of three corner properties, namely nos. 124 and 125 in Strait Street and no. 109 Archbishop Street, Valletta (hereinafter “the properties”).
According to a court-appointed expert the properties nos. 124 and 125 were valued at the equivalent of 35,000 euros (EUR) each in 1993 and EUR 58,000 and EUR 60,000 respectively in 2012, while property no. 109 was valued at the equivalent of EUR 93,000 in 1993 and EUR 140,000 in 2012. The same architect estimated that the rental value from 1993 to 1998 would be the equivalent of EUR 233, EUR 250 and EUR 600 respectively, to be augmented by 10 % every five years thereafter.
By a President’s declaration of 23 February 1993 the Government declared its intention of acquiring by title of absolute purchase the three properties for public purposes. No Notice to Treat (offering an amount of compensation) was issued by the Commissioner of Lands (‘CoL’) at the time (see below). The public purpose later transpired to be that of using the properties, together with other properties also expropriated (together referred to as “the premises” hereinafter), as government offices  in particular, as the Office of the Attorney General.
On 2 June 1993 and 12 October 1993 the Government had lodged planning applications, which were later withdrawn. Another development application was submitted in 1996 and approved in the same year. However, since parts of the premises expropriated (including other adjacent property not owned by the applicant companies) were occupied by squatters and by other persons having legal title (of lease or similar  inkwilini  hereinafter referred to as “lessees”), the Government was unable to take over the premises. The applicant companies insisted that at the time of the declaration, the properties owned by them were vacant.
Between 1996 and 2007 the Attorney General repeatedly requested the Lands Department to take steps to vacate the premises. In turn the latter department wrote to the Housing Authority requesting it to provide alternative accommodation to the lessees and the squatters. Given that not all the occupiers had applied for alternative accommodation, as expected by the authorities, the relocation process was delayed. Thus, the construction permit in relation to the planned project issued in 1996 expired. On 18 September 2000 another application was submitted to the Malta Environment and Planning Authority for approval. By the end of 2015 no approval had yet been issued due to various obstacles from the various committees of the Planning Authority.
In the meantime in April 2000 the issue was brought to the attention of the Justice Minister and in January 2001 eviction orders were issued to evict the occupiers of the premises.
In 2003 the applicant companies wrote to the CoL requesting him to pay compensation for the taking. The latter did not reply.
In 2007 the premises were vacated and the Government took over their possession.
By means of a judicial protest of 20 July 2008 the applicant companies requested the return of the properties owned by them as well as compensation for the taking until its effective release. The CoL did not reply to the protest.
On 24 June 2009 the Government issued a new declaration for the expropriation of the properties. They offered the following amount of compensation which was deposited via the courts in an interest bearing account: EUR 8,968 for property no. 124 (for a plot of land measuring 23.10 sq.m.); EUR 8,316 for property no. 125 (no measurement provided); and EUR 21,733 for property no. 109 (for a plot of land measuring 87.08 sq.m), in line with estimates made by architect FHV.
The Government thus became the owner of the properties in accordance with the Land Acquisition (Public Purposes) Ordinance, Chapter 88 of the Laws of Malta, hereinafter “the Ordinance”, as amended. The applicant companies were not served with this declaration as required by law (see paragraph 37 below).
On unspecified dates the two applicant companies instituted separate constitutional redress proceedings complaining that the taking had not been in the public interest, that there had been a delay in the payment of compensation and that they had had no access to an impartial and independent tribunal in the meantime.
The two applications were heard and determined concurrently by the domestic courts.
By two separate judgments of 12 October 2012 the Civil Court (First Hall), in its constitutional jurisdiction, upheld the applicant companies’ claims in part.
It rejected their claim concerning the lack of public interest of the expropriation, having considered that the purpose of the taking was one in the general interest of citizens, given the role of the Attorney General who performed constitutional duties in the interest of the State. The Attorney General’s Office was to be moved to a more appropriate location, allowing it to expand. Whether the Government had other alternative property for this project was not a matter to be examined by the court, such choices falling within the Government’s discretion, which in the present case had not been applied unreasonably, and the decision had been intra vires. While it was true that a certain delay had occurred in the development of the initial plan, the court considered that the public interest still existed as the plan was still in force and had recently started progressing more rapidly. Moreover, the property was still earmarked for the same purpose, which purpose had never been abandoned by the authorities.
The court, however, found a violation of Article 6 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention in connection with the delay resulting from the expropriation proceedings, highlighting the slowness of the authorities in taking steps to vacate the premises and in offering the applicant companies compensation.
It further found a violation of Article 6 in so far as the applicant companies had not had access to court between 1993 and 2009, given that access to the Land Arbitration Board (LAB) was limited solely to the CoL.
Moreover, until 2009 the LAB did not fulfil the requirements of an independent and impartial tribunal given its composition according to the law as it stood before the 2009 amendments. The constitutional jurisdictions had already held (in previous domesticcase law) that the LAB did not fulfil the requirement of independence and impartiality because of the method of appointment of its technical members before the 2009 amendments. Nevertheless, the latter amendments provided that the technical members, who assisted the chairperson in his decision, would now be appointed by the chairperson. Moreover, the latter’s decision was subject to appeal before the Court of Appeal. It followed that the same issues did not arise post 2009, thus the applicant companies had suffered a violation of their right to have their claims determined by an independent and impartial tribunal solely until 2009.
Furthermore, in the court’s view, the applicant companies were also still suffering a violation of their right to a fair trial within a reasonable time in connection with the proceedings which were at the time in their preliminary phase, in so far as the CoL had not yet officially notified the owners (or curators on their behalf) allowing them to challenge the compensation.
The court further noted that while according to the law the obligation to act was upon the CoL and owners should not be required to take judicial steps to impose a term for him to act, the fact that the applicant companies had not undertaken such judicial steps could affect the compensation awarded.
The court rejected the applicant companies’ claims for material damage without prejudice to proceedings which they could bring before the LAB which could now be considered independent and impartial – it being chaired by a judge or magistrate who fulfilled the relevant guarantee - and whose decisions could also be appealed. It awarded each applicant company EUR 10,000 in nonpecuniary damage (known in the domestic system as moral damage) bearing in mind that they each were owners of a third undivided share of the properties. The court also ordered the applicant companies to pay half the costs of the proceedings, that is to say EUR 3,546.97.
Both parties appealed.
By two separate judgments of 31 May 2013 the Constitutional Court rejected the defendants’ appeal and upheld the applicant companies’ appeal in part. It confirmed the firstinstance judgment, extending the scope of certain violations and increasing the amount of compensation awarded.
The Constitutional Court confirmed the violations of Article 6 (access to court and length of proceedings) and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention in so far as in the absence of a Notice to Treat issued by the CoL the applicant companies had had no access to court from 1993 to 2009. However, these violations persisted further, in so far as even after the declaration of 2009 and the CoL’s deposit in court of the offer made to the applicant companies, he had failed to notify the owners as required by law [Article 9 (2) of the Ordinance] with the consequence that proceedings had stagnated and no access to court by the applicant companies was possible as a result of his inaction. Indeed, the authorities had slacked all throughout the process. Similarly, the Constitutional Court confirmed that the applicant companies’ failure to bring judicial proceedings to oblige the CoL to act could only have a bearing on the award of compensation but not on the substance of the claim.
It further confirmed the public interest of the taking, which persisted to date since, despite the delay, the Government was still pursuing the aim it had originally intended for the property.
The Constitutional Court also confirmed the lack of independence and impartiality of the LAB, however not only until 2009. The Constitutional Court considered that, even following those amendments the law remained deficient given the lack of security of tenure of the technical members of the board, on whose technical advice the chairperson had to base his or her decision. While it confirmed the firstinstance court’s findings concerning the role of the chairperson, it observed that the technical members were still subject to reappointment (by the President of Malta, on the advice of the executive, which was always a party to the proceedings before such board). Although the role of the technical members was subordinate to that of the chairperson (who following the amendments was not bound to follow the experts’ unanimous report), in practice it was decisive in so far as the chairperson (a legal person without the necessary technical knowledge) was undoubtedly influenced by the decision of the technical members when considering technical matters. As stated in previous domestic case-law, at least in the mind of an objective observer, the possibility of the technical experts being reappointed could be an incentive for such members to determine low values for expropriated property in order to remain in the good books of the executive who had the power to keep them in office. Thus, such a body did not fulfil the guarantees of independence and impartiality. In the specific circumstances, those failings could not be cured by the Court of Appeal, which was not in a position to interfere with the conclusions of the technical members of the board.
However, the Constitutional Court considered that material damage had to be awarded by the LAB in separate proceedings; it thus only awarded non-pecuniary damage in the amount of EUR 15,000 to each applicant company. It ordered the applicant companies to pay a third of the costs of the appeal proceedings (that is, EUR 1,109.41) and confirmed the costs as ordered at first-instance for those proceedings. It further directed that the judgment be served upon the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
In 2018 the applicant companies submitted that no use had yet been made of their property, the value of which was increasing in line with the value of property in general in Malta. They also noted that the Government had done restoration works in the area, particularly to a part of Palazzo Verdelin, which was a historic building described in newspapers as an early example of baroque architecture in Malta, but not to the part owned by the applicant companies which was left to deteriorate in the absence of maintenance works.
At the same time, the Government informed the Court that due to the urgency of vacating and transferring the Office of the Attorney General, another building in Valletta which was previously a museum was identified for use as the Office of the Attorney General. It was now being refurbished and modified for such purpose. However, the applicant companies’ property remained designated for public use. They noted that the applicant companies’ property could not be refurbished as it needed extensive structural works unlike Palazzo Verdelin which required only restoring the facade.
The Land Acquisition (Public Purposes) Ordinance (Chapter 88 of the Laws of Malta), which has been repealed by Act XVII of 2017, in so far as relevant, read as follows:
Section 3
“The President of Malta may by declaration signed by him declare any land to be required for a public purpose.”
Prior to the amendments introduced in 2002, the Land Acquisition (Public Purposes) Ordinance provided that:
Section 12(1)
“...the competent authority shall give to the owner a notice ... by means of a judicial act, stating the amount of compensation, as shown in a valuation to be attached to the notice to treat.”
Section 13(1)
“The amount of compensation to be paid for any land required by a competent authority may be determined at any time by agreement between the competent authority and the owner ...”
Section 22
“If the owner shall by a judicial act decline to accept the offer made by the competent authority, the matter shall be brought before the Board by an application to be made by the competent authority, and the Board shall give all necessary orders or directions in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.”
Following amendments in 2002, Sections 9 and 22 of the Ordinance (the latter applicable at the time of the President’s declaration of 24 June 2009), in so far as relevant, read as follows:
Section 9
“(1) Whenever the President of Malta declares that any land is required for a public purpose, the competent authority shall cause a copy of such declaration (together with particulars sufficient for the purpose of identifying the land) to be published in the Government Gazette, in at least two local newspapers (one of which must be a newspaper published in English and the other a newspaper published in Maltese) and on the notice board of the office of the Local Council of the locality where the land is situated.
(2) The competent authority shall also file a copy of the declaration and of the particulars in the registry of the Board, and shall cause a copy thereof to be served through the Board in the manner prescribed by the Code of Organisation and Civil Procedure on every owner of and on every other party having a legal interest in the land to which the declaration refers, of whose existence and identity the competent authority is aware.”
“(1) If the competent authority and the owner agree as to the amount of compensation for any land, the Board on the application of any one of the parties, shall make an order carrying the agreement into effect.
Provided the amount of acquisition rent or recognition in rent, as the case may be, shall be determined in terms or the relevant provisions of Article 27.
(2) Where the land is to be acquired by the absolute purchase thereof (including the acquisition by conversion from possession and use or public tenure into absolute ownership), the President’s Declaration issued for the purposes of article 3 of this Ordinance, shall state the amount of compensation which the competent authority is willing to pay for the land to which the declaration refers. The Declaration shall have attached with it a valuation drawn up by an architect and where available a site plan of the land described in the Declaration.
(3) Within fifteen working days from the publication of the President’s Declaration as is referred to in subarticle (2) hereof in the Gazette the Government shall deposit in an interest bearing bank account (which will guarantee a minimum of interest per annum as the Minister responsible for lands may by regulation under this subarticle prescribe) a sum equal to the amount of compensation offered in the president’s Declaration. Such sum shall be freely withdrawn together with any interests accrued thereon by the person or persons entitled to such compensation upon evidence to the entitlement thereto, in a manner satisfactory to the competent authority.
(4) The competent authority shall signify its acceptance or otherwise of the evidence submitted by the persons referred to in the immediately preceding subarticle, by means of a judicial act within two months from, the submission of such, evidence.
(5) The amount deposited as provided in subarticle (3) together with any interests accruing thereon may be withdrawn as provided in the said subarticle whether or not the sum deposited as compensation has been accepted as the amount of compensation due, and the withdrawal of such deposit interests shall not prejudice the right competent to any person to take action according to this Ordinance for the purpose of determining any further compensation that may be payable to him in accordance with this Ordinance.
(6) Where the person entitled to compensation does not accept that the amount deposited is adequate, such person may apply to the Board for the determination of the compensation in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Such application shall, on pain of nullity, state the compensation that in the opinion of the applicant is due.
(7) Such application shall be filed in the Registry of the Board within twenty one days from the notification of the judicial act by the competent authority accepting proof of evidence hi accordance with-subarticle (4) of this article. The Board shall determine such compensation and shall give all necessary orders and directives in accordance, with this Ordinance.
(8) Upon the making of a Declaration by the President in accordance with this Ordinance that any land is to be acquired by the absolute purchase thereof, the absolute ownership of the land to which the declaration refers shall be deemed to be a registration area for the purposes of the Land Registry Act and the absolute ownership thereof shall by virtue of this Ordinance and without any further, assurance or formality be transferred to and be acquired by the competent authority free and unencumbered from any charge, hypothec or privilege and with all the appurtenances thereof, and the competent authority shall cause such land to be registered in the Land Registry in its name in accordance with the Land Registry Act within three, months from the .issue of the Declaration of the President.
(9) The right to withdraw compensation deposited in accordance with subarticle (3) and to any further compensation that may be due under this Ordinance (hereinafter referred to as “the compensation rights”) shall be deemed to be an immovable right by reason of the object to which it refers and shall be transferable accordingly. Any charge, hypothec or privilege which prior to the acquisition of the land by the competent authority attached to such land, shall continue to attach to the compensation rights with the same ranking and priority as it attached to the land.
(10) Where the compensation payable in respect of land acquired by the absolute purchase thereof is determined, whether by agreement or decision of the Board, any sum due as compensation over and above any sum deposited in accordance with this article together with interests thereon in accordance with article 12 (3) of this Ordinance shall be paid to the person entitled thereto, by the competent authority not later than three months from the date on which such compensation was determined as aforesaid.
(11) The compensation due for the acquisition by absolute purchase of any land, and the sum to be deposited in accordance with this article shall be:
(a) in cases other than those falling under paragraphs (b) and (c) hereof, such compensation as is established in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance regard being had to the value at the date of publication of the Declaration by the President in the Gazette;
(b) in the case of conversion from possession and use into; absolute purchase a sum arrived at by the capitalisation at the rate of one per centum of the annual acquisition rent due under the provisions of this Ordinance;
(c) in the case of conversion from public tenure into absolute purchase a sum arrived by the capitalisation at the rate of one point four per centum of the annual recognition rent due under the provisions of this Ordinance.”
Following amendments in 2009, Section 23 and 24 of the Ordinance, in so far as relevant, read as follows:
Section 23
“(1) There shall be a Board to be known as the Land Arbitration Board.
(2) The Board shall consist of a Chairman who shall be appointed by the President of Malta. The Chairman shall be a person who holds or has held the office of judge or a person who holds the office of magistrate.
(3) The President of Malta may appoint several such judges or magistrates to sit on the Board, but only one such judge or magistrate shall sit in any one case.
(4) The President of Malta shall also appoint a Panel of Architects and Civil Engineers for the purpose of assisting the Board in the valuation of land and in other technical matters. The said Panel of Architects and Civil Engineers shall be appointed from among persons who hold the warrant to practice as architect and civil engineer according to the provisions of the Periti Act and who have practised that profession in Malta for not less than seven years.
(5) The provisions of articles 733, 734, 735, 737 and 739 of the Code of Organization and Civil Procedure shall apply to the Chairman and to the members of the Panel and any exception to any member of the Panel shall be decided by the Chairman and shall not be subject to appeal.”
Section 24
“(3) The members of the Panel shall be appointed for a period of three years and may be reappointed.”
The law does not provide for the procedure through which a Chairman is appointed or revoked or changed, nor does it specify a term of office, or the grounds on which termination or substitution may occur.
Article 1078 (b) of the Maltese Civil Code, Chapter 16 of the Laws of Malta, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“Where the time for the performance of the obligation has been left to the will of the debtor, or where it has been agreed that the debtor shall discharge the obligation when it will be possible for him to do so, or when he will have the means for so doing, the following rules shall be observed:
(b) if the subject-matter of the obligation is other than the payment of a sum of money, the time within which the obligation is to be performed shall be fixed by the court according to circumstances.”
The legal provisions concerning constitutional and conventional remedies are set out in Apap Bologna v. Malta (no. 46931/12, §§ 2829, 30 August 2016).
In their observations the parties referred to the cases of Dr Mark Refalo noe vs Director of Lands and Maria Stella sive Estelle Azzopardi Vella et vs Attorney General, both firstinstance judgments of 28 January 2016, which were, at the time of the exchange of observations, pending before the Court of Appeal.
In the above mentioned cases the Constitutional Court gave judgment on 30 September 2016.
In the first case, which concerned the taking of the complainant’s property by the State under title of possession and use and, eventually, expropriation, the Constitutional Court reversed the first instancejudgment and dismissed the complaint finding that the complainant had not exhausted domestic remedies.
In the second case, which dealt with the imposition by law of a unilateral lease relationship for an indeterminate time without providing owners with a fair and adequate rent (as was the case in Amato Gauci v. Malta, no. 47045/06, 15 September 2009) the Constitutional Court upheld the violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 but annulled the remedies ordered by the first-instance court, replacing them with a joint award of EUR 5,000 covering both pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage. In connection with future rent awarded by the first-instance court the Government had argued that the court could not change the parameters set out in legislation and usurp the function of parliament. According to the Government the adequate remedy would have been to find the law inconsistent and without effect to the relevant extent. The Constitutional Court agreed that such a course of action would mean that the lessees [who were benefitting from the law to the detriment of the owners] would not continue to benefit from such law had they to be evicted. However, the Constitutional Court held that it would not evict the tenants, as it was not its role. Nevertheless, in the event that eviction proceedings were to be undertaken the tenants could not use the law to their defence.