The case concerns the detention of an asylum seeker on the grounds that he risked absconding since his identity could not be clarified, he had no means to support himself and had no connections in the country.
The applicant was born in 1981 and presently lives in Budapest as a Pakistani national under subsidiary protection. He was represented by Mr T. Fazekas, a lawyer practising in Budapest.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr Z. Tallódi, from the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 4 July 2013 officers of the Csongrád county police apprehended the applicant for an identity check. During his questioning he admitted to having crossed the Hungarian border illegally but produced no documents.
On 5 July 2013 the applicant lodged an asylum application with the Office of Immigration and Nationality. As he had no documents, his detention was ordered (menekültügyi őrizet) under section 31/A (1) a) and c) of Act no. LXXX of 2007 on Asylum (“the Asylum Act”) in order to clarify his identity and nationality and to ensure his availability for the asylum procedure. The Office held that less stringent measures would not be appropriate for those purposes. That measure lasted from 5 to 8 July 2013.
On 8 July 2013 the Békéscsaba District Court extended the asylum detention until 6 September 2013. It noted that the applicant’s identity was unclear and that he had arrived in Hungary unlawfully, and held that continued detention was necessary to ensure his availability for the asylum procedure.
On 1 August 2013 having found that the applicant’s asylum request was neither inadmissible nor manifestly ill-founded, the asylum authority ordered the examination of the case on the merits. The applicant was heard on 2 October 2013.
On 29 August and 29 October 2013 the District Court further extended the applicant’s asylum detention, on exactly the same grounds as before.
The applicant’s request for refugee status having been declined, he was ultimately granted subsidiary protection (oltalmazott) pursuant to section 12 § 1 of the Asylum Act. Consequently, he was released from asylum detention by a decision of the asylum authority on 21 December 2013.
The applicant was in asylum detention from 5 July until 21 December 2013, that is to say, for five-and-a-half months.
Act no. LXXX of 2007 on Asylum (“the Asylum Act”) provides as follows:
Section 31/A
“(1) In order to ensure compliance with the provisions set forth in sections 33 and 49(5), and having regard to the restrictions under section 31/B, the asylum authority may take into asylum detention a person seeking recognition whose right of residence is only based on the submission of an application for recognition if:
a) the identity or nationality of the person seeking recognition is not clear, in order to establish it;
...
c) there are grounds for presuming that the person seeking recognition is delaying or frustrating the asylum procedure or presents a risk of absconding, in order to establish the particulars required for conducting the asylum procedure; ...”