The case originated in an application (no. 59552/08) against the Czech Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Czech national, Mr Petr Rohlena (“the applicant”), on 4 December 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr J. Kružik, of the Czech Bar. The Czech Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V.A. Schorm.
The applicant complained in particular of the retrospective application of the criminal law, to his detriment.
On 14 November 2011 the Government were given notice of the application.
The applicant was born in 1966 and lives in Brno.
On 29 May 2006 the applicant was formally charged by the Brno municipal prosecutor with having, at least between 2000 and 8 February 2006, repeatedly physically and mentally abused his wife while drunk. He was alleged to have subjected her to verbal abuse, hit her on the head with his hand and fist, slapped her, held her by the throat, tried to strangle her, thrown her against the furniture or onto the ground, pushed her down stairs and kicked her. He had also hit the children, gambled away the household’s money on gaming machines and smashed the crockery. As a result, his wife had sustained haematomas, bruising and a fractured nose and had been obliged to seek medical assistance on that account on 26 June 2000, 18 July 2003 and 8 February 2006. The applicant had allegedly sought to undermine his wife psychologically in order to control her. According to the prosecutor, the applicant had thus committed the continuing offence of abusing a person living under the same roof within the meaning of Article 215a §§ 1 and 2(b) of the Criminal Code, given that his conduct prior to the introduction of that offence on 1 June 2004 had amounted to the offence of violence against an individual or group of individuals under Article 197a of the Criminal Code and assault occasioning bodily harm under Article 221 of the Code.
On 18 April 2007 the Brno Municipal Court found the applicant guilty of the offence of abusing a person living under the same roof, committed at least between 2000 and 8 February 2006 and described in the same manner as in the bill of indictment. It sentenced him to a suspended term of two and a half years’ imprisonment and placed him on probation for five years. He was also placed under supervision and ordered to undergo treatment for alcohol dependency. The court based its decision on the statements given by the applicant, the victim (his wife) and several witnesses and on documentary evidence and expert reports. It adopted the classification of the offence as abuse of a person living under the same roof within the meaning of Article 215a §§ 1 and 2(b) of the Criminal Code as in force from 1 June 2004 onwards, taking the view that this classification also extended to the acts committed by the applicant prior to that date since they had been punishable at the material time, amounting at least to the offence of violence against an individual or group of individuals under Article 197a of the Criminal Code. Lastly, the court considered that, owing to the duration of the conduct in question, the offence committed in the present case presented a relatively high degree of danger which justified a sentence ranging from two to eight years’ imprisonment under paragraph 2 of Article 215a of the Criminal Code. Taking into consideration the extenuating circumstances (in particular the fact that the applicant had confessed and that he had no previous convictions), it imposed a suspended sentence situated at the lower end of the range.
On 6 September 2007 the Brno Regional Court dismissed an appeal by the applicant in which he contested the facts as established by the Municipal Court and the unilateral assessment of the evidence. The Regional Court found no defects in the previous proceedings and considered that the classification of the applicant’s conduct was in conformity with the provisions of the Criminal Code.
On 21 February 2008 the Supreme Court dismissed as manifestly illfounded an appeal on points of law lodged by the applicant in which he alleged that the trial court had applied Article 215a of the Criminal Code even to his conduct prior to 1 June 2004, when the offence of abuse had not yet existed in domestic law. On this point the Supreme Court noted, referring to its ruling Tzn 12/93 of 8 December 1993, that where, as in the case at hand, the offence was a continuing one which was considered to constitute a single act, its classification in criminal law had to be assessed under the law in force on completion of the last occurrence of the offence. That law therefore also applied to the earlier assaults, provided that these would have amounted to criminal conduct under the previous law. In the instant case the Supreme Court considered that the applicant’s conduct prior to the amendment of the Criminal Code on 1 June 2004 had amounted at least to an offence punishable under Article 197a or Article 221 § 1 of the Criminal Code.
On 10 June 2008 the Constitutional Court dismissed as manifestly ill-founded a constitutional appeal lodged by the applicant in which he complained that the proceedings had been unfair and that the Criminal Code had been applied retrospectively, to his detriment. Referring to the ruling of the Supreme Court and to its relevant case-law, the Constitutional Court held that the decisions given by the courts in the present case had been logical and coherent and had not had any retrospective effect prohibited by the Constitution.
As the applicant committed another offence while on probation and did not undergo treatment for his alcohol dependency, he was required to serve the prison sentence imposed by the judgment of 18 April 2007. He has been in prison since 3 January 2011.
Under Article 89 § 3, a continuing offence comprised different acts driven by the same intent which constituted the same offence and were linked by virtue of being carried out in an identical or similar manner, occurring close together in time and pursuing the same aim.
Article 197a § 1 dealt with the offence of violence against an individual in the form of a threat to kill the person concerned or cause him or her bodily harm or other serious harm. The offence was punishable by a term of imprisonment of up to one year or by a fine. Paragraph 2 provided that any person committing the offence in question against witnesses, experts or interpreters in connection with the performance of their duties was liable to a sentence of up to two years’ imprisonment.
Article 215a, which came into force on 1 June 2004, introduced into the Criminal Code the offence of abusing a person living under the same roof. Under paragraph 1, the offence carried a sentence of up to three years’ imprisonment. According to paragraph 2, the perpetrator of such an offence faced between two and eight years’ imprisonment if (a) he or she acted in a particularly brutal manner or committed the offence against several persons or (b) he or she continued the conduct in question over a lengthy period.
Article 221 § 1 made the offence of assault with intent to cause bodily harm punishable by a prison term of up to two years. Paragraph 2 provided for a prison term ranging from one to five years where, among other factors, the perpetrator caused serious bodily harm to the victim; under paragraph 3, where the perpetrator’s conduct resulted in death, he or she was liable to a prison sentence of between three and eight years.
The Government noted that, according to the legal literature, a continuing offence was considered to constitute a single act; when one of the elements referred to in Article 89 § 3 of the Criminal Code was absent, the offence in question was characterised as cumulative. According to the legal literature and the settled case-law of the Supreme Court (decisions published in the Reports of Judicial Decisions and Opinions under the numbers 103/1953, 44/1970 and 7/1994; decisions nos. 3 Tz 155/2000, 3 Tdo 1115/2003, 5 Tdo 593/2005, 11 Tdo 272/2007 and 3 Tdo 1431/2006), a continuing offence came to an end on completion of the last occurrence of the offence. Accordingly, a continuing offence was considered to be caught by the new legislation provided that at least some of the punishable acts had been committed after the entry into force of the new law and that the previous acts had constituted an offence at the time they were committed, even if that offence carried a lighter sentence.