The case originated in an application (no. 35121/09) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Yuriy Mykhaylovych Koval (“the applicant”), on 15 June 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr Y.V. Zinchenko, a lawyer practising in Mykolaiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr I. Lishchyna.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that:
(i)  he had been ill-treated by the police in the course of his arrest on 16 November 2007 and that there had been no effective investigation in that regard, in breach of Article 3 of the Convention;
(ii)  the conditions of his detention and transportation on 23 and 24 December 2008, and (iii)  the material conditions of his detention in the Mykolaiv SIZO had been contrary to Article 3 of the Convention;
(iv)  the domestic courts which ordered his pre-trial detention and upheld that decision had lacked independence and impartiality, contrary to Article 5 §§ 3 and 4 of the Convention, on account of the fact that the application for the applicant’s pre-trial detention had been supported by the President of the Supreme Court, who had certain powers in respect of the judges who had made those pre-trial detention decisions;
(v)  neither the applicant nor his lawyers had been informed of the pretrial detention hearings on 18 February, 21 April and 16 June 2009 and they had been prevented from attending them, and the defence had been unable to prepare and present counterarguments to those presented by the prosecutors, notably because the defence had not been given an opportunity to have knowledge of the prosecutors’ requests to extend the applicant’s detention, in breach of Article 5 § 4 of the Convention;
(vi)  the criminal proceedings against the applicant had been excessively lengthy, and the undertaking imposed on the applicant not to abscond and not to leave his place of residence without the investigating authority’s permission had remained in place for an excessively long period of time.
On 30 May 2018 the Government were given notice of the above complaints and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Mykolaiv.
At the material time he held the post of President of the Mykolaiv Regional Commercial Court (“the Commercial Court”).
On 8 November 2007 G., who was a party to a property dispute before the Commercial Court, complained to the General Prosecutor’s Office (hereafter “the GPO”) that the applicant had sought to extort a bribe from him.
On 13 November 2007 the applicant allegedly took a bribe from G.
G. informed the authorities that he was going to offer the applicant another bribe on 16 November 2007, and the investigators decided to catch the applicant in the act of taking it. The police handed G. a sum of money to be given to the applicant. The money was marked with a special colouring agent.
On 16 November 2007 the applicant met G. in a city park in Odessa. The police secretly observed the meeting. An officer was present making a video recording. The money was handed over at around 7 p.m.
When the police attempted to stop the applicant following the handover, the applicant started running away and ran into the nearby street, where he nearly collided with a car.
According to the results of the domestic investigation (see paragraph 68 below), on the handover of the money the police officers, some of them in uniform, appeared and asked the applicant, who was walking away from the place of his meeting with G., to stop, saying “Wait, police!” (зачекайте, поліція!). Hearing this, the applicant ran away through the park so that they lost sight of him and started pursuing him.
According to the applicant, he ran because he did not know the person who had followed him after the meeting with G. In a nearby street his path was blocked by a car (apparently without police markings), from which people in civilian clothing jumped out. They pushed the applicant to the ground, where, he claimed, he was “cruelly beaten” (жорстоко побито).
According to the results of the domestic investigation, the pursuing police officers found the applicant lying in the street near a Lada car. They observed two individuals they did not know getting into the car. When the officers approached, the applicant got up and the officers saw abrasions on his face and right hand which, they said, appeared to have been caused by a fall.
The applicant was searched and traces of the special colouring agent were found on his hands and clothes. The applicant was questioned. He stated that he had agreed to meet G. in the park at night but claimed that, when G. had attempted to put money in his pocket, he had seized G.’s hand and pushed the money away.
On 17 November 2007 the applicant was charged with bribery. Banknotes marked with the special colouring agent were found strewn around in the park. Searches were conducted in the applicant’s home and the homes of his relatives, and in his office.
On 19 November 2007 a certain Ga. complained to the prosecutors that the applicant had forced him to buy some computer equipment for the Commercial Court.
On 7 December 2007 a certain R. complained to the prosecutors that the applicant had extorted bribes from her in the course of 2007.
The prosecutors accordingly instituted criminal proceedings against the applicant for having taken bribes from R. and for abuse of power in relation to Ga. Those proceedings were merged with those previously instituted concerning the dealings between the applicant and G.
The applicant challenged, ultimately without success, the decisions instituting criminal proceedings against him before the domestic courts. The Government estimated that this resulted in a delay of twenty-five months in the proceedings (see paragraph 163 below).
On 17 November 2007 the investigator dealing with the criminal case against the applicant ordered the seizure of certain case files from the Commercial Court. The applicant, who still held the post of president of that court, ordered his subordinates not to allow the investigator’s access to the case files in question. As a result, the files were not seized. The applicant maintained that he had obstructed the seizure because the case files in question had not been related to the criminal proceedings against him.
On 13 February 2008 the investigator instructed the applicant to resign from the post of court president, in view of the criminal proceedings pending against him. The applicant refused to resign, stating that only the President of Ukraine had the power to dismiss him.
On 25 March 2008 the applicant again ordered the Commercial Court staff not to allow the seizure of the case files ordered by the investigator.
On 3 March and 15 May 2008 the Kyiv Pechersky District Court (“the Pechersky Court”) and the Mykolaiv Tsentralny District Court, respectively, following requests from investigator, ordered the State Control and Audit Agency to check the financial activities of the Commercial Court and to draw up an inventory of the court’s property. On 14 March and 22 May 2008 the Agency was unable to carry out an inventory because the applicant refused to comply with the Agency’s instructions.
On 25 June 2008 the GPO instituted criminal proceedings against the applicant for obstructing the execution of the court orders of 3 March and 15 May 2008.
On 3 July 2008 the investigator issued a fresh decision suspending the applicant from the post of court president. However, the applicant refused to resign and continued working.
On an unspecified date the investigator dealing with the criminal case concerning non-compliance with the court orders summoned the applicant. On 4 July 2008 the applicant sent him a written refusal to appear, stating that the investigator was biased.
On 8 December 2008 the prosecutors, relying on the Rules of Procedure of the Verkhovna Rada (Parliament), requested the President of the Supreme Court to support their application for the applicant’s arrest.
On 12 December 2008 the President of the Supreme Court forwarded the application for the applicant’s arrest to Parliament, stating that he supported (“підтримав”) it.
On 18 December 2008 Parliament gave its consent for the applicant’s arrest.
On 23 December 2008 the Pechersky Court, in the presence of the applicant and his lawyer, ordered the applicant’s arrest and pre-trial detention at the Mykolaiv pre-trial detention centre (hereafter “the Mykolaiv SIZO”). The court noted, in particular, that the applicant had not appeared before the investigator when summoned and had obstructed the investigation.
According to the applicant, from 10 a.m. on 23 December 2008 until the end of the day he was detained in handcuffs in the office of the GPO investigator in charge of his case.
At midnight a police detail of five officers arrived from Mykolaiv to Kyiv in a Gazel, a minibus commonly used in Ukraine for commercial passenger transportation, including on intercity lines. The applicant was handed over to them and the trip to Mykolaiv lasted from about midnight until about 9 a.m. That night, the temperature outside was below freezing and the heating inside the minibus was not fully adequate. Therefore, one of the guards gave the applicant his overcoat. The applicant was cuffed by one wrist to a vertical pole located next to his seat.
At least one of the guards was armed with a pistol. According to the applicant, the officer in question was a certain K. who had participated in the applicant’s arrest on 16 November 2007 and who had been among the persons against whom the applicant sought the institution of criminal proceedings in that connection (see paragraph 65 below). In the applicant’s submission, the fact that this same armed officer was part of the escort had humiliated the applicant and caused him to fear for his life.
The police officers’ accounts and the various versions of the applicant’s account diverge as to how often the handcuffs were removed and the applicant was fed in the course of the journey.
In the application form the applicant alleged that he had been transported for twelve [sic] hours, handcuffed, and wearing only a suit in the unheated van. Throughout that period he had been “deprived of the opportunity to eat, sleep or wash” (я був позбавлений можливості приймати їжу, спати, помитися). The handcuffs had been taken off only once, for a few minutes.
In his observations in reply to those of the Government the applicant stated that the journey had lasted for nine and a half hours and that from 10.30 a.m. on 23 December until 10.30 a.m. on 24 December 2008 he had been “deprived of food” (позбавлений їжі).
In the course of the domestic investigation (see paragraphs 39 and 83 below) the applicant stated that, during the journey, one of the guards had given him his overcoat to wear. There had been only one stop, during which his handcuffs had been removed, he had been allowed to use the toilet and he had been given one pie (пиріжок) to eat.
According to the statements made by police officers in the course of the domestic investigation (see paragraph 83 below), stops were made every two hours. On these occasions the applicant had been given an opportunity to use the toilet and been provided with food, and his handcuffs had been removed for five to ten minutes.
On arrival in Mykolaiv, the applicant was initially placed in a police detention facility (ізолятор тимчасового тримання, “ITT”), where he was held in a cell with a former military serviceman.
The applicant complained to the prosecutors about the conditions in which he had been transported from Kyiv to Mykolaiv and about his placement in the police detention facility with an ordinary inmate (by law, he, as a judge, had to be held separately from the ordinary prison population). The details of those proceedings are set out in paragraphs 78 to 88 below.
From early January until 17 December 2009 the applicant was detained in the Mykolaiv SIZO.
The applicant described the conditions of his detention there in the following terms. The cell where he was initially held and which the applicant occupied alone measured five square metres. Due to insufficient heating, the cell walls and the bedding were damp in winter. Lacking sufficient ventilation, the cell was stuffy in the summer. Food and personal hygiene products had to be provided by the relatives because the detention centre did not provide adequate food (в СІЗО не забезпечують належним харчуванням) or personal hygiene products.
On an unspecified date the applicant was transferred to a cell measuring eight square metres, which he shared with another detainee.
The Government submitted that the applicant had been detained in cells nos. 404, 405 and 406, and that the conditions in the prison block where the applicant had been held had been adequate (підтримуються належні побутові умови). More detailed information could not be provided because the prescribed five-year storage period for files had expired and they had been destroyed on 25 May 2016, before notice of the application had been given to the Government.
On 18 July 2008 the applicant signed a contract with a law firm under the terms of which he instructed F., the firm’s managing partner, and K., another lawyer of the firm, to represent him in the criminal proceedings against him.
On an unspecified date the applicant also instructed Z. as his lawyer.
On 26 December 2008 the Kyiv Court of Appeal, having considered the applicant’s appeal in his absence but in the presence of his lawyer, upheld the detention order of 23 December 2008 (see paragraph 31 above).
On 18 February 2009 the Pechersky Court examined a request by the prosecutor to extend the applicant’s detention to four months. The applicant and his lawyers were not present. According to the applicant, they had not been informed about the hearing and had not been notified of the prosecutor’s request for an extension of his detention. According to a copy of the court decision submitted by the applicant, he was represented at that hearing by S., who was a lawyer. The applicant stated that he had not retained that lawyer personally as his representative, but that she was an associate of his lawyers, F. and K. (see paragraph 46 above). According to the applicant, his lawyers had learned about the hearing “by chance” just an hour before it took place and, being unable to attend, had sent S. to the court with a request to adjourn the hearing. Instead, the court had put down S.’s name as the applicant’s representative even though she had made no submissions on his behalf.
At the close of the hearing the court allowed the prosecutor’s request and extended the applicant’s detention to four months. The court held that, if the applicant were released, there was a risk that he might abscond, interfere with the establishment of the truth in the case and prevent the implementation of procedural decisions. A number of investigative steps, including questioning of judges of the Commercial Court and examination of a number of documents on the court’s premises, needed to be conducted.
In their appeal the applicant’s lawyers, F. and K., raised, inter alia, the matter of the applicant’s representation before the first-instance court, in the terms set out in paragraph 49 above.
On 25 February 2009 the Kyiv Court of Appeal upheld the firstinstance court’s decision of 18 February 2009 in the presence of the applicant’s two lawyers. It did not comment on their allegations concerning the applicant’s representation at the first-instance court’s hearing.
On 21 April 2009 the Kyiv Court of Appeal held a hearing in the presence of the prosecutor and the applicant’s lawyer K., and extended the applicant’s detention to six months. The court held that there was a need to conduct a number of additional investigative actions, including an expert analysis of the audio recordings, and to furnish the results of that analysis to the defence, draw up the act of indictment, and so on. The applicant stood accused of a particularly serious offence and there were no grounds to change the previously imposed preventive measure.
On 16 June 2009 the Kyiv Court of Appeal held a hearing in the presence of a prosecutor, who made submissions in favour of the extension of the applicant’s detention. The court extended the applicant’s detention to eight months. Neither the applicant nor his counsel were present. The court’s order does not contain any comment in that regard. According to the applicant, neither he nor his lawyers were informed of the hearing. The grounds for the extension order were similar to those stated in the order of 21 April 2009 (see paragraph 53 above).
Following subsequent extensions of the applicant’s detention, on 19 February 2010 the Kherson Court of Appeal released him on an undertaking not to abscond, requiring him not to leave his place of registered residence without the investigating authority’s permission.
On 4 October 2013 the Kherson Komsomolsky District Court convicted the applicant of bribery and abuse of power in connection with the episodes involving G., Ga. and R. (see paragraphs 7 to 10, 17 and 18 above).
On 18 March 2014 the Kherson Court of Appeal quashed the applicant’s conviction and remitted the case to the prosecutor’s office for further investigation. Among the reasons given was that the Court of Appeal considered the evidence collected on 16 November 2007 to be inadmissible, as there was a strong indication that the “unidentified individuals” who had used force against the applicant (see paragraphs 14 and 70) had in fact been police officers. It followed that the applicant had been arrested on 16 November 2007 in the absence of Parliament’s consent (see the relevant provision of the Constitution in paragraph 90 below), rendering the evidence collected inadmissible.
At the time of the last communication from the applicant, on 26 March 2019, the investigation was still pending.
On 2 April 2018 the applicant lodged an application with the Pechersky Court seeking the lifting of the undertaking not to abscond imposed on him on 19 February 2010 (see paragraph 55 above).
On 4 April 2018 the Pechersky Court rejected the application, holding that it lacked jurisdiction to entertain such applications.
On 20 September 2018 the Kyiv Court of Appeal rejected an appeal by the applicant against the decision of 4 April 2018, finding that it had been lodged outside of the five-day time-limit for appeal.
On 5 December 2018 the Kyiv Court of Appeal examined an application by the applicant for extension of the time-limit for appeal. It found that the applicant had learned about the decision of the first-instance court with a delay since he had not been duly informed of that decision. Accordingly, the Court of Appeal extended the time-limit for appeal, examined the appeal and upheld the decision of 4 April 2018, considering it to be correct.
On 17 November 2007 the applicant felt unwell, allegedly owing to his ill-treatment on 16 November 2007 (see paragraph 13 above), and called an ambulance. The doctors who examined the applicant noted that he had concussion and a kidney contusion.
In November and December 2007 the applicant underwent in-patient treatment for concussion, chest and lower back contusions, knee abrasions and rib fractures.
The applicant lodged complaints with the prosecutor’s office alleging that on 16 November 2007 he had been arrested unlawfully, since Parliament had not authorised his arrest (see the relevant provision of the Constitution in paragraph 90 below), that he had been ill-treated in the course of his arrest and that the subsequent searches at his home and the homes of his relatives and at his office (see paragraph 16 above) had been unlawful.
The GPO conducted several rounds of pre-investigation enquiries (for an explanation of that procedure see paragraph 94 below) into the applicant’s complaints.
The police also conducted an internal investigation.
On 28 December 2007 the police issued a report setting out the results of its internal investigation, based on statements taken from the officers who had taken part in the operation on 16 November 2007 and from the applicant. The report was based on the police officers’ accounts set out in paragraph 14 above. The conclusion was that the applicant’s allegations were unfounded. The report was sent to the GPO to be used in its preinvestigation enquiries.
On 25 January 2008 a commission of experts concluded that the diagnoses of concussion and rib fractures had been based solely on the applicant’s claims, with no objective evidence to back them up.
On 4 August 2008 the GPO decided not to institute criminal proceedings against the police officers. The prosecutor noted the conclusion of the commission of experts of 25 January 2008 (see paragraph 69 above) as well as a number of medical opinions according to which the diagnosis of kidney contusion was unjustified and not based on objective evidence. In addition, the prosecutor noted the statement made by a laboratory technician, according to which the blood and urine samples on which that diagnosis had been based had been provided not by the applicant but by his son-in-law. The prosecutor also noted that the applicant’s son-in-law had been convicted, in separate proceedings, of the administrative offence of pressurising the medical personnel into providing him with the applicant’s medical records. According to the prosecutor, the applicant’s remaining injuries could be explained by his fall. The prosecutor’s office concluded that the “unidentified individuals” had taken action against the applicant simply to prevent him from fleeing.
On 3 March 2009 the Pechersky Court quashed the decision of 4 August 2008, finding that the prosecutor’s office had failed to take sufficient steps to establish the identity of the officers who had stopped the applicant from fleeing.
On 25 December 2009 the GPO again decided not to institute criminal proceedings. The applicant was informed of this decision on 14 March 2011.
On 18 July 2011 the Pechersky Court quashed that decision, on essentially the same grounds as those in the decision of 3 March 2009. It noted, in particular, that the legality of the applicant’s arrest had not been conclusively established.
On 25 August 2011 the GPO again decided not to institute criminal proceedings.
On 15 December 2011 the Pechersky Court upheld the decision of 25 August 2011. It considered the investigation to be complete. It took note in particular of the prosecutor’s examination of the medical evidence, endorsed the prosecutor’s reliance on the expert report of 25 January 2008 casting doubt on the correctness of the original diagnoses (see paragraph 69 above), and noted the steps taken by the prosecutor’s office to try and identify the persons who had stopped the applicant from fleeing. The court found those efforts to have been sufficient.
On 30 January 2012 the Kyiv City Court of Appeal upheld the firstinstance court’s decision of 15 December 2011.
An appeal on points of law lodged by the applicant against the Court of Appeal’s decision was rejected for non-compliance with the procedural formalities.
In response to the applicant’s complaint concerning the conditions of his transportation (see paragraph 41 above), the prosecutor’s office conducted several rounds of pre-investigation enquiries and adopted several decisions not to institute criminal proceedings against the police officers who had escorted the applicant.
The first of those decisions was taken on 19 January 2009. The prosecutor’s office established that the commanding officer of the convoy detail had been briefed on the applicant’s flight attempt of 16 November 2007 and his efforts to obstruct the investigation. He had accordingly decided, under the Police Act (see paragraph 96 above), that the applicant posed a flight and self-harm risk and that it could not be ruled out that an attempt would be made to liberate him and that the applicant would need to be handcuffed to minimise those risks.
The superior prosecutors quashed those decisions. The copies of the relevant decisions have not been provided to the Court, but it appears that the primary reason for the quashing of the decisions lay in unsuccessful efforts to clarify the circumstances of the applicant’s initial placement in the police detention facility (see paragraph 40 above), a matter which is beyond the scope of the present case.
On 19 November 2012 a new Code of Criminal Procedure came into force. Under the new Code an investigation is commenced without preinvestigation enquiries, by creating an entry in the Unified Register of Pre-Trial Investigations (hereafter “the Register of Investigations”, see paragraph 95 below).
On 20 February 2013 the relevant entry was created in the Register of Investigations.
The applicant and the members of the police detail who had escorted him made statements which are summarised in paragraphs 38 and 39 above.
On 24 February 2015 the prosecutor’s office discontinued the investigation in this regard for lack of the constituent elements of an offence in the relevant officers’ actions.
On 29 February 2016 the Mykolaiv Tsentralny District Court quashed the prosecutor’s office’s decision and remitted the case for further investigation. It considered, in particular, that the efforts made to find the detainee with whom the applicant had shared the cell at the police facility had not been sufficient. The circumstances of the applicant’s handcuffing had also not been sufficiently established: while it was clear that the applicant had been handcuffed to a pole in the minibus, it was not clear how comfortable the applicant had been and why he could not be handcuffed to one of the guards instead.
On 30 August 2016 the prosecutor’s office discontinued the investigation again. Following additional questioning of the commanding officer of the convoy detail, the prosecutor established that the applicant had been handcuffed to the vertical pole right next to his seat, allowing him to move his arm and hand fairly freely and without strain.
On 17 April 2018 the Mykolaiv Tsentralny District Court quashed the above decision, considering the reasons given for it to be insufficient. The court did not state the reasons for this conclusion.
There is no information in the case file concerning the further progress of this investigation.
The relevant legislative provisions, as they stood at the material time, are described below.
Article 126 provided that a judge could not be apprehended or arrested (затриманий чи заарештований) without Parliament’s consent. Judges could be dismissed by the body that elected or appointed them (that is, the President and Parliament) in an exhaustive number of situations, most notably where they had attained the age of sixty-five, had engaged in an activity incompatible with judicial office, or had been convicted of a crime.
Article 129 provided that in the administration of justice, judges were independent and subject only to the law.
Article 131 established the High Council of Justice, which, among other things, had the exclusive power to propose the dismissal of judges. The President of the Supreme Court was an ex officio member of the Council, along with the Minister of Justice and the Prosecutor General. Other members were appointed or elected by Parliament, the President and by assemblies of judges, prosecutors, licensed advocates and legal academics.
Details of the other constitutional and legislative provisions concerning the status of judges, judicial careers and the system of judicial discipline in effect at the relevant time can be found in Oleksandr Volkov v. Ukraine (no. 21722/11, §§ 56-74, ECHR 2013).
At the material time the 1960 Code of Criminal Procedure provided for a procedure known as “pre-investigation enquiries”. That procedure resulted in a decision either not to institute criminal proceedings or to institute them. In the latter case, a fully-fledged criminal investigation was conducted. The relevant provisions can be found in the judgment in the case of Kaverzi v. Ukraine (no. 23893/03, § 45, 15 May 2012).
On 19 November 2012 a new Code of Criminal Procedure came into force. The new Code eliminated the pre-investigation enquiry stage. Under the new Code a fully-fledged investigation is commenced directly, without any need for prior enquiries, by creating an entry in the Register of Investigations.
Section 14 provided, inter alia, that police officers could use handcuffs in order to protect themselves and others from attacks and other actions which endangered life or health, in order to arrest offenders if they were resisting police officers or if there were reasons to consider that they might escape or cause harm to themselves or others, and in order to overcome resistance to the police.
Section 33 empowered the President of the Supreme Court, as well as the presidents of the judges’ disciplinary commissions and the presidents of the high and appellate courts, to initiate disciplinary proceedings against judges before the relevant disciplinary commissions, composed primarily of other judges.
Rule 218 of the Parliament’s Rules of Procedure (Регламент Верховної Ради) established the procedure for the submission and approval of applications for the arrest and pre-trial detention of judges. Any such application had to be prepared by the investigating or adjudicating body and submitted for prior approval to the President of the Supreme Court. The application had to be sufficiently reasoned and contain concrete facts and evidence demonstrating that the judge concerned had committed a criminal offence. The necessity of detention had to be clearly substantiated.