The case originated in an application (no. 46466/16) against the Republic of Malta lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Maltese national, Ms Grace Gatt (“the applicant”), on 5 August 2016.
The applicant was represented by Dr J. Brincat, a lawyer practising in Marsa. The Maltese Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Dr P. Grech, Attorney General.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that disciplinary proceedings had not been heard by an independent and impartial tribunal.
On 4 September 2018 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1968 and lives in Naxxar.
The applicant joined the Malta Police Force on 14 June 1990.
On an unspecified date her son fell seriously ill and needed to be flown to the United Kingdom several times. For this purpose the applicant and some of her colleagues organised a collection of funds in respect of which no permission had been requested. As a result, in February 1999 (or 28 May or 2 June 2001), the applicant was suspended from her duties.
On 30 July 2001 her request to the Permanent Secretary of the Office of the Prime Minister for her to travel abroad in connection with her son’s illness was accepted.
In view of the above, on 15 February 2001 the applicant was charged before the Court of Magistrates as a court of criminal judicature of fraud and fund collection without prior authorisation. On an unspecified date she was found guilty of the latter, but not the former and was put on probation (an order requiring the offender to be under the supervision of a probation officer for a specified period) for six months.
During these proceedings the applicant often requested the court to grant leave for her to leave the country in connection with her son’s illness and was granted permission.
Given the precarious financial situation which ensued following the applicant’s suspension (between June 2001 and November 2005 she was only receiving half her salary), she started working, inter alia, as a private investigator, without requesting permission from the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry. Nor had she requested authorisation to leave the country.
Amongst the cases she was working on was a case concerning the daughter of a Maltese woman who had been kidnapped and taken to Syria. The applicant had flown to Syria and managed to trace them and brought them back to Malta. In this connection the applicant gave various interviews to the papers and also on one occasion, on 6 January 2006, participated in a television programme. Another police officer had also been present on the television programme (at the request of the Commissioner of Police “CoP”). The scope of the interview was to raise awareness about the problems faced by Maltese women who marry in a culture different to theirs. According to the applicant during the interview she did not speak as a member of the Police Force.
A week after the television interview the applicant was arrested for having acted as a private investigator without the relevant licence. By a judgment of 23 May 2007, following her guilty plea, she was found guilty as charged, aggravated by the fact that she was a police officer, and was given a suspended sentence of one year’s imprisonment.
Her appeal was dismissed on 20 September 2007.
In the meantime, two weeks after the interview (in January 2006) the applicant was notified that disciplinary proceedings were being brought against her for having i) brought the Police Force into disrepute; ii) gone abroad without permission from the Public Service Commission (Regulation 12 (10) of the Public Service Procedure and Discipline Regulations); iii) undertaken private work without permission contrary to Article 7.3 of the Public Service Management Code; iv) appeared on television without the permission of the CoP contrary to his circular GHQ/47/2002. She was informed that the disciplinary offences were contrary to Articles 1 (g) and 3 (a) of the Third Schedule to the Police Act and that in the CoPs view they could lead to dismissal. She was given ten days to make submissions.
The CoP informed her that an Internal Board of the Police (hereinafter “the Board”) would be convened to examine the charges against her, and that the Board’s report would be sent to the Public Service Commission (hereinafter ‘the PSC’) to take a decision on the matter. The applicant complained to the CoP that the members of the Board he was appointing could not be impartial or independent given that they were his subordinates. Nevertheless, the Board was convened.
A written objection to that effect, on the basis that the Board’s loyalty was inclined towards the CoP was raised before the Board who, in turn communicated the issue to the Chairman of the PSC. On an unspecified date, without giving reasons, the Chairman of the PSC rejected her request, and informed the CoP, as Head of Department, that proceedings could commence.
Thereafter, the Board heard the case, and following the advice of a legal expert to whom they had entrusted the legal matters raised by the applicant, rejected her objections and found the applicant, who had been legally represented throughout the proceedings, guilty of the disciplinary charges brought against her. According to the applicant, the case before the Board had focused on the fact that the applicant had been abroad without the permission of the PSC.
The Board’s report was passed on to the PSC, before which fifteen witnesses were heard. On an unspecified date, the PSC made a recommendation to the Prime Minister that the applicant should be dismissed. On 21 December 2006 the Prime Minister approved the dismissal with immediate effect and as a result of this decision the applicant lost half her salary for the duration of her suspension as well as any future salary.
On 22 October of an unspecified year the applicant requested that her case be revised, but the PSC rejected her request.
The applicant instituted constitutional redress proceedings complaining under Articles 10, 14 in conjunction with Article 6 and Article 13 of the Convention and the corresponding articles of the Constitution.
Under Article 10 of the Convention she complained about the circular or memo issued by the CoP requiring prior permission to attend a television programme, claiming that her right to freedom of expression had been breached as a result of the rules which had been applied to her while she was not on duty.
Relying on Articles 6 and 14 she complained about the unilateral decision to dismiss her while other police officers who had committed far worse crimes had solely been suspended and then reinstated.
Invoking Article 13 she complained that there was no remedy against the decision of the PSC save that of a constitutional nature.
Lastly, she requested the court to award her redress including a declaration that Regulation 12 [10] of the Public Service Procedure and Discipline Regulations (hereinafter “the Discipline Regulations”) was in breach of the relevant articles of the Convention and the Constitution and to annul the decision in her regard.
By a judgment of 14 July 2015 the Civil Court (First Hall) in its constitutional competence rejected all her claims.
It considered that as from her enrolment into the Police Force the applicant voluntarily made herself subject to the Police Act and the Discipline Regulations. The latter also applied to police officers who had been suspended on half pay.
The court considered that the applicant was complaining under Article 6 of the impartiality and independence of the Board and the PSC. Having examined all the evidence produced, it found that although the proceedings before the Board could raise doubts as to impartiality (“jbagħti fl-apparenza ta’ mparzjalità”), the proceedings before the PSC could not be in breach of Article 6 since they had respected the principle of audi alteram parte. Nor could it be said that the case had been examined in a hurry in that it focussed solely on whether or not the applicant had been abroad without permission. Although it was unfortunate that the members of the Board who investigated, heard and established facts were also police officers answerable to the CoP, these persons had taken an oath of impartiality before the Attorney General in respect of the specific appointments. The court noted that these were persons who usually would have a lot of experience and who were trusted by the members of the Police Force. As to the PSC, the court held that, although the Constitution provided that the PSC was not obliged to give anyone before it a fair hearing and that the exercise of its functions was not questionable before any court, domestic caselaw had established that the PSC immunity from judicial action was not absolute and that the PSC had a duty to comply with procedural rules and observe the principles of natural justice, and they could not act ultra vires. The caselaw of the Court had also evolved, opening the applicability of Article 6 to police officers in certain cases. However, in the light of the principles established in Vilho Eskelinen and Others v. Finland ([GC], no. 63235/00, § 62, ECHR 2007II), the present cases did not fulfil the two criteria necessary to make Article 6 applicable. Indeed the charges issued against the applicant called into question “that special bond of trust and loyalty” and the PSC’s actions were not subject to any review, thus there was no violation of Article 6.
Under Article 14 the court found that the applicant had failed to give an example of a case with circumstances identical to hers. Moreover, unlawful acts could not be justified by claiming discrimination.
As to the incompatibility of Regulation 12 (10) of the Discipline Regulations with Article 44 of the Constitution and Articles 2 §§ 2 and 3 of Protocol No. 4 to the Convention, it noted that according to the Police Act and the Discipline Regulations a police officer was a public officer and Article 44 of the Constitution made specific restrictions in that case. Further, in the court’s view requiring permission to travel was not equivalent to being denied the possibility to travel, it followed that the invoked provisions were not violated.
Similarly, Article 10 had not been violated as the applicant had not applied for permission to participate in the television programme as required by circular of the CoP GHQ/47/2002, which was different from being denied such permission.
As to Article 13, while the court sympathised with the applicant’s ordeal, given that all her claims had not resulted in a violation, the court was of the view that there was no remedy which could be given to the applicant.
The applicant appealed claiming i) a breach of Article 6 of the Convention in so far as there had not been an impartial tribunal to decide on the accusations raised against her; not only had the Board been subordinate to the CoP, but the CoP had put pressure on the Chairman of the Board to find for the dismissal of the applicant; ii) a breach of Article 14 in conjunction with Article 6 of the Convention, noting that her claim had referred to what constituted bringing the police in disrepute; iii) that Regulation 12 (10) of the Discipline Regulations was incompatible with Article 2 §§ 2 and 3 of Protocol No. 4 to the Convention, in so far as it required permission, as opposed to solely informing the authorities; and iv) that there had been a breach of Article 10 of the Convention in her regard - the first court had neither examined the legitimate aim nor the proportionality of the measure. It had simply considered that the circular at issue was necessary in a democratic society; moreover, she had been dismissed without any examination of the content of the interview. She reiterated that she was seeking a remedy before the court, but that she would not insist on her Article 13 complaint.
By a judgment of 12 February 2016 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal.
It considered that Article 6 was not applicable to the Board that was not a tribunal whose decisions were directly decisive or final. Its function was solely limited to establishing facts and sending their conclusions to the Chief of the Department and the person charged. The Constitutional Court dismissed as unsubstantiated the claim of interference by the CoP with the Chairperson given that in its view his intervention had solely amounted to a piece of advice concerning procedures in disciplinary matters. Moreover, the applicant being a police officer given the bond of trust and loyalty attached to such a function Article 6 did not apply.
It confirmed the first-instance findings under Article 14 that the examples brought forward by the applicant were not similar to her situation and all those examples had specific situations, while the applicant had been repeatedly subject to disciplinary action. Moreover, the applicant had not linked her discrimination complaint to any personal characteristic.
As to the Protocol, the Constitutional Court considered that Regulation 12 [10] of the Discipline Regulations, which provided for the restriction, pursued a legitimate aim and was necessary in a democratic society in the interest of public order. A mere requirement that an officer who was suspended from office had to request permission to travel during the suspension - a rule the applicant was aware of when she joined the Police Force - could not be considered disproportionate.
Lastly under Article 10, the Constitutional Court reiterated that the applicant had failed to request the necessary permission under the written circular issued by the CoP, which he had the right to issue in accordance with Section 108 of the Police Act. According to the Constitutional Court, given the trust associated with the Police Force, the restriction had pursued nearly all the legitimate aims set out in Article 10 § 2. In particular prior authorisation was necessary to safeguard the reputation of the Police Force which was to keep out of public debate so to be consonant with what the Police Force represented. While it was not necessary to examine the content of the interview, a prima facie assessment of such content showed that it had not been consonant with the role of a police officer. In the Constitutional Court’s view, when the applicant went to Syria to bring back the kidnapped child without the CoP’s permission and while she was still a police officer, she had created a delicate situation which could have had repercussions at an international level. Thus, even in the light of the content of the interview the interference in her case had been justified.
Article 44 of the Constitution of Malta reads as follows:
“(1) No citizen of Malta shall be deprived of his freedom of movement, and for the purpose of this article the said freedom means the right to move freely throughout Malta, the right to reside in any part of Malta, the right to leave and the right to enter Malta. ...
(3) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this article to the extent that the law in question makes provision -
(a) for the imposition of restrictions that are reasonably required in the interests of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or decency, or public health and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society; ...
(c) for the imposition of restrictions upon the movement or residence within Malta of public officers; or”
Article 86 (1) of the Constitution reads as follows:
“Where by this Constitution the Prime Minister is required to exercise any function on the recommendation of any person or authority he shall exercise that function in accordance with such recommendation:
Provided that -
(a) before he acts in accordance therewith he may once refer that recommendation back for reconsideration by the person or authority concerned; and
(b) if that person or authority, having reconsidered the original recommendation under the preceding paragraph, substitutes therefor a different recommendation, the provisions of this sub-article shall apply to that different recommendation as they apply to the original recommendation.”
Article 109 of the Constitution reads as follows:
“(1) There shall be a Public Service Commission for Malta which shall consist of a chairman, a deputy chairman and from one to three other members.
(2) The members of the Public Service Commission shall be appointed by the President, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister given after he has consulted the Leader of the Opposition.
(3) A person shall not be qualified to hold office as a member of the Public Service Commission if he is a Minister, a Parliamentary Secretary, a member of, or a candidate for election to, the House of Representatives, a member of a local government authority or if he is a public officer.
(4) A member of the Public Service Commission shall not, within a period of three years commencing with the day on which he last held office as a member, be eligible for appointment to or to act in any public office.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this article, the office of a member of the Public Service Commission shall become vacant -
(a) at the expiration of five years from the date of his appointment or at such earlier time as may be specified in the instrument by which he was appointed; or
(b) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the Commission, would cause him to be disqualified for appointment as such.
(6) A member of the Public Service Commission may be removed from office by the President, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, but he may be removed only for inability to discharge the functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity of mind or body or any other cause) or for misbehaviour.
(7) If the office of a member of the Public Service Commission is vacant or if a member is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, the President, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, given after he has consulted the Leader of the Opposition, may appoint a person who is qualified to be appointed to be a member to be a temporary member of the Commission; and any person so appointed shall, subject to the provisions of sub-articles (5) and (6) of this article, cease to be such a member when a person has been appointed to fill the vacancy or, as the case may be, when the member who was unable to perform the functions of his office resumes those functions.”
Article 110 (1) of the Constitution reads as follows:
“Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, power to make appointments to public offices and to remove and to exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in any such offices shall vest in the Prime Minister, acting on the recommendation of the Public Service Commission:
Provided that the Prime Minister may, acting on the recommendation of the Public Service Commission, delegate in writing, subject to such conditions as may be specified in the instrument of delegation, any of the powers referred to in this subarticle to such public officer or other authority as may be specified in that instrument.”
Article 115 of the Constitution of Malta reads as follows:
“The question whether -
(a) the Public Service Commission has validly performed any function vested in it by or under this Constitution;
(b) any member of the Public Service Commission or any public officer or other authority has validly performed any function delegated to such member, public officer or authority in pursuance of the provisions of subarticle (1) of article 110 of this Constitution; or
(c) any member of the Public Service Commission or any public officer or other authority has validly performed any other function in relation to the work of the Commission or in relation to any such function as is referred to in the preceding paragraph,
shall not be enquired into in any court.”
Regulation 7 of the Public Service Commission (Disciplinary Procedure) Regulations 1999 (‘the Disciplinary Regulations’) provides that:
“A Head of Department preferring charges of misconduct or breach of discipline against an officer shall be entitled to be represented by any person of his choice, at every stage of any hearing before a Disciplinary Board or before the Commission, including any hearing on appeal.”
According to the text of law applicable at the relevant time Regulation 12 (10) of the Discipline Regulations, read as follows:
“An officer who is under interdiction may not leave Malta without the written permission of the Head of the Public Service and any such officer who leaves Malta without such permission shall be liable to dismissal.”
The composition of the Board emanates from the Discipline Regulations which provided in Regulation 21 (1) that:
“(1) The Disciplinary Board for the purpose of regulation 20 (2) (e) shall be appointed by the Head of Department and shall consist of a Chairperson and two members appointed as follows –
(a) The Chairperson shall be an officer of the department not below salary scale 10 and not connected with the case of discipline to be heard by the Board and not less than two salary scales above the officer charge[d], and not in the same grade as the officer charged,
(b) Two other officers of the department not connected with the case of discipline and at least one salary scale above the officer charged, and not in the same grade as the officer charged:
Provided that where the Head of Department has informed the officer that the alleged offence could lead to dismissal, the Chairperson of the Disciplinary Board shall be, at least an officer at Assistant Director level or analogous grade”.
Regulation 21 (3) and (4) provided as follows:
“(3)Where serious objections are raised by an officer charged or by his representative that the chairperson and, or any of the members of the Disciplinary Board are in some way prejudiced against him, the officer charged may petition the Commission and shall send a copy of the petition to his Head of Department. Pending the decision of the Commission on the petition, the disciplinary proceedings shall be suspended.
If the Commission accepts the petition, it shall appoint a fresh Disciplinary Board or make appropriate changes to the Board. The officer and the Head of Department shall be informed accordingly.”
Regulations 22 to 26 concern the procedure before the Board, as applicable at the relevant time, and read as follows:
“22. (1) Every Disciplinary Board appointed under regulation 21 to investigate the case, shall establish the facts and communicate its findings to the Head of Department and to the officer charged as early as practicable and in no case later than thirty working days from the date on which the case is referred to it.
(2) The Board shall have the power to seek expert advice whenever it considers such advice to be necessary or expedient, and to summon any person to appear before it and give evidence or to produce any document.
(3) The Board may direct that any evidence given before it be confirmed by an affidavit.
(4) The period of thirty working days specified in subregulation (1) of this regulation may on good cause being shown, be extended by the Head of Department up to a maximum of another thirty working days.
(5) Where serious and justifiable reasons exist which, in the opinion of the Head of Department, preclude the Board from making a report of its findings earlier than the prescribed period of thirty days and any extension thereof, the Head of Department shall refer the matter to the Commission for its direction.
(1) In exercising its functions under these regulations, a Disciplinary Board shall afford a fair opportunity to both sides to present their case, but shall dispense with all undue formalities and ensure that justice is done expeditiously and according to the substantive merits of the case.
(2) Notice of not less than ten working days shall be given of the time and place of the hearing to the Head of Department and to the officer charged. Every notice shall be signed by the chairperson and served by registered mail or by hand.
(3) If the Board is satisfied that notice of the hearing has been given, it may proceed with the case notwithstanding the absence of the officer charged if, taking all circumstances into account, including the requirements of regulation 22, the Board is of the opinion that it ought so to proceed with the case.
(4) The following procedure shall apply to the hearing by a Board –
(a) the hearing shall be held in private;
(b) the officer summoned to appear at the hearing shall be given full opportunity to defend himself and to produce witnesses;
(c) the officer or his representative may cross-examine the witnesses called in support of the case against him.
(5) Subject to this regulation the Board may regulate its own procedure at the hearing.
(6) The Board may seek the opinion of, or a directive by, the Commission on questions of procedure.
(1) Where a Disciplinary Board hearing evidence against an officer is of the opinion that such evidence discloses other prima facie misconduct or breach of discipline, the following procedure shall apply -
(a) the Disciplinary Board shall report the matter to the Head of Department and to the officer charged, and shall thereupon suspend its proceedings;
(b) if the Head of Department thinks fit to proceed against the officer charged on the additional grounds disclosed, the Head of Department shall furnish the officer with fresh charges and the procedure described in regulation 20(2) ... shall apply. ...
(1) At the conclusion of its investigation, the Board shall communicate its findings to the Head of Department and to the officer charged.
(2) A report on the findings shall comprise -
(a) a summary of such parts of the evidence as the Board considers relevant;
(b) the findings of the investigation on material questions of fact;
(c) a statement whether in the Board’s opinion the accused officer has or has not committed the offence or offences charged and a brief statement of the reasons for that opinion;
(d) details of any matters which alleviate or aggravate the gravity of the case.
(3) The report of the Board shall not include any recommendation regarding the penalty that may be imposed.
... (2) In the case of an offence where the Head of Department had given notice to the officer charged that the charges, if proved, could lead to dismissal, the following procedure shall apply –
(a) upon receipt of the Board’s report, the Head of Department shall, as soon as practicable, send a copy of the report to the Commission;
(b) in giving consideration to the Board’s findings, the Commission shall give an opportunity to the officer charged and to the Head of Department to make oral representations;
(c) after considering the findings of the Board and the representations made to it, the Commission shall make its recommendation to the Prime Minister both as to the guilt or otherwise of the officer charged and as to the penalty, if any.”
At the relevant time, Section 8 of the Police Act read as follows:
“(1) Every member of the Force shall, in the execution of his duties, obey the lawful orders of his lawful superiors.
(2) An order given to a member of the Force by the lawful superior of that member shall be deemed to be lawful, unless it is manifestly contrary to an express provision of law or a Court order.”
At the relevant time, Section 108 of the Police Act read as follows:
“The Commissioner may, subject to the provisions of this Act and to any regulations made by the Minister responsible for the Police, from time to time make standing orders for the general governance of police officers in relation to their leave, conditions of service, transfer ( including expenses in connection therewith), training, arms and accoutrements, clothing and equipment, places of residence, classification and duties, as well as to their distribution and inspection, and such other orders as he may deem expedient to prevent negligence and for promoting efficient and discipline on the part of police officers in the discharge of their duties.”
The reservation made at the time of signature, on 12 December 1966, and contained in the instrument of ratification of the Convention, deposited on 23 January 1967, by the Government of Malta reads as follows:
“The Government of Malta, having regard to Article 64 of the Convention [Article 57 since the entry into force of the Protocol No 11], and desiring to avoid any uncertainty as regards the application of Article 10 of the Convention, declares that the Constitution of Malta allows such restrictions to be imposed upon public officers with regard to their freedom of expression as are reasonably justifiable in a democratic society. The Code of conduct of public officers in Malta precludes them from taking an active part in political discussions or other political activity during working hours or on official premises.”