The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) on 28 October 1996 and by the Government of the Swiss Confederation (“the Government”) on 14 January 1997, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 § 1 and Article 47 of the Convention. It originated in an application (no. 21353/93) against Switzerland lodged with the Commission under Article 25 by a Swiss national, Mr Bruno Camenzind, on 2 October 1992.
The Commission’s request and the Government’s application referred to Articles 44 and 48 and to the declaration whereby Switzerland recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46). The object of the request and of the application was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Articles 8 and 13 of the Convention.
In accordance with Rule 31 § 1 of Rules of Court B, the applicant designated the lawyer who would represent him.
The Chamber to be constituted included ex officio Mr L. Wildhaber, the elected judge of Swiss nationality (Article 43 of the Convention), and Mr R. Bernhardt, the Vice-President of the Court (Rule 21 § 4 (b)). On 29 October 1996, in the presence of the Registrar, the President of the Court, Mr R. Ryssdal, drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr J. De Meyer, Mr A.N. Loizou, Mr A.B. Baka, Mr G. Mifsud Bonnici, Mr J. Makarczyk, Mr E. Levits and Mr P. van Dijk (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 § 5).
As President of the Chamber (Rule 21 § 6), Mr Bernhardt, acting through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Government, the applicant’s lawyer and the Delegate of the Commission on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 39 § 1 and 40). Pursuant to the order made in consequence, the Registrar received the applicant’s memorial on 27 March 1997 and the Government’s memorial on 1 April.
On 16 May 1997 Mr Bernhardt granted the applicant legal aid (Rule 4 of the Addendum to Rules of Court A, mutatis mutandis).
In accordance with the President’s decision, the hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 26 June 1997. The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Mr Martínez, Mr Crevoisier and Mr Schürmann.
On 5 December 1991 the radio communications surveillance unit of the Head Office of the Swiss Post and Telecommunications Authority (PTT) located on a frequency reserved for civil and military aircraft a private telephone conversation being held on a telephone of an unauthorised type. The surveillance unit recorded the conversation held on the line allocated to Mr Camenzind – a lawyer living in Fribourg – and informed the appropriate PTT authorities.
The applicant was suspected of contravening section 42 of the Federal Act of 1922 “regulating telegraph and telephone communications”. On 11 December 1991 the Berne cantonal telecommunications office (Fernmeldekreisdirektion) of the PTT began an investigation concerning the applicant pursuant to the Federal Administrative Criminal Law Act 1974.
On 13 December 1991 the area director of the PTT in Berne issued a warrant to search the applicant’s home under sections 48 et seq. of the Federal Administrative Criminal Law Act. It was specified in the warrant that the purpose of the search was to find and seize the unauthorised cordless telephone.
At 9.50 a.m. on 21 January 1992 two PTT officials went to the applicant’s home. He admitted having tested a cordless telephone in the past but said that it was no longer in his possession. After being shown the search warrant, he allowed the PTT officials into the hall of the flat, in which he in fact occupied only one room, the other five being let. Having been told of the legal aspects of the search, he consulted the file on his case and telephoned a lawyer and a senior official at the PTT office in Berne.
The search was carried out by a single PTT official, as requested by Mr Camenzind, and in his presence. The official searched every room of the two-storey building, including the cellar. He did no more than check whether the telephones and television sets were PTT-approved. He did not touch anything, open any drawers or examine any documents. No equipment of the type sought was found. At 11.55 a.m. a record was drawn up and signed by both the applicant and the investigating official. The record indicated among other things that a complaint could be made about the search under sections 26 to 28 of the Federal Administrative Criminal Law Act.
On 24 January 1992 Mr Camenzind applied to the Indictment Division of the Federal Court under section 26 of the Federal Administrative Criminal Law Act for a declaration that the search was a nullity. The Head Office of the PTT argued that the application was inadmissible.
On 27 March 1992 the Federal Court delivered a judgment dismissing the application in the following terms (translation from German):
For these reasons the Indictment Division holds:
(1) In so far as it has been declared admissible, the complaint is dismissed;
...”
In decisions of 14 August and 26 September 1995 the Federal Communications Office imposed a fine of 150 Swiss francs on the applicant for an offence under section 42 of the Act “regulating telegraph and telephone communications” and ordered him to pay the costs and expenses.
On 11 October 1995 Mr Camenzind brought proceedings for review of that decision in the Saane District Court (Bezirksgericht), which on 18 December 1995 were dismissed on the ground that prosecution of the offence in question was time-barred (absolute Verjährung).
At the material time, section 42 of the Federal Act of 1922 “regulating telegraph and telephone communications” provided:
Administrative criminal law procedures are governed by the Federal Administrative Criminal Law Act of 22 March 1974, as amended (“the DPA”).
The federal authorities are responsible for prosecuting and trying certain offences against federal law. They are also vested with the power to conduct the investigations into such offences. The necessary interviews (of which records are made), on-the-spot inspections and coercive measures are entrusted to officials specially trained for the purpose (section 20 (1) of the DPA).
Officials called upon to conduct an investigation or to take or prepare a decision are required to stand down if they have a personal interest in the case, if they are related to the “suspect” by blood or marriage, by direct or collateral descent up to the third degree, or are linked with him through marriage, engagement or adoption and if there are circumstances such as to make them appear to be partial in the case (section 29).
A “suspect” is entitled, whatever the circumstances, to representation (section 32). In principle, both the “suspect” and his representative may be given leave by the investigating official to participate in the taking of evidence (section 35).
The investigating official may interview the “suspect” (section 39), other people “for information purposes” (section 40) and – in the presence of the “suspect” and his representative – witnesses (section 41). He may also order an expert opinion – in consultation with the “suspect” (section 43) – and an on-the-spot inspection, which the “suspect” and his representative are entitled to attend (section 44). The investigating official is in addition empowered to effect “with due regard for the person concerned and his property” seizures, searches and provisional arrests (sections 45 et seq.); these measures, known as “coercive” measures, may not be used in respect of a “breach of administrative regulations” (such a breach is a contravention which is so described in special administrative law or one for which an administrative fine can be imposed; section 3).
Searches in particular are governed by the following provisions of the Federal Administrative Criminal Law Act:
Section 48
Section 49
Section 50
Coercive measures, including searches (sections 45 et seq. of the DPA), and related acts and omissions may form the subject of a complaint to the Indictment Division of the Federal Court (section 26).
Complaints are admissible for breaches of federal law – or of the Convention (see the Federal Court’s judgment of 17 August 1989 in the case of X v. Caisse de pensions de l’Etat de Neuchâtel et tribunal administratif du Canton de Neuchâtel, Judgments of the Swiss Federal Court, vol. 115, V, p. 253) – for inaccurate or incomplete findings of fact or for inappropriateness. A complaint may be lodged by anyone affected by the impugned investigative measure, the omission complained of or the decision on the complaint and who has an interest worthy of protection in having the measure, omission or decision quashed or varied (section 28). The Indictment Division of the Federal Court has said (X. gegen Generaldirektion PTT, 23 June 1977, Judgments of the Swiss Federal Court, vol. 103, IV, p. 115; translation from German):
“Only persons who are (still) affected, at least in part, by the impugned decision and as a result have an interest in its being varied have locus standi to lodge a complaint.”
The authorities have jurisdiction to try offences against administrative criminal law. However, where the department to which they are subordinate considers that a custodial sentence or measure must be contemplated, jurisdiction lies with the courts. A person affected by a decision of the authorities in criminal proceedings may, within ten days of being notified of the decision, ask to be tried by a court. If he does not do so, the decision is “treated as a judgment that has become final” (sections 21 and 72).
A suspect who is found to have no case to answer may seek compensation from the authorities for detention pending trial and other losses sustained. Compensation may be reduced or refused if it was through the suspect’s own fault that the investigation was started or if, without reason, the suspect has hindered or delayed the proceedings. The authorities’ decision on that issue may be challenged by lodging a complaint with the Indictment Division of the Federal Court (sections 99 and 100).
In his application (no. 21353/93) to the Commission of 2 October 1992, Mr Camenzind alleged that the search carried out at his home had infringed Article 8 of the Convention and that he had had neither a fair hearing within the meaning of Article 6 nor an effective remedy before a national authority as required by Article 13.
The Commission declared the application admissible on 27 February and 27 November 1995 with respect to Articles 8 and 13 only. In its report of 3 September 1996 (Article 31), it expressed the unanimous opinion that there had been no violation of Article 8, but that there had been a violation of Article 13. The full text of the Commission’s opinion is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.
In their memorial the Government asked the Court to
“conclude, like the Commission, that there has been no violation of Article 8 of the Convention in the instant case and to consider whether, as regards the search at his home, the applicant had an effective remedy before a national authority within the meaning of Article 13 of the Convention”.
The applicant requested the Court to
“conclude, like the Commission, that there has been a violation of Article 13 of the Convention in the instant case [and to] find a violation of Article 8 § 2 of the Convention”.