The case originated in an application (no. 11010/10) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Oleg Aleksandrovich Kiselev (“the applicant”), on 13 January 2010.
The applicant was represented by Ms O. Tseytlina, a lawyer practising in St Petersburg. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 10 July 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1965 and lives in the Leningrad Region.
On 25 February 2009 an investigator charged the applicant with kidnapping in absentia and put his name of the international list of fugitives from justice. On the same day the investigator asked the Vasileostrovskiy District Court in St Petersburg to detain the applicant on remand.
On 2 March 2009 the District Court granted the investigator’s application for a detention order, referring to the gravity of the charges against the applicant.
On 22 July 2009 the applicant was apprehended in the Vologda Region and transferred to a remand prison in St Petersburg.
On 30 July 2009 the applicant was interviewed and received a copy of the charge sheet. He also submitted an appeal against the detention order of 2 March.
On 1 September 2009 the St Petersburg City Court heard the appeal and set aside the detention order, finding that the failure to follow the legal procedure for putting the applicant’s name on the list of fugitives from justice amounted to a “fundamental breach” of the rules of criminal procedure. It ordered a new examination of the detention matter but did not specify whether or not the applicant should remain in custody. As it happened, the applicant was not released.
On 18 September 2009 the District Court refused the investigator’s request for a detention order. It held, firstly, that the gravity of the charges was not a sufficient reason for detaining the applicant and, secondly, that the procedure for putting his name on the list of fugitives from justice had not been followed. The applicant was released in the courtroom.
On 21 October 2009 the District Court found the applicant guilty and gave him a custodial sentence conditional on four years’ probation.