The case originated in an application (no. 40355/11) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by seven Romanian nationals (“the applicants”), on 13 June 2011. A list of the applicants is set out in the appendix.
The applicants were represented by Romani Criss, a nongovernmental organisation based in Romania. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicants alleged that I.B. had been a victim of police brutality, that the ensuing investigation was flawed, and that the victim had been discriminated against on the ground of his Roma origin.
On 29 January 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicants are all Romanian nationals of Roma origin and heirs of I.B., who, together with some of the applicants, initiated the domestic proceedings. Those proceedings were still pending when I.B. died on 1 April 2010.
I.B.’s heirs pursued the case before the domestic courts and lodged a complaint before the Court on his behalf and on their own behalf.
On 30 March 2006 at around 5 p.m. A.N., I.B.’s daughter-in-law, was attacked near I.B.’s home. I.B.’s three sons (the applicants nos. (1)-(3) in the appendix) and C.G.M., the victim’s father, went to Clejani Police Station to report the assault.
In front of the police station they were allegedly attacked by a group of fifty villagers. When I.B. arrived there, attracted by the noise, he saw C.G.M. injured, with his head covered with blood. His sons’ car was also damaged (the windows were broken and the car’s bonnet was concertinaed). I.B. also saw the villagers chasing his sons and attacking them with stones, bats and bricks.
At around 6 p.m. police officers T.B. and M.N. from Clejani police station, accompanied by colleagues from the Giurgiu Rapid Intervention Squad (Detaşamentul Poliţiei pentru Intervenţie Rapidă) arrived at I.B.’s home to take him into custody. The police intervention team entered the yard and took him by force to the police car, while shouting abuse and calling him a gypsy (ţigan). To I.B.’s question whether they had a search warrant, T.B. pointed to the special squad and said “They are my search warrant!”. Then the police made two children from the household, one aged 13 and one 14, lie down on their stomachs and called them wretched disgraceful gypsies (ţigani borâţi). The sixth applicant, Marian Boacă, who was 13 at the time, and M.D., I.B.’s daughter-in-law, were taken to the police station in the same car.
Later, the first three applicants, I.B.’s other sons, were apprehended on the street by ten masked police officers, who shouted at them to lie down and then kicked them in the stomach and face while shouting abuse and calling them “wretched disgraceful gypsies”. They were also taken to Clejani police station, where they found the sixth applicant and M.D. standing with their arms up, facing the wall.
The interrogations took place in the chief of police’s office. I.B. was taken there first. He was beaten up first by police officer T.B. and two masked officers. Two more masked officers joined them later. They kicked I.B. in the ribs, on his right side; they punched him and beat him with their weapon butts and shouted abuse. I.B. lost consciousness. The first three applicants were brought to the same office and tripped over their father’s body, which was lying unattended on the floor. They were ordered to lie down and were hit and shouted at. T.B. called the chief of the Letca Noua Police Station and told him to come for “a match with the boys” (la o partidă cu băieţii). Some ten to fifteen minutes later officers from Letca Noua joined the interrogations and started hitting the applicants. According to the applicants, the police officers who beat them up had been drinking alcohol.
At the applicant’s request, the officers eventually allowed I.B. to leave the police station, but told the first three applicants that they had to sign confessions concerning the rape of a foreign woman and the theft of pipes. The statements had been written by the police officers. The applicants were not allowed to read the contents of those confessions. They denied committing any crime, but eventually signed the confessions and were allowed to leave the police station.
On 30 March 2006 an altercation broke out between the Boacă family and the G. family, both parties behaving aggressively towards each other and armed with dangerous objects. The altercation occurred in front of the Clejani police station, where the G. family (belonging to the Ursari Roma community – țigani ursari) was going to make a criminal complaint against the applicants’ family about a previous altercation that had occurred the same day. In their statements to the police, members of the G. family related that the third applicant had tried to hit them with the car and, driving dangerously, had managed instead to hit his father, I.B.
In this context, at 6.30 p.m. the Giurgiu Rapid Intervention Squad was called to restore public order. A team of four officers and a driver was in place from 7 p.m. to 6 a.m. the next day. According to the police agents’ statements, there were no incidents during this operation, as the Boacă family members concerned willingly complied with the police orders given when they were apprehended. Four eyewitnesses, all proposed by I.B., declared they had seen him come out of the police station feeling ill, but with no apparent indications that he had been attacked.
M.N., the head of Clejani police station, did not participate in the investigation out of fear of reprisals from the Boacă family.
I.B. was taken by ambulance to Giurgiu County Hospital, where he underwent pulmonary X-ray investigations but received no treatment. He was then taken to Bucharest University Hospital, where he remained from 31 March to 4 April 2006.
On 11 April 2006 a forensic doctor examined him. The medical certificate concluded that he had suffered a thoracic trauma inflicted by a “blow caused by a hard object or by body impact”. He needed fifteen to nineteen days to recover.
Mihăileşti Police started investigating the events of 30 March 2006. The accusations were of theft of pipes by members of the Boacă family and of a brawl involving twenty-one people, mainly belonging to the two families (Boacă and G.). Statements were taken from all those involved in the altercation and from some eyewitnesses. In their various statements made during those investigations, I.B. and the applicants declared that they had been beaten up by police. Some members of the opposing family declared that I.B. had been hit by the car driven by his son, the third applicant.
On 9 May 2007 the prosecutor’s office attached to Giurgiu County Court decided not to prosecute any of those involved in the incidents. He noted that the pipes had been returned to their rightful owner, who did not wish to seek damages from the applicants’ family; as for the brawl, the prosecutor noted that there had been “reciprocal violence” and therefore decided to impose administrative fines on all involved.
It appears that the decision was not contested.
On 1 June 2006 I.B. and the first three applicants lodged a criminal complaint with the prosecutor’s office attached to Giurgiu County Court against the police officers who had allegedly ill-treated them. In his complaint to the police, I.B. stated that the police chief was friendly with the Ursari Roma from Clejani, with whom the Boacă family were in conflict. They also complained of discrimination, arguing that because of their Roma origin the police officers had been aggressive towards them and had called them racist names.
The prosecutor started the investigations. He took statements from the six police officers involved in the events, including T.B. and M.N. They all denied having harmed the plaintiffs in any way. The prosecutor examined the intervention squad’s official report from 30 March 2006 as well as the prosecution file concerning the accusations brought against the members of the two families involved in the fight on 30 March (see paragraph 18 above).
On 18 December 2006 the prosecutor’s office dismissed the complaint on the ground that the police officers’ actions did not disclose any appearance of a criminal offence. The prosecutor noted that the rapid intervention squad was called to the scene of an altercation which the local police could no longer contain. In the squad’s official report it was explained that intervention was required “for an altercation between two Gypsy clans” (scandal între două grupuri de ţigani). The prosecutor considered that the plaintiffs had failed to provide medical evidence of the injuries they had sustained, or that injuries had been inflicted by police officers.
The plaintiffs appealed against that decision to the prosecutorinchief, but their objection was dismissed on 29 January 2007. The applicants challenged that decision before the Giurgiu County Court, reiterating their complaints of ill-treatment and discrimination.
On 16 April 2007 the Giurgiu County Court upheld the prosecutor’s decision, considering that the applicants had not provided proof of their allegations.
The plaintiffs appealed, and on 27 June 2007 the Bucharest Court of Appeal quashed the above-mentioned decision and ordered the prosecutor to continue the investigation. It considered that the prosecutor had not taken into account the forensic medical certificate delivered to I.B., had not heard either the applicants or the eyewitnesses, and had not allowed the applicants to produce evidence (medical evidence or witnesses).
On 29 August 2008 the prosecutor’s office refused to institute criminal proceedings against the police officers. The prosecutor considered that the plaintiffs had not substantiated their allegations of ill-treatment and discrimination. It found that the police officers had acted lawfully and had been trying to counter the plaintiffs, who had used gas guns and sharp objects. One eyewitness was heard by the prosecutor.
I.B. and the first three applicants appealed against the prosecutor’s decision, but on 21 October 2008 the prosecutor-in-chief dismissed their objections and thus upheld that decision. On 28 October 2008 I.B. and the first three applicants appealed once again before the Giurgiu County Court.
On 3 February 2009 the Giurgiu County Court allowed the appeal lodged by the four plaintiffs, quashed the decisions of the prosecutor and of the prosecutor-in-chief, and sent the case back to the prosecutor, on the ground that the investigations ordered by the court had not been carried out by the prosecutor.
The prosecutor’s office challenged that decision, and on 12 June 2009 the Bucharest Court of Appeal allowed the appeal on points of law in part. It found that the criminal investigation should be continued regarding I.B.’s injuries. As far as the first three applicants were concerned, it considered that the criminal investigation should be closed because, in failing to sign the appeal against the decisions of 29 August 2007 and of 21 October 2008, they had in fact not endorsed the application for an investigation. The court considered that by failing to sign the application for leave to appeal within the assigned deadline the applicants had lost the right to lodge that appeal.
On 28 October 2009 the prosecutor’s office refused to institute criminal proceedings against the police officers, on the ground that their actions were consistent with their professional duties. He heard evidence from four eyewitnesses, who had seen I.B. being taken into the police station and then had seen him coming out. They reported that they could not see any signs of violence on him. One witness said that he could hear I.B. screaming and wailing in the police station, and that when he came out he had asked them to call an ambulance because he did not feel well.
On 4 December 2009 the prosecutor-in-chief upheld that decision. I.B. appealed against both decisions before the Giurgiu County Court, which on 22 April 2010 dismissed his appeal. The court noted that the prosecutor heard I.B. and four villagers who were in front of the Clejani police station during the incidents. The four villagers declared that I.B. did not have any signs of violence on him when he left the police station. The court dismissed as unsubstantiated the allegations of discrimination made by I.B.
On 1 April 2010 I.B. died of causes unrelated to the present case and the first six applicants continued the proceedings instituted before the domestic courts.
On 14 December 2010 the Bucharest Court of Appeal upheld the decision delivered by the Giurgiu County Court and dismissed an appeal on points of law raised by I.B.’s heirs. It reiterated that the four witnesses had not seen the police officers beating the victims, and considered that the fact alone that there had been other witnesses who could have been heard by the prosecutor was irrelevant, given the evidence already gathered in the case.
The United Nations Committee on Elimination of Racial Discrimination in its 2010 Annual Report held with respect to the situation of Roma people in Romania the following:
“(15)  The Committee notes with concern the excessive use of force, ill-treatment and abuse of authority by police and law enforcement officers against persons belonging to minority groups, and Roma in particular. It is also concerned about the use of racial profiling by police officers and judicial officials.”
The Council of Europe’s Advisory Committee on the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities published an opinion on 23 February 2006 regarding Romania’s compliance with that Convention. The relevant parts of the opinion concerning respect of its Article 6 on tolerance and intercultural dialogue read as follows:
“101.  Although there has been significant improvement following the efforts made by the authorities, there continue to be reports of inappropriate behaviour by certain police members vis-à-vis persons belonging to the Roma community, in some cases involving violence, although such reports are now much less frequent. Nongovernmental sources also indicate that there are shortcomings in the judicial investigations and prosecution of such incidents.
Despite the fact that the Ministry of the Interior has special investigation procedures and a special body to deal with complaints of abuse by police members and to apply sanctions where appropriate, the Advisory Committee notes that there are concerns with regard to the impartiality of such investigations ...
The authorities should identify the most appropriate solutions to ensure efficient and impartial investigation of complaints against members of the police forces. Additional measures should be taken to train and inform members of the legal profession to ensure that legislation on discrimination and the provisions of the Criminal Code regarding the fight against racism and intolerance are fully applied.”
The Council of Europe High Level Meeting on Roma in October 2010 adopted the “Strasbourg Declaration on Roma”. Under the heading “Access to justice”, the Declaration recommends that member States:
“(27) Ensure timely and effective investigations and due legal process in cases of alleged racial violence or other offences against Roma.
(28) Provide appropriate and targeted training to judicial and police services.”
In a letter addressed to the Romanian Prime Minister on 17 November 2010 the Council of Europe’s Commissioner for Human Rights expressed particular concerns that Roma continue to face pervasive discrimination in Romania. The Commissioner also stated, inter alia, that:
“anti-Roma rhetoric is present in domestic political discourse. Some politicians have made stigmatising statements, among others linking Roma with criminality, blaming this population for not trying to integrate, and referring to popular stereotypes.”
On 1 February 2012 the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted a Declaration on the rise of anti-Gypsyism and racist violence against Roma in Europe, in which deep concerns are expressed with respect to the fact that:
“In many countries, Roma are subject to racist violence directed against their persons and property. These attacks have sometimes resulted in serious injuries and deaths. This violence is not a new phenomenon and has been prevalent in Europe for centuries. However, there has been a notable increase of serious incidents in a number of member States, including serious cases of racist violence, stigmatising anti-Roma rhetoric, and generalisations about criminal behaviour.”
In his June 2014 report on Romania, CommDH(2014)14, the Commissioner for Human Rights stated as follows:
“196.  The Commissioner wishes to underline the view expressed by NGOs that Roma are confronted at present mainly with institutionalised racism combined with excessive use of force by law-enforcement authorities. Although such incidents are not frequently reported, they seem to be a current problem in Romania, with several of them resulting in deaths or serious injury. In 2013, NGOs reported two cases of excessive use of force by the police during searches carried out in Roma homes in Reghin, Mureș county. In the previous year, on 31 May, 10 June and 28 July 2012, members of the police and gendarmerie in different parts of the country killed three Roma men during pursuits.”
He further reiterated that the domestic authorities should display special diligence in investigating possible racist motives as the origin of violence inflicted on Roma:
“197.  In this context, the Commissioner notes the Court’s judgment in the case of Stoica v. Romania in which the Court found that the applicant’s ill-treatment by the police had been motivated by his ethnic origin (Roma). In Cobzaru v. Romania, concerning the beating of a Roma man while in police custody, the Court found that the circumstances in the case disclosed no prima facie indication of racist motives behind the applicant’s ill-treatment; however, the prosecuting authorities should have displayed special diligence in investigating possible racist motives at the origin of the violence inflicted on the applicant. Nevertheless, the authorities failed to investigate such motives and made racially biased remarks about the applicant’s ethnic origin during the investigation. These cases are part of the Barbu Anghelescu group of 21 cases, concerning primarily ill-treatment inflicted on the applicants while they were under the responsibility of law enforcement officers, and the ineffectiveness of the investigations into the allegations of ill-treatment. The execution by Romania of the judgments delivered in this group of cases is under the supervision of the Council of Europe Committee of Ministers since 2005.”