The case originated in an application (no. 58717/10) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by seven Azerbaijani nationals, Mr Famil Zakir oglu Nasirov (Famil Zakir oğlu Nəsirov  “the first applicant”), Ms Amina Talat gizi Mammadova (Əminə Tələt qızı Məmmədova  “the second applicant”), Ms Gulnaz Mahammadali gizi Hasanova (Gülnaz Məhəmmədəli qızı Həsənova  “the third applicant”), Ms Salatin Ali gızı Iskandarova (Salatın Əli qızı İsgəndərova  “the fourth applicant”), Ms Shafiga Mahammad gizi Mammadova (Şəfiqə Məhəmməd qızı Məmmədova  the fifth applicant”), Ms Rahima Amikishi gizi Huseynova (Rəhimə Əmikişi qızı Hüseynova  “the sixth applicant”) and Ms Aygul Novruz gizi Nasirova (Aygül Novruz qızı Nəsirova  “the seventh applicant”) (“the applicants”) on 7 October 2010.
The applicants were represented by Mr R. Cook, Mr A. Carbonneau and Mr J. Wise, lawyers practising in the United Kingdom and Canada respectively. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
The applicants complained under Articles 9, 10 and 14 of the Convention that the domestic authorities had unlawfully interfered with their right to freedom of religion. The third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh applicants further complained under Article 5 of the Convention that their arrest and their detention in excess of the time permitted by domestic law had been without just cause and in breach of their right to liberty. The seventh applicant also complained that the search and seizure carried out by the police officers at her home had infringed her rights under Article 8 of the Convention.
On 30 August 2017 notice of the complaints concerning Articles 5 (in respect of the third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh applicants), 8 (in respect of the seventh applicant), 9, 10 and 14 (in respect of all the applicants) of the Convention was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants’ dates of birth and places of residence are listed in the Appendix.
The applicants are members of the Religious Community of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
On 3 March 2010 the first and second applicants were preaching door to door in an apartment block in Baku. While they were still inside the apartment block three uniformed police officers approached them and asked why they were bothering people. The police officers took the first and second applicants to the Khatai District Police Department, where reports were drawn up and they were asked to remove the literature they were carrying from their bags. After three hours at the police station the two applicants were taken to the Khatai District Court.
On the same date and by separate decisions the Khatai District Court found the first and second applicants guilty under Article 300.0.2 of the Code of Administrative Offences (hereinafter referred to as “the CAO”) of distributing literature which had not been approved for import and fined each of them 200 Azerbaijani manats (AZN – approximately 200 euros (EUR) at the relevant time).
On 12 March 2010 the first and second applicants lodged appeals against those decisions. They argued that they had not been engaged in unlawful activities and had been arrested without legitimate cause. The applicants also complained that the first-instance court’s decisions violated their rights under Articles 9, 10 and 14 of the Convention.
On 8 April 2010 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the first applicant’s appeal and upheld the decision of the first-instance court. The appellate court found that under the relevant legislation, the books which he had been distributing had been allowed only for the internal purposes of the religious organisation in question at its registered legal address, whereas he had been distributing the books in public places to people who were not members of a Jehovah’s Witnesses congregation.
On 31 May 2010 the Baku Court of Appeal quashed the decision of the first-instance court in respect of the second applicant on the grounds that there had been no assessment of whether the books she had been distributing had been approved for import. It referred the case back for fresh consideration.
On 1 July 2010 the Khatai District Court found the second applicant guilty under Article 300.0.2 of the CAO. The court stated that despite the fact that the books in her possession, including the one entitled “What does the Holy Book really teach?” (“Əslində müqəddəs kitab nəyi öyrədir”), were permitted for import by the State Committee for Work with Religious Associations (Dini Qurumlarla İş Üzrə Dövlət Komitəsi – hereinafter referred to as “the Committee”), their usage was restricted to within the religious organisation in question. However, the court discontinued the proceedings as time-barred without applying a penalty and ordered the confiscated books to be returned to the second applicant.
On 13 July 2010 the second applicant lodged an appeal against that decision, reiterating the submissions she had made during her first appeal.
On 27 July 2010 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the second applicant’s appeal and upheld the decision of the first-instance court. The appellate court held that although the books she had been distributing had not been banned by the Committee, they were only allowed for the internal purposes of the religious organisation in question at its registered legal address but not for distribution in public places.
On 26 April 2010 the third, fourth and fifth applicants were preaching door to door in the town of Aghstafa and then went to a friend’s home. While they were there, three or four police officers knocked on the door, looking for “women with sports bags”. The police officers searched their bags and seized approximately 400 assorted books which the three applicants had previously obtained at a religious assembly for further distribution. Afterwards, the third, fourth and fifth applicants were taken to the Aghstafa District Police Department, where they were detained for several hours before being released after midnight. The next morning, 27 April 2010, they returned to the police station as ordered and were taken to the Aghstafa District Court.
On the same day and by separate decisions the Aghstafa District Court found the three applicants guilty of distributing literature which had not been approved for import under Article 300.0.2 of the CAO and fined each of them AZN 200 (approximately EUR 200 at the relevant time).
On 14 May 2010 the third, fourth and fifth applicants lodged appeals against those decisions. Relying on various Articles of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention, they argued that they had not been engaged in unlawful activities and had been arrested without legitimate cause.
On 8 June 2010 the Ganja Court of Appeal, by separate decisions, quashed the decisions of the first-instance court in part, ordering that all the books, except those entitled “What does the Holy Book really teach?”, be returned to the Jehovah’s Witnesses’ headquarters in Baku. The appellate court stated that the particular title the applicants had been distributing had been banned by the Committee and that the remaining titles were allowed only for the internal use of the religious organisation at the registered legal address of the entity concerned but could not be distributed in public places.
On 4 May 2010 the sixth and seventh applicants were bearing witness house to house in Sumgayit when a police officer who happened to live in the same apartment block detained them and took them to the police station. They were questioned and the religious literature in their bags was confiscated. Whereas the sixth applicant remained at the police station until she was released after midnight, the police officers took the seventh applicant to the apartment which she allegedly shared with other persons, where they carried out a search, confiscating her religious literature. She was then returned to the police station and detained until early in the morning of 5 May 2010. The following day, 6 May 2010, the two applicants returned to the police station as ordered and were taken to the Sumgayit City Court.
The court on the same date and by separate decisions found the sixth and seventh applicants guilty under Article 300.0.2 of the CAO of distributing literature not approved for import and fined them AZN 200 (approximately EUR 200 at the relevant time) each.
According to the decision of the first-instance court in respect of the seventh applicant, her registered place of residence was in Baku.
On 18 May 2010 the sixth and seventh applicants lodged appeals against those decisions. Relying on Articles 5, 8, 9, 10 and 14 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention, they argued that they had not been engaged in unlawful activities and had been arrested without legitimate cause. They also sought the recovery of the costs involved and the return of the seized books.
On 12 June 2010 the Sumgayit Court of Appeal, by separate decisions, quashed the decisions of the first-instance court. Having found the sixth and seventh applicants not guilty of committing the administrative offence provided for by Article 300.0.2 of the CAO, the court discontinued the proceedings and ordered the confiscated property to be returned to them. The court held that although the applicants had possessed books banned by the Committee, the evidence had not proved that they had been distributing them. However, as they had been causing a public disturbance by unexpectedly knocking on citizens’ apartment doors and breaching the general provisions of the legislation regulating religious activities, their claim for recovery of the costs involved was dismissed.
At the material time, the relevant provisions of the Constitution provided as follows:
Article 47. Freedom of thought and speech
“...
Agitation and propaganda inciting racial, ethnic, religious and social discord and hostility are not allowed.”
Article 48. Freedom of conscience
“...
Everyone has the right to independently determine his or her attitude to religion, to confess, alone or in community with others, to any religion or to refrain from following one, to manifest his or her religious belief and to convey it to others.
Freedom of conscience and religion shall not serve as a basis for exemption from responsibility for violation of the law. ...”
Article 22 (Religious literature and assets of religious nature) of the Law on Freedom of Religion, as in force at the material time, provided that individuals and religious communities could obtain and use religious literature and other assets and materials of a religious nature in any language. Religious communities could, with the consent of the relevant executive authority for religious affairs, import and freely distribute literature, assets of a religious nature and other information material with religious content.
Paragraph 9.2 of the Regulations on the State Committee for Work with Religious Communities, as in force at the material time, provided that in the fulfilment of its duties, the Committee had the right to control and authorise the production, import and distribution of literature and assets of a religious nature and information material with religious and other content upon the request of religious communities or the relevant public authorities.
Article 300.0.2 (Violation of legislation concerning freedom of religion) of the CAO, as in force at the material time, provided that the distribution by natural persons of literature and assets of a religious nature and information material with religious content which had been imported or produced without the consent of the relevant executive authority was punishable by a fine in the amount of 200 to 400 manats and the seizure of the literature, items and material directly forming the subject of the administrative offence.
Article 396.1 (Measures to secure administrative-offence proceedings) of the CAO, as in force at the material time, provided for a number of measures, including administrative escorting (gətirilmə) of a suspect to a police station and administrative arrest (inzibati qaydada tutma). Such measures may be used for the purpose of putting an end to an administrative offence; establishing an offender’s identity; compiling an administrative-offence record, where this could not be done on the spot; ensuring the timely and correct examination of a case; and enforcing a decision taken in a case.
Article 398.1 (Administrative arrest) of the CAO, as in force at the material time, provided that an administrative arrest was a restriction of the liberty of a natural person for a limited period of time which could be applied in exceptional cases if it was necessary in order to examine thoroughly and promptly a case concerning an administrative offence or to ensure the execution of a decision relating to an administrative offence. The duration of this type of arrest could not exceed three hours (Article 399.1 (Duration of the administrative arrest)).
Article 400 (Record of administrative arrest) of the CAO, as in force at the material time, provided that in all circumstances a record of administrative arrest (inzibati qaydada tutma haqqında protokol) had to be drawn up containing the following information: the date and place where the record was drawn up; the official position, name, surname and patronymic of the person who drew up the record; the personal details of the arrested person; and the date of and reasons for the arrest. The record had to be signed by the person who drew it up and the arrested party. If the latter refused to sign it, this fact had to be noted in the record.