The case originated in an application (no. 30165/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Mr Jurgis Jurevičius (“the applicant”), on 5 August 2002.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Petravičius, a lawyer practising in . The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms E. Baltutytė.
On 7 September 2005 the Court decided to communicate the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant is a Lithuania national who was born in 1941 and lives in .
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant’s parents owned two buildings with the adjacent plots of land in the centre of the city of . The property was nationalised following the Soviet occupation of  in the 1940s. After  regained its independence in 1990, the applicant’s mother applied for the property to be returned to her in kind, pursuant to the 1991 legislation on restitution of property rights.
On 14 March 1996 the Kaunas City Council adopted a decision to pay to the applicant’s mother monetary compensation for the family’s former building situated in Šv.  6 in the city of . The local authorities also decided to return in kind those parts of the building that were not suitable for housing purposes, thereby excluding two flats located in the building.
Following the death of the applicant’s mother, he applied to a court for the decision of 14 March 1996 to be quashed.
On 5 February 1999 the Kaunas City District Court accepted the applicant’s action. The court ordered the local authorities to return in kind Flat No. 2 located in the building, and to offer equivalent compensation for Flat No. 1 - by way of another apartment - in accordance with the relevant legislation on the restitution of property rights.
The Kaunas City Council did not appeal against the decision, which entered into force on 19 February 1999.
On 20 March 2001 the Kaunas City Council held that the question of an equivalent flat - in compensation for Flat No. 1 - should be decided by the Vilnius City Council as the applicant was a  resident. By a letter from the Vilnius City Council of 29 March 2002, the applicant was informed that the local authorities could not take a decision in the absence of the relevant governmental provisions on equivalent flats.
On 26 March 2001 the Kaunas City Council applied for the re-opening of the proceedings. By a final decision of the Supreme Court of
On 27 November 2003 the Kaunas City Council adopted a decision to return in kind Flat No. 2. The applicant has not yet carried out the necessary formalities in order to register the flat in his name, as he is dissatisfied with the fact that two tenants continue living there and that he is allegedly unable to request their eviction. He has brought no court action in this respect.
The applicant also submits that the local authorities have adopted no decision to return in kind another building, situated in Laisvės alėja 18 in the city of , and the plot of land adjacent to that building. The Government do not deny the possibility of the applicant’s eventual entitlement, in the form of compensation, to the plot of land in Laisvės alėja 18. However, according to the Government, this question has not yet been resolved in view of the difficulties pertaining to the adoption of a detailed plan of the area by the local authorities, and given the ongoing legal disputes in this connection.
On 2 November 2004 the applicant applied to the , claiming the unlawfulness of the decision to create a car park in Laisvės alėja 18 in . At the same time, the applicant claimed that the local authorities had protracted the adoption of the necessary planning decisions in that area.
On 8 April 2005 the  rejected the applicant’s action insofar as it related to the creation of the car park. However, it obliged the local authorities to prepare a detailed plan of the area. In this respect, the court awarded the applicant 3000 LTL in
On 28 June 2005 the applicant was informed by the Vilnius City Council that the relevant legal provisions on equivalent compensation had been adopted, and that the applicant had been included in the list of persons having priority for the restoration of their property rights.
On 12 September 2005 the  upheld the decision of 8 April 2005.
On 26 January 2006 the applicant submitted a fresh action, alleging the inactivity of the local authorities in their adoption of a detailed plan for the area and the restoration of his property rights in Laisvės alėja 18. The case is currently pending.
The Restitution of Property Act 1991 (Nuosavybės teisių ... atkūrimo įstatymas) (amended on numerous occasions) provides for two forms of restitution: 1) the return of the property in certain circumstances,
On 27 May 1994 the  examined the issue of the compatibility of the Constitution with the domestic laws on the restitution of property rights. In its decision the  held inter alia that possessions which had been nationalised by the Soviet authorities since 1940 should be considered as “property under the de facto control of the State”. The  also stated that, “The rights of a former owner to particular property have not been restored until the property is returned or appropriate compensation is afforded. The law does not itself afford any rights until it is applied to a concrete person in respect of specific property. In this situation the decision of a competent authority to return the property or to compensate has the legal effect that only from that moment does the former owner obtain property rights to the specific property.” The  also held that fair compensation for property which could not be returned was compatible with the principle of the protection of property.
In decisions of 15 June and 19 October 1994, the  emphasised that the notion of the restitution of property rights in  essentially denoted partial reparation. In this respect the  noted that the authorities of , as a re-established State in 1990, were not responsible for the Soviet occupation half a century ago, nor were they responsible for the consequences of that occupation. The  held that since the 1940s many private persons had bought, in accordance with the legislation applicable at the material time, various properties which had been previously nationalised. The denial of these factual and legal aspects was impossible, and the domestic legislation on the restitution of property rights duly took into account not only the interests of the former owners, but also the interests of private persons who had occupied or purchased the property by way of lawful contracts.
On 20 June 1995 the Constitutional Court held that the choice by the Parliament of the partial reparation principle was influenced by the difficult political and social conditions, in that “new generations had grown, [and] new proprietary and other socio-economic relations had been formed during the 50 years of occupation, which could not be ignored in deciding the question of the restitution of property”.
On 8 March 1995 the  ruled that a person who qualifies for compensation for property which cannot be returned is entitled to choose the form of compensation (land or money) by giving written permission for the authorities to proceed with the decision. The  also held that the executive authorities have discretion to decide on appropriate compensation in each case, but that a person is entitled to contest the compensation offered thereby through a court action.
Under Article 18 of the Restitution of Property Act (all versions until 1999), the authorities were required to obtain the written permission of the person concerned before they determined the appropriate compensation for property which could not be returned. Pursuant to the version of the Restitution of Property Act as amended from 2 June 1999, the executive authorities are now entitled to decide the question of compensation without the person’s approval. That decision can be appealed to a court in accordance with the procedure established in Article 19 of the Act. No stamp duty is required to file such an action.
According to Article 8 paragraph 3 of the Act (the version in force since 1997), where a decision has been taken to return in kind a building or a part of it (a flat), the authorities are automatically obliged to decide the question of the restitution of the rights to the land adjacent to that property, with no need for a specific request in this regard by the person concerned.