The case originated in an application (no. 37138/06) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Azerbaijani national, Farhad Shovlet oglu Aliyev (Fərhad Şövlət oğlu Əliyev – “the applicant”), on 8 September 2006.
The applicant was represented by Ms L. James and Lord Lester of Herne Hill QC, lawyers practising in London, and Mr E. Guliyev, a lawyer practising in . The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Asgarov.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that during his pre-trial detention his rights under Articles 3, 5, 6, 8, 13 and 14 of the Convention had been infringed by various domestic authorities and officials.
On 4 April 2007 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29  § 1).
The applicant was born in 1963 and lives in . He was the Minister for Economic Development of Azerbaijan from 2001 until the events of the present case.
The circumstances of the applicant's arrest
Shortly after 2 p.m. on 19 October 2005 the applicant was taken to the Ministry of National Security (“the MNS”) from his office in the Ministry of Economic Development. He was not informed why he was taken there. He was taken to the MNS in his own car driven by his personal driver, accompanied by two deputies to the Minister for National Security.
Shortly after that, television channels broadcast a presidential order for the applicant's dismissal from ministerial office. At around 3 p.m. the text of the presidential order was published by AzerTAG, a State-owned news agency.
After the arrest, the applicant was taken to the office of one of the MNS investigators inside the MNS building. He was then moved from one office to another until 10 p.m. and was unable to leave the MNS building during this time. He was not allowed to contact his family by phone when he asked to do so. At about 10 p.m. he was informed about his dismissal from ministerial office. He was also briefly informed that he was suspected of being one of the accomplices to organising mass unrest and a coup d'état allegedly planned by a group of current and former high-ranking State officials.
From 11.45 p.m. on 19 October to 12.50 a.m. on 20 October 2005, the applicant was questioned for the first time after his arrest earlier that day. A State-appointed lawyer was present during the questioning. The applicant was asked about a loan of 100,000 euros (EUR) that he had allegedly made to Fikret Yusifov, one of the alleged organisers of the coup d'état. He was told that this money had been found in Mr Yusifov's house and that the latter had explained that he had received it from the applicant. The applicant was asked to confirm this and to explain the reason for the loan. The applicant stated that he had indeed lent that amount to Mr Yusifov at the latter's request owing to personal financial difficulties. The applicant was also asked about his relationship with Rasul Guliyev, a former Parliament Speaker, who at the time lived abroad and was sought by the Azerbaijani authorities for a number of crimes allegedly committed by him while in office. The applicant stated that he had never been in touch with Mr Guliyev.
Following the questioning, the applicant was informed that he was being detained as a suspect. He was then taken to the MNS Detention Facility.
Shortly after 8 p.m. on 19 October 2005 officials of the MNS entered the applicant's office and informed him about the criminal offences of which he was suspected. They then accompanied the applicant to the MNS in his car. The car entered the courtyard of the MNS building at 8.25 p.m.
By letter of 19 October 2005 the applicant's family was notified that he was detained in the MNS detention facility on suspicion of having committed a criminal offence under Article 278 of the Criminal Code.
At 11 p.m. a State-appointed lawyer was introduced to the applicant, since he had not expressed a wish to be assisted by a lawyer of his choice. The applicant did not object to being assisted by the State-appointed lawyer.
From 11.15 to 11.25 p.m. an MNS investigator drew up a record of the applicant's arrest as a person suspected of committing a criminal offence (tutma protokolu), in accordance with, inter alia, Articles 147 and 148 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCrP”). The record was signed by the applicant at 11.25 p.m. At 11.45 p.m. the applicant signed another record confirming that he had been informed of the nature of the suspicions against him, while adding in handwriting that he denied the accusations. Thereafter, the applicant was questioned, in the presence of his State-appointed lawyer, from 11.45 p.m. on 19 October to 12.50 a.m. on 20 October 2005.
Other events around the time of the applicant's arrest
According to the applicant, on 19 October 2005, the day of his arrest, some fifteen officials in plain clothes and armed soldiers entered his flat in  without a search warrant. The officials produced a search warrant about two hours after the search had begun. The search continued for more than twelve hours and numerous items were seized. Several other flats and houses, registered in the name of the applicant's closest relatives, were also searched and sealed.
The applicant's brother Rafig Aliyev, a wealthy businessman, was also arrested at around the same time on similar suspicions. According to the applicant, not only his brother Rafig, but his other brothers were also either arrested or dismissed from their jobs. Alipanah Aliyev, the Head of the Environment Committee of the Baku City Executive Authority, was dismissed from his job. Ashad Aliyev, a CEO of a private company, was prosecuted on charges of tax evasion but was later released after agreeing to pay what was alleged to be due. Sudeef Aliyev, a manager of a small carpet factory, was also accused of tax evasion. Alovsat Aliyev, who intended to stand as a candidate for the forthcoming parliamentary elections, had his candidacy revoked by a court decision. Alovsat's wife was dismissed from her position as a teacher at a State school. A number of his other, more distant relatives, as well as his former colleagues and employees, were also allegedly persecuted in various ways. According to the applicant, all of the above events were directly related to his arrest.
On 20 and 21 October 2005 the official newspapers and other mass media published two press releases with the headline “Special Statement of the Prosecutor General's Office, the Ministry of National Security and the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the ”. These press releases officially informed the public about the arrest and indictment of a number of well-known current and former State officials and provided a summary of the evidence gathered in respect of their alleged plans for the “forcible capture of power” during the election period, “under the guise of an appeal for democratic changes in the political situation in the country”. The evidence mainly consisted of the testimony of one of the arrested persons concerning secret meetings between them and their sources of financing, as well as large amounts of cash and other valuables found in the homes of some of them. Additionally, some of the arrested persons were suspected of embezzlement of public funds and abuse of authority. Specifically, the press releases mentioned the names of the applicant, the former Parliament Speaker Rasul Guliyev, the former Minister of Finance Fikret Yusifov, the owner of Azpetrol Oil Company Rafig Aliyev (the applicant's brother), the Minister for Health Care Ali Insanov, as well as other, less prominent names. It appears that all of the mentioned persons (except Rasul Guliyev, who was not physically present in ) had been arrested prior to the publication of the press releases.
The press release of 20 October 2005 stated, inter alia:
“It was established that former Minister of Finance Fikret Yusifov was the contact responsible for obtaining large amounts of funding for the forcible capture of State power... He was arrested as a suspect on 16 October. ... 100,000 euros and 60,000 US dollars were seized from Fikret Yusifov's flat during a search conducted in the context of the investigation...
On 18 October 2005 Fikret Yusifov wrote to the Prosecutor General... and indicated his willingness to voluntarily provide information about the preparatory actions by Rasul Guliyev and his supporters aimed at usurping State power...
Fikret Yusifov stated in his testimony that, during his visit to St Petersburg in the Russian Federation in July 2005, Rasul Guliyev ... had contacted him on his mobile phone and instructed him to pass on his directions concerning the financing of the process of the capture of State power to the Minister for Economic Development, Farhad Aliyev, and his other supporters who had the necessary financial means.
In this connection, in August of the current year Fikret Yusifov met Farhad Aliyev in the office of the latter's brother Rafig Aliyev and informed him about Rasul Guliyev's directions. Farhad Aliyev promised to provide any kind of assistance in this matter and to take additional measures via his contacts. At the end of August Fikret Yusifov went to  and notified Rasul Guliyev by phone about Farhad Aliyev's agreement.
Pursuant to another instruction by Rasul Guliyev, [Fikret Yusifov] returned to Baku on 23 September and again met Farhad Aliyev in the same office ... [Farhad Aliyev] again gave assurances that he would provide any kind of assistance and that he was ready to provide funding in the amount of 3,000,000 US dollars and to organise anything within his capability.
On 3 October 2005 Fikret Yusifov met Rasul Guliyev in . During the meeting, Rasul Guliyev stated that he was planning to return to  in the middle of October and stressed that it was important that he be met by a large group of people, which would prevent his arrest, and that State power be forcibly seized by creating public disorder. Rasul Guliyev also gave a specific instruction that Farhad Aliyev should provide substantial financial assistance for implementing these plans.
Having returned to , Fikret Yusifov met Farhad Aliyev and notified him about this instruction. On 15 October Farhad Aliyev personally gave cash in the amount of 100,000 US dollars to Fikret Yusifov for the purposes of financing the usurpation of State power. This money was found during the search of Fikret Yusifov's flat on 16 October 2005 and was seized as physical evidence.
During the searches conducted in the course of the investigation in houses, dachas and other properties belonging to Farhad Aliyev, [the authorities] seized large amounts of foreign currency, jewellery, works of art and other valuable items obtained in a criminal manner.
As a result of operational measures, it was also established that Farhad Aliyev, having abused his official authority and committed serious breaches of the law during the process of privatisation of State property, had procured documents of title to State property at negligible prices and formally registered the property in the name of his relatives and acquaintances, and thus de facto transferred it into his ownership.
An investigation into breaches of the law is currently under way in numerous commercial companies linked to Farhad Aliyev, including Azpetrol. Rafig Aliyev, the owner of Azpetrol, was arrested at the airport while attempting to leave the country.
Based on the material gathered, the Prosecutor General instituted criminal proceedings under Articles 179.3 (embezzlement), 308.2 (abuse of official authority), 28/220 (preparation to organise public disorder) and 278 (usurpation or forcible retention of State power) of the Criminal Code and on 19 October 2005 Farhad Aliyev was arrested as a suspect in connection with these criminal proceedings.”
The press release of 21 October 2005 stated, inter alia:
“As has been notified earlier, during the searches conducted in the course of the investigation in houses, dachas and other properties belonging to the former Minister for Economic Development Farhad Aliyev, arrested as a suspect in connection with the criminal proceedings under Articles 179.3, 308.2, 28/220 and 278 of the Criminal Code, [the authorities] have seized large amounts of foreign currency, jewellery, works of art and other valuable items obtained in a criminal manner.
In particular, [the following were seized during the searches:] 50,500 US dollars, 6,000 euros and 860 UK pounds sterling from Farhad Aliyev's personal office in the administrative building of the Ministry of Economic Development; 30,000 euros and 6,500 US dollars from his flat...; 34 valuable works of art and 500 privatisation vouchers from his dacha; 565,000 US dollars and 5,609,000,000 [old] Azerbaijani manats, which had not been entered in accounting books, from his brother Rafig Aliyev's office at Azpetrol. In addition, jewellery in large amounts, seven firearms of various models, other valuable items, and documents of title to numerous items of real property have been discovered at the mentioned addresses. The investigation continues into offences of corruption and other breaches of the law within numerous commercial companies belonging de facto to Farhad Aliyev. ...”
From 21 October 2005 the applicant was assisted by two lawyers hired by his family.
By a decision of the investigator in charge of the case, issued at an unspecified hour on 21 October 2005 in the presence of the applicant and his lawyers, the applicant was formally accused in the context of criminal case no. 76586. The applicant was one of several accused persons in that case. Specifically, he was charged with criminal offences under Articles 179.3.2 (embezzlement in large amounts), 308.2 (abuse of official authority entailing grave consequences), 28/220 (preparation to organise public disorder) and 278 (actions aimed at usurping State power) of the Criminal Code. Following this, he was questioned from 7.50 p.m. to 8.15 p.m. on 21 October 2005.
On the same day, a judge of the Nasimi District Court arrived at the MNS to hold a hearing concerning the prosecution's request to apply the preventive measure of remand in custody (həbs qətimkan tədbiri) in respect of the applicant. The hearing was held in the office of one of the MNS investigators in the presence of the applicant and his lawyers. According to the Government, the hearing commenced at 8.25 p.m. According to the applicant, he was not brought before the judge until 9 p.m.
The judge remanded the applicant in custody for a period of three months, calculated from 19 October 2005. The judge substantiated the necessity of this measure as follows:
“Taking into account the possibility of the accused absconding from the authority conducting the criminal proceedings and illegally influencing persons participating in the proceedings, as well as the nature and gravity of the actions imputed to him, I consider it necessary to apply the preventive measure of remand in custody in respect of him.”
The applicant appealed, claiming inter alia that, prior to the issuance of a judicial order remanding him in custody, he had been detained as a suspected person for several hours in excess of the maximum forty-eight-hour period prescribed by law, because he had been actually arrested at 2 p.m. on 19 October but had been brought before the judge at 9 p.m. on 21 October. He further claimed that, upon issuing the detention order, the judge had merely relied on the submissions of the prosecution and had not assessed any evidence independently in order to establish whether there had been a reasonable suspicion that he had committed a criminal offence. Lastly, he complained that the judicial hearing had been held in the MNS building and not in a regular courtroom, and in the absence of the public prosecutor.
On 26 October 2005, in the presence of the applicant's lawyers but in the absence of the applicant himself, the Court of Appeal upheld the Nasimi District Court's detention order, repeating the lower court's reasoning and finding that it was correct. The Court of Appeal's decision did not address any of the applicant's specific complaints.
By a decision of 13 January 2006 the Nasimi District Court extended the period of the applicant's detention by another four months (until 19 May 2006). Both the applicant and his lawyer were absent from this hearing. On 19 January 2006 the Court of Appeal upheld that decision, in the presence of the applicant's lawyer, but in the applicant's absence.
On 13 May 2006 the Nasimi District Court extended the period of the applicant's detention by another five months (until 19 October 2006). Neither the applicant nor his lawyers were informed of this hearing. On 22 May 2006 the Court of Appeal upheld that decision, in the presence of the applicant's lawyer, but in the applicant's absence.
On an unspecified date the applicant requested that the preventive measure of remand in custody be substituted by a less restrictive measure, such as release on bail or house arrest. It appears that on 17 July 2006 the Nasimi District Court rejected this request (no copy of this decision was made available to the Court).
On 2 October 2006 the Nasimi District Court extended the period of the applicant's detention by another six months (until 19 April 2007). The applicant was absent from the hearing; his lawyer was present. On 9 October 2006 the Court of Appeal upheld that decision.
In all of its decisions extending the applicant's detention, the Nasimi District Court's reasoning justifying his continued detention was the same as or similar to that cited in paragraph 23 above. In all of his appeals against those decisions, the applicant complained that there was no evidence giving rise to a reasonable suspicion that he had committed a criminal offence, that the material in the prosecuting authority's possession had not been made available to him, that the extension orders were based only on the submissions of the prosecuting authority, that neither his nor his lawyers' presence at the hearings had been ensured, that there were no reasons to believe that he would abscond or influence the investigation, and that the condition of his health and other personal circumstances had not been taken into account when assessing the necessity of his continued detention. The Court of Appeal's decisions upholding the extension of the applicant's detention repeated the lower court's reasoning and did not contain any assessment of the specific arguments raised by the applicant in his appeals.
On 19 January 2007 the investigator issued a new decision charging the applicant with criminal offences under Articles 179.3.1 (embezzlement), 179.3.2 (embezzlement in large amounts), 28/220.1 (preparation to organise public disorder), 278 (actions aimed at usurping State power), 308.2 (abuse of official authority entailing grave consequences), 311.3.1 (bribe-taking by an organised group), 311.3.2 (repeatedly committed bribe-taking), 311.3.3 (bribe-taking in large amounts) and 313 (forgery in public office) of the Criminal Code.
On 1 March 2007 the investigator issued yet another decision, charging the applicant with criminal offences under Articles 179.3.1, 179.3.2, 192.2.1 (illegal commercial activity resulting in grave pecuniary damage), 192.2.2 (illegal commercial activity yielding a large amount of profit), 206.4 (smuggling by an organised group), 213.4 (tax evasion in large amounts), 28/220.1, 278, 308.2, 311.3.1, 311.3.2, 311.3.3 and 313 of the Criminal Code.
On 5 March 2007 a new criminal case (no. 76961) was severed from criminal case no. 76586. In the context of the new criminal case no. 76961, the applicant was charged under Articles 179.3.1, 179.3.2, 192.2.1, 192.2.2, 206.4, 213.4, 308.2, 311.3.1, 311.3.2, 311.3.3 and 313 of the Criminal Code.
On 5 March 2007 the applicant requested the prosecutor to provide him with a copy of the decision to sever the criminal case. This request was refused, on the ground that the applicant would be able to familiarise himself with the contents of the entire case file, including a copy of that decision, after completion of the pre-trial investigation.
On 7 March 2007 the applicant was informed that the investigation in criminal case no. 76961 had been completed on 5 March 2007.
On 16 April 2007 the investigator issued the final bill of indictment in criminal case no. 76961 under Articles 179.3.2, 192.2.1, 192.2.2, 206.4, 213.4, 308.2, 311.3.1, 311.3.2, 311.3.3 and 313 of the Criminal Code. On the same day, the bill of indictment was signed by the Prosecutor General and the case was referred to the  for trial.
Thus, criminal case no. 76961 was sent for trial in the . There were nineteen co-defendants standing trial in this case, including the applicant and his brother Rafig Aliyev, under charges of complicity in various offences involving embezzlement and corruption. It appears that the original criminal case no. 76586, which still carried the charges against the applicant under Articles 28/220.1 and 278, was not sent for trial, but was not terminated either.
On 23 April 2007 the applicant's lawyers applied to the Nasimi District Court, seeking the applicant's release on the ground that the latest detention order in respect of him, as well as the statutory maximum period for detention during the pre-trial investigation, had expired on 19 April 2007. It is not clear whether the Nasimi District Court replied to this request.
On 15 and 16 May 2007 the applicant's lawyers lodged similar requests with the , arguing that the applicant should have been released on 19 April 2007 at the latest. It appears that at least six other codefendants also requested release pending trial, relying on various grounds.
At its preliminary hearing on 21 May 2007 the  rejected the applicant's and his co-defendants' requests for release and authorised their continued detention pending trial.
In particular, in connection with the applicant's specific argument that his detention was unlawful following the expiry of the relevant period on 19 April 2007, the Assize Court noted that the criminal case had been referred to the court a few days before 19 April 2007, and that the running of the applicant's detention “pending investigation” had ended on that day. Therefore, his detention had not exceeded the time-limits specified by law.
Furthermore, assessing the situation of all the detained co-defendants collectively, the  decided that “the preventive measure of remand in custody had been chosen correctly and should remain unchanged”. The court noted that “the accused persons detained on remand” had sufficient financial means, as well as business and other contacts in foreign countries, which could enable them to leave the  and thus abscond from the trial. It further noted that, using those significant financial means, the detained persons could apply illegal pressure on persons participating in the trial.
During the period of the pre-trial investigation, the applicant's lawyers lodged a number of applications and petitions with the prosecuting authorities and courts concerning various procedural aspects of the criminal proceedings and alleged breaches of the applicant's procedural rights.
In particular, on 24 November 2005 the applicant's lawyer applied to the Nasimi District Court, complaining that the actions of the prosecuting authorities violated the applicant's rights to liberty, to a fair investigation and to presumption of innocence. He also complained that, owing to the harsh conditions of his detention, the applicant was being subjected to inhuman and degrading treatment. In the application, the applicant's lawyer also complained, in two sentences, that the applicant's rights following his arrest had not been respected because he had not been allowed to contact his family and relatives by telephone in order to inform them of his arrest. On 26 December 2005 the Nasimi District Court rejected these claims, finding them unsubstantiated.
On 29 December 2005 the applicant lodged an appeal against this decision, summarising the complaints he had made to the Nasimi District Court, including a complaint that “he had not been allowed to telephone his family upon his arrest”. On 25 January 2006 the Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant's appeal.
The applicant was tried by the  together with eighteen other accused persons.
On 25 October 2007 the  convicted the applicant of all the criminal offences he was charged with under criminal case no. 76961 and sentenced him to ten years' imprisonment.
On 16 July 2008 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the applicant's conviction. On 6 July 2009 the Supreme Court upheld the lower courts' judgments in respect of the applicant.
The submissions and documents concerning the applicant's health and medical treatment are voluminous and contain numerous details. While the Court has duly examined the entire medical file, only the main and most relevant points are summarised below for information purposes.
The applicant complained mainly of cardiovascular problems. Before his arrest, he had been examined by doctors in Azerbaijan and . In particular, in January 2004 he was examined by Dr Abbasaliyev of the Central Clinical Hospital in  and was diagnosed with mild coronary artery disease and stenocardia (angina pectoris), and prescribed a number of medications. It was noted that the applicant complained of pains, shortness of breath, discomfort and occasional feelings of weakness; however, it appears that the examination did not reveal any serious condition.
Also prior to his arrest, in June 2005, the applicant underwent a medical examination in a cardiology hospital in  (Deutsches Herzzentrum Berlin) and was diagnosed with hyperlipoproteinaemia (elevated concentration of lipoprotein particles in the blood) and arterial hypertension as cardiovascular risk factors. Echocardiography (“echo”) tests did not reveal any serious abnormalities. It was noted that he was in a “good general condition” and that the examination “showed no significant deficit in cardiac function”, although the measurement of heart wall thickness showed a mild septal hypertrophy of the left ventricle. The treatment suggested included three medications (Ramipril for preventing the progression of the left ventricular hypertrophy, and ASS-100 (Aspirin) and Atorvastatin for improving the cardiovascular risk profile) and regular control of blood pressure and cholesterol level.
In detention, the applicant continuously complained of his health condition. Specifically, he complained of, inter alia, breathing problems, spasms, headaches, dizziness and heart pain.
As to the period after his arrest on 19 October 2005, according to the applicant, he was not examined by a physician upon his arrest and was first seen by a doctor on 21 October 2005. The medical records submitted by the Government contained entries made by MNS doctors on 24, 28 and 29 October 2005. According to those records, the applicant underwent a blood test and outpatient examinations by the MNS doctors, who noted that he complained of chest pains and dizziness. The entry for 29 October 2005 contained a diagnosis of “ischaemic heart disease” (followed by a question mark), “hypertension” (also followed by a question mark), and “neurocirculatory dystonia of hypertonic type”. It was further noted that the applicant had no specific health-related complaints on that occasion and that, although he had been prescribed several medications (including Nitrosorbit, Ramipril, ASS and Persen Forte), he had refused to take them on previous days, but had agreed to do so after he had been informed of their nature.
As to the period subsequent to the initial days after the arrest, it appears from the medical records that the applicant was examined by MNS doctors on 9 and 25 November 2005 and 5 and 21 December 2005. While the exact treatment is not fully specified in the available medical records, it appears that a number of medications were prescribed and administered.
At an unspecified time on 22 December 2005, while in his cell, the applicant lost consciousness for several minutes as a result of abnormally high blood pressure. Before fainting, he called a warder, who brought a blood-pressure monitor. The applicant used the monitor himself after regaining consciousness. Then a doctor came and gave him some medication, but this did not help. An ambulance was called and at around 11.45 p.m. on the same day the applicant was taken to  suspected of having suffered a stenocardiac attack. At the hospital, he was examined by Dr Abbasaliyev, a cardiologist who had previously seen him prior to his detention. According to the medical record drawn up by Dr Abbasaliyev, an electrocardiogram (“ECG”) and echocardiogram (“echo”) were taken and a blood test was carried out. Apart from the left ventricular hypertrophy diagnosed earlier, no new disorders were discovered and the blood test result did not reveal any anomalies. The applicant was given unspecified medications administered via injections and an intravenous drip, which resulted in normalisation of the blood pressure. It was determined that the applicant had suffered a “hypertonic attack (due to failure to take his medication and emotional stress)”. He was diagnosed with first-stage hypertension and left ventricular hypertrophy.
The applicant stayed in the hospital overnight and the next morning he was brought back to his cell. According to the applicant, he was still feeling ill when brought back to his cell and he lay in his bed for several days without medical supervision until the “attack” eventually subsided. Following the attack, different medications were prescribed. According to the applicant, the pills were given to him by medically unqualified warders of the MNS Detention Facility on an irregular basis, usually following a request by the applicant himself.
According to the medical records submitted by the Government, during the period from 23 December 2005 to 11 April 2006 the applicant was seen several times by the MNS doctors. On each occasion, his healthrelated complaints (or lack of them) were recorded and he was prescribed and administered a number of medications to alleviate his condition (Diroton, Dibazol, Papaverine, Dimedrol). While the above-mentioned records are too voluminous and repetitive to be fully summarised, it should be noted that during this period the applicant usually complained of chest pains, dizziness, headaches and weakness, and was repeatedly diagnosed with “neurocirculatory dystonia of hypertonic type” and “neurotic reactions”. However, on 31 March 2006 the chief cardiologist of the Ministry of Health noted that the applicant's ECG and echo test revealed ischaemic heart disease, stenocardia and arterial hypertension.
Following several complaints by the applicant's lawyer about the applicant's alleged ill-health, lodged with the MNS Investigation Department in the period from January to March 2006, on 10 April 2006 an MNS investigator took a procedural decision to request a formal medical examination of the applicant within the context of the criminal proceedings. The examination was held on 12 April 2006 by four experts of the Ministry of Health. The medical experts were specifically asked to assess the applicant's state of health and the gravity of any illnesses from which he suffered, and to specify whether outpatient treatment of these illnesses would be adequate.
According to the expert report issued on 13 April 2006, the experts noted that the applicant complained of unstable blood pressure, shortness of breath, neck pains, chest pains, weakness and numbness of the left arm and two fingers of the left hand, occasional dizziness and darkening of vision, among other problems. Further, the experts summarised the applicant's medical record during his detention. In response to the specific questions asked by the investigator, the experts diagnosed the applicant with “neurocirculatory dystonia of hypertonic type” and noted that this condition belonged to a group of widespread ordinary illnesses that could be treated on an outpatient basis with calmative medications and vasodilators.
According to the applicant, on 23 April 2006 he experienced another attack and it took some four hours for a number of doctors to stabilise his condition. The relevant medical records do not contain any entries relating to this alleged incident.
Upon a request by the applicant's British lawyers, on 5 May 2006 Dr Martyn Thomas, a consultant cardiologist at King's College Hospital in London, issued a brief one-page opinion on the applicant's state of health based “on papers ... received from [the applicant's lawyers]”. It is unclear which specific documents were among those “papers”. Dr Thomas noted that, according to those papers, “the medical care of [the applicant] is far from ideal” and that “it is possible that his symptoms relate to some noncardiac condition [such as] a neurological cause...”. Nevertheless, Dr Thomas concluded that it was difficult for him “to comment on this gentleman's medical situation based merely on the paperwork I have received” and recommended that the applicant be examined by a cardiologist and “a more general physician [in order] to come to a definitive diagnosis as to the causes of his collapses”.
Following continued complaints about chest pains, back pains, headaches and heart pains, on 23 July 2006 the applicant was transferred to the Medical Facility of the Ministry of Justice. According to the relevant records, upon his arrival the applicant refused, in writing, to take any medications prescribed to him by doctors of the Ministry of Justice's Medical Facility and noted that he would not take any medications other than those that had been prescribed by the German doctor in 2005.
On 25 July 2006 the applicant was examined by Prof. Dr Bakhshiyev of the Azerbaijan Medical University and on 8 August 2006 by Dr Abdullayev of the Cardiology Research Institute (according to the Government, the latter doctor was chosen by the applicant himself because he had previously examined the applicant; the applicant denied this). Among other tests, the applicant underwent a twenty-four-hour Holter monitor procedure for the purpose of excluding the possibility of coronary insufficiency. The tests did not reveal any serious condition. Both doctors diagnosed him with “neurocirculatory dystonia of hypertonic type” and osteochondrosis of the cervical and thoracic regions of the spine. The applicant was prescribed treatment with calmative medications, but he again refused to take anything other than “his own medications”.
According to the applicant, on 12 August 2006, while in the Ministry of Justice's Medical Facility, he experienced another attack (of unspecified nature) but was not provided with “timely” medical assistance.
It appears that on 23 September 2006 the applicant was checked out of the Ministry of Justice's Medical Facility in a “satisfactory condition” and returned to the MNS Detention Facility.
On 11 October 2006 the applicant was examined by three cardiologists (including Dr Abbasaliyev, who had previously examined him on several occasions). It was noted that the applicant was in a generally good condition and that the examination did not reveal any new disorders. It was recommended that the applicant continue taking the prescribed medications and he was also prescribed an additional medication.
In November 2006 the applicant's lawyer requested that the applicant again be transferred to the Ministry of Justice's Medical Facility for in-patient treatment. In order to determine whether such treatment was necessary, the applicant was examined by a medical commission consisting of ten doctors specialising in various fields of medicine. The commission confirmed the earlier diagnosis of “neurocirculatory dystonia of hypertonic type” and explained that this was a condition caused by the applicant feeling emotionally distressed because of his arrest. The examination did not reveal any disorders or diseases of the blood, lungs, ear, nose and throat (ENT) or kidneys. Similarly, no injuries, orthopaedic disorders or infectious diseases were discovered. In conclusion, it was noted that the applicant was “practically healthy”. Accordingly, the applicant was not transferred to the Ministry of Justice's Medical Facility for in-patient treatment.
On 8 January 2007 the applicant was again examined by Dr Abbasaliyev, who noted that his general condition was good and stable.
On 17 January 2007 the applicant's lawyer requested to be provided with copies of all the applicant's medical records for the purpose of submitting them for an “alternative” expert examination, to be carried out at the applicant's expense by experts appointed by the defence. In reply, on 26 January 2007 the MNS investigator ordered a complex medical examination (komisyon məhkəmə tibb ekspertizası) of the applicant by the country's leading medical experts.
The complex medical examination was carried out by a commission of ten medical experts, each with between 25 and 55 years' professional experience and holding advanced degrees in medical science. The commission consisted of five cardiologists, one neuropathologist, one haematologist, one pulmonologist and two forensic experts. The expert opinion was issued on 2 February 2007 and consisted of 34 pages. According to the expert opinion, the experts examined in detail the applicant's medical records and concluded that the applicant suffered from neurocirculatory dystonia accompanied by high arterial pressure, a condition which was primarily caused by the emotional stress experienced by him as a result of the drastic change in his lifestyle brought about by his arrest. This diagnosis was confirmed by the fact that arterial pressure was quickly normalised after taking necessary medications and that no serious disorders had been revealed by various tests (ECG, echo tests, blood tests and biochemical tests). The analysis of medical records showed that the applicant's complaints of feeling unwell were often of a “subjective character” and were not confirmed by laboratory tests and examinations carried out in response to his complaints. Since the applicant's condition had not seriously deteriorated during the previous three years and since he could usually be quickly relieved of feelings of discomfort by taking calmative and vasodilator medications, the applicant's condition could be characterised as belonging to a group of widespread ordinary “functional” conditions caused by emotional stress. The experts further dismissed the opinion of Dr Thomas, noting that it was based on misrepresented facts and contained recommendations inconsistent with his own analysis. In conclusion, the experts noted that the applicant's general condition was satisfactory, that he did not suffer from any serious diseases, and that his medical supervision and treatment had been carried out by well-qualified doctors and had been adequate.
In an application of 12 February 2007 the applicant's lawyer objected to the complex medical examination and clarified that, in his application of 17 January 2007, he had not requested this type of examination, but had asked to be provided with the applicant's medical records for the purpose of carrying out an “alternative” medical examination at the applicant's own expense.
On 21 February 2007 the investigation authorities provided the applicant's lawyer with copies of the requested medical records. According to the Government, although the applicant was allowed to provide the investigation with the results of an “alternative” medical examination carried out by experts of his own choice, the applicant did not submit any “alternative” expert opinions to the investigation authorities.
It appears that the applicant forwarded his medical records, as well as his own description of the medical treatment received and the conditions of his detention, to Dr Duncan S. Dymond, based in , for an expert evaluation. Dr Dymond issued his report on 9 July 2007. He noted that the Azerbaijani cardiologists used terminology (such as “neurocirculatory dystonia” and “stenocardia”) which was not “familiar to contemporary cardiologists” and was not “used conventionally in the medical world in 2007”. He noted that the applicant had “probably rather labile hypertension with some evidence of mild ventricular hypertrophy”, meaning that his blood pressure fluctuated rather widely and that his heart muscle had become slightly thickened in response to high blood pressure. Further, he noted that the applicant had been documented as “having very mild coronary artery disease affecting only one vessel for which no intervention was required” and that, as a result, the applicant had been “quite correctly placed on anti-hypertensives, Aspirin and a Statin”. As to the attacks and loss of consciousness experienced by the applicant, Dr Dymond stated that the causes were unclear to him. Furthermore, he opined that the way in which the applicant's medications had been handled (for example, the fact that they had been administered by unqualified personnel), and the conditions of his detention (locked cell, bad diet and lack of exercise), were unacceptable.
In conclusion, Dr Dymond stated that, from the documents examined, he could not conclude whether the applicant's pains “represent[ed] an actual deterioration in his heart condition or [were] the results of stress” and that the medical reports were inconsistent. No conclusion was made as to whether the applicant could actually have a coronary disease, or ischaemic heart disease; it was stated that it was “possible” that the situation had worsened since the applicant's angiographic situation in 2004. Lastly, Dr Dymond criticised the conditions of the applicant's detention and lack of access to “modern cardiological care”.
Starting from the moment of his arrest on 19 October 2005 and throughout the pre-trial and trial proceedings until his conviction on 25 October 2007, the applicant was placed in solitary confinement in a twoperson cell in the MNS Detention Facility, with the exception of a twomonth period from 23 July to 23 September 2006 when he was receiving in-patient treatment in the Medical Facility of the Ministry of Justice. In the MNS Detention Facility, the applicant was initially placed in a cell where there was a leak in the ceiling, causing the applicant to have to place a bucket under the leak, which resulted in excessive noise and disturbance and also increased the humidity within the cell. Following several oral complaints, he was moved to a similar cell where there was no leak in the ceiling. The cell was dirty and measured about 7.5 sq. m. Approximately 4.5 sq. m of the total floor area was occupied by the furniture. The window was 0.7 m high and 1.1 m wide. However, because of the width of the window frames (5 cm), the window pane measured 0.5 m by 1 m. The window was covered, with only its top part open, allowing very little natural light to enter the cell. The ventilation and heating systems did not function properly and, therefore, it was extremely cold in winter and extremely hot in summer. There was a wall lamp which was switched on throughout the day and night, which constantly disturbed the applicant and made it hard for him to sleep.
Before September 2006, the applicant was allowed only twenty minutes of out-of-cell exercise per day. From September 2006, his exercise time was increased to two hours per day. However, the exercise area was extremely confined and it caused the applicant to feel dizzy when walking there. The applicant never saw any gym facilities in the MNS Detention Facility and never exercised there.
The applicant had to wash and dry all his clothes himself inside his cell. He was allowed to take a shower for twenty minutes once a week and was not allowed to possess a large bath towel. The food was of low quality. A few improvements in the conditions of detention were made after the applicant's health crisis of 23 April 2006; for example, the shower time was extended and extra food was allowed to be sent from home.
The applicant was handcuffed for the first time when he was taken from his cell for questioning. After an objection by his lawyers, the handcuffs were removed. The applicant was not allowed to send letters to his wife and family, who were not permitted to write to him or visit him either. The applicant was not allowed to give any written information to his lawyers for the purpose of preparing his defence. Any notes written by the applicant were seized.
From 23 July to 23 September 2006 the applicant was kept in the Medical Facility of the Ministry of Justice in a four-person room measuring about 15 sq. m.
In the MNS Detention Facility, at his own request, the applicant was detained alone in a cell designed for two persons. The area of the cell was about 10 sq. m. The cell had a window that was 1.4 m wide and 1.2 m high. The cell was connected to the MNS building's central heating system and was well lit and ventilated. While the electric lighting was switched on throughout the day and night in accordance with the relevant regulations, the lamp was mounted in a manner that did not disturb inmates' sleep.
The applicant was permitted to walk outside his cell for two hours and to use a gym. Food was served three times a day. In addition, like all other detainees, the applicant was allowed to receive from home a food package of up to 5 kg per week. The applicant was provided with clean towels and bedding. Once a week he received clean clothing from his family, so he was always dressed according to season. The applicant was never handcuffed during questioning or any other investigative steps.
The Government did not provide any specific information concerning the conditions of detention in the Ministry of Justice's Medical Facility.
There are two “types”, or periods, of pre-trial detention under the CCrP: (1) initial detention (police custody) of a suspected or accused person without a court order, prior to his being brought before a judge; and (2) detention on remand, following a relevant court order imposing a preventive measure of remand in custody. Both types of detention are described below.
Chapter XVI of the CCrP deals with, inter alia, arrest on suspicion of a criminal offence (tutulma; hereinafter also referred to as “initial detention”, sometimes also referred to as “police custody”). The following persons, inter alia, may be subject to arrest: (a) a person suspected of having committed a criminal offence; or (b) a person who is to be officially charged with a criminal offence or an accused person breaching the terms of a preventive measure previously imposed on him or her (Article 147.1). The arrest and initial detention may be effected when, inter alia, a suspicion arises that a person has committed a criminal offence, or there already exists a relevant decision by the prosecuting authority charging a person with a criminal offence (Article 147.2.1).
Article 148 of the CCrP concerns the arrest of a person on suspicion of having committed a criminal offence (cinayət törətməsinə şübhə yarandıqda şəxsin tutulması). A preliminary investigator, investigator or prosecutor may arrest a person if, inter alia: the person was caught in the process of committing a criminal offence or at the crime scene immediately after committing a criminal offence; a victim of the criminal offence or a witness to it specifically referred to that person as the one who had committed the offence; or in other circumstances when the person, or his or her outside appearance, belongings, home or vehicle, bear clearly visible signs of his or her having committed a criminal offence (Article 148.2.1).
Article 148.4 states as follows:
“148.4.  In cases specified in Articles 148.1 ... of this Code, the arrest may be carried out prior to the institution of the relevant criminal proceedings. If a decision to institute criminal proceedings is not issued within twenty-four hours from the moment of the person's arrest, the arrested person must be immediately released. Even if such a decision is issued, the arrested person may not be so detained for a period longer than forty-eight hours. Within forty-eight hours from the moment of his or her arrest, the arrested person must be charged with a criminal offence and, in the event that the prosecutor requests his or her further detention, must be brought before a court; the court must examine the case without delay and issue a decision on the imposition of the preventive measure of remand in custody or [the arrested person's] release.”
Article 153 provides that, in order to ensure the rights of the arrested person, the relevant prosecuting authorities must carry out the following actions, inter alia: immediately after the arrest, to inform the arrested person of the reasons for the arrest and his or her rights to remain silent and to receive legal assistance (Article 153.2.1); without delay, to take the arrested person to the relevant detention facility, to draw up a record of the arrest and to allow the arrested person to familiarise himself or herself with the record (Article 153.2.2); immediately after the arrest, to ensure that the arrested person can exercise the right to inform his or her relatives of the arrest (Article 153.2.4); and from the moment of the arrest, to allow the arrested person effective access to a lawyer (Articles 153.2.5-153.2.8). Articles 90 and 91 also provide that the same rights are to be enjoyed by a suspect or accused person.
Articles 153.3-153.4 state as follows:
“153.3.  The arrested person shall be released by the prosecuting authority in the following cases:
3.1.  if the suspicion that the person has committed a criminal offence is not confirmed;
3.2.  if there is no necessity to further detain the person;
3.3.  (repealed [by a legislative amendment of 2 July 2001])
3.4.  ... if no court order remanding the arrested person in custody is issued within 48 hours after the moment of his or her arrest.
4.  In the cases specified in Articles 153.3.1 and 153.3.2 of this Code, the arrested person may be released by the preliminary investigator, investigator or prosecutor supervising the preliminary investigation, whereas in the cases specified in Article 153.3.4 of this Code, [he or she] may also be released by the head of the temporary detention facility [where he or she is detained].”
Article 154 of the CCrP provides for ten types of preventive measures imposed pending trial, including remand in custody (həbs qətimkan tədbiri). Any preventive measure, including remand in custody, can be applied taking into account the existence of a risk that the accused may: (a) hide from the prosecuting authority; (b) interfere with the pre-trial investigation or trial by illegally influencing the parties to the proceedings or by tampering with or hiding the relevant evidence; (c) reoffend or pose a danger to the public; (d) fail to appear before the prosecuting authority without good reason or otherwise evade criminal responsibility and punishment; or (e) hinder the execution of a court judgment (Article 155.1). The following should also be taken into account in deciding on the necessity of a preventive measure and choosing the type of measure to be applied: (a) the nature and gravity of the criminal charge and circumstances in which the investigated offence was committed; (b) the accused's personality, age, health, occupation and family, financial and social situation; and (c) whether the accused has been convicted or subjected to preventive measures before, and other relevant circumstances (Article 155.2). Moreover, as a general rule, the preventive measure of remand in custody can be imposed only with regard to a person who is charged with an offence which carries a punishment of more than two years' imprisonment (Article 155.3).
The CCrP distinguishes between two types of detention on remand: (1) detention “pending investigation”, that is, while the relevant prosecuting authority conducts the pre-trial investigation; and (2) subsequent detention while the case is being tried in court (hereafter referred to as “detention during the trial”). There is no apparent practical difference between these types of detention except as regards the calculation of the time-limits.
In respect of persons accused of especially serious criminal offences, the maximum length of detention “pending investigation” (məhkəməyədək icraat zamanı qətimkan tədbiri qismində həbsdə saxlama müddəti) cannot exceed eighteen months from the moment of the arrest, including all possible extensions of the initial three-month period (Articles 158.1, 159.1, 159.2, 159.7 and 159.8). The calculation of this total period of detention “pending investigation” takes into account any periods of actual detention, house arrest or stay in a medical facility. The running of detention “pending investigation” stops on the day the case is sent for trial or the day when the preventive measure of remand in custody is lifted (Article 158.3).
The period during which the accused and his or her lawyers are given access to the case file (cinayət işinin materialları ilə  olma müddəti) is not taken into account in calculating the period of detention “pending investigation” (Article 158.4).
Upon completion of the pre-trial investigation, the investigator notifies the accused person and other relevant parties and determines the time and place for giving them access to the case file (Article 284.1). Articles 284-288 of the CCrP set out detailed rules and procedures for consultation of the case file by the relevant parties, including the accused person. After the consultation of the case file is completed as required by Articles 284-288, the investigator issues the bill of indictment (Article 289). The bill of indictment is then forwarded to the prosecutor supervising the pre-trial investigation, who has five days to, inter alia, approve it or return it to the investigator for redrafting (Article 290).
Following the approval of the bill of indictment by the supervising prosecutor, the case is sent for trial (Article 292). If the accused person is detained on remand, the date on which the case is sent to the trial court marks the end of his or her detention “pending investigation” (Article 158.3) and the beginning of detention “during the trial”.
Pursuant to a legislative amendment of 14 June 2005 (repealing former Article 158.5), the CCrP no longer provides for any time-limits for detention “during the trial”.
Proceedings concerning the application and review of detention on remand
The preventive measure of remand in custody may be applied and extended only by means of a court order upon a request by the prosecutor supervising the pre-trial investigation (Articles 156.2 and 441.1.2).
Various procedural matters relating to pre-trial investigation, including the application of detention on remand, are examined in camera by a single judge of the relevant district court within twenty-four hours after receiving the relevant request (Articles 447.1 and 447.2). The following persons have a right to attend the hearing: (a) the person who has lodged the request concerning the particular procedural matter; (b) the prosecutor supervising the pre-trial investigation; and (c) the person whose rights are affected by the request, or his or her representative (Article 447.3).
A court order applying or refusing to apply the preventive measure of detention on remand, as well as a court order extending or refusing to extend the detention period, may be appealed against to an appellate court. The appellate court's decision on this matter is final (Articles 157.6 and 159.6).
The appeal must be lodged within three days after the delivery of the relevant court order (Article 452.1). Within three days of receipt of the appeal, it is examined in camera by a panel of three judges of the appellate court (Articles 453.1 and 453.2). The following persons have the right to attend the hearing: (a) the person lodging the appeal; (b) the prosecutor supervising the pre-trial investigation; and (c) the lawyer or representative of the accused person (Article 453.3).
Within fifteen days (or thirty days in complex cases) after the receipt of the case file, the trial court must hold a preliminary hearing (Article 298.2). At this preliminary hearing, among other things, the court must determine whether the defendant should remain in custody or be released pending trial and must issue a relevant order (Articles 299.3.5, 300.2, 301.2 and 306).
At any time during the trial and upon its own initiative, the court may order, vary or revoke any preventive measure, including detention on remand (Articles 156.2 and 320). Any such decision must be given in the deliberations room and must be signed by all the judges on the bench (Article 321.2.2).
During the trial, judicial decisions concerning preventive measures cannot be appealed against to a higher court (Article 173.2).
The following are the relevant extracts from the report on the visit to  carried out by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) from 24 November to 6 December 2002 (CPT/Inf (2004) 36) (“the 2002 CPT Report”):
“B.  Establishments under the authority of the Ministry of National Security
The Isolator [Detention Facility] of the Ministry of National Security in Baku accommodates persons suspected or accused of offences investigated by the Ministry's competent services (crimes against the State, participation in illegal armed groups, serious organised and economic crime, violations of the border control regulations, etc.). It holds both persons in the custody of the investigation bodies of the Ministry (for up to 72 hours) and persons remanded in custody.
Located in the building of the Ministry, the Isolator had an official capacity of 106 places. ...
The delegation did not hear any allegations of ill-treatment of persons detained at the Isolator of the Ministry of National Security by staff working at the establishment, and did not find any other evidence of such treatment.
Material conditions at the Isolator were on the whole acceptable and could serve as a model for other establishments accommodating pre-trial detainees in .
Inmates were accommodated in cells designed for one, two or four inmates. Single cells measured 6 to 8 m², double 10 m² and those for four persons 18 m². All cells were well lit and ventilated, and were maintained in an adequate state of repair and cleanliness. The furniture consisted of beds with full bedding, tables, benches or stools, lockers and shelves. The cells were also equipped with washbasins and floor-level toilets; as regards the latter, the delegation noted that not all of them were screened. However, partial screens were gradually being fitted in the context of the ongoing refurbishment of the establishment.
Detainees could take a hot shower once a week. Those without financial resources were provided with basic hygiene items (soap, towels and toilet paper). Bed sheets were changed weekly and washed in the laundry, which was a well-equipped facility.
The delegation did not hear any complaints about food, which was served three times a day. Detainees were also allowed to receive up to 5 kg of food per week from their families.
Inmates had the possibility to take one hour of daily outdoor exercise. However, the exercise yards, which were situated on the roof of the building, were small (9 to 12 m²), bare and of an oppressive design (high walls topped with wire netting). By virtue of their configuration and limited size, these facilities did not facilitate proper physical exertion.
Apart from outdoor exercise and periods of interrogation, detainees spent their time locked up in their cells with virtually nothing to occupy themselves. Radio and television sets were not authorised; the only distractions consisted of playing board games or reading books and newspapers. In their letter of 2 April 2003, the Azerbaijani authorities informed the CPT that a number of inmates had been offered work in the context of the above-mentioned refurbishment programme. The Committee welcomes this initiative, which is a step in the right direction.
At the time of the visit, the Isolator did not employ any health-care staff. Recourse was had to the services of general practitioners and specialists working in the nearby polyclinic of the Ministry of National Security, and there seemed to be no particular problems with access to them. Distributing medicines and managing the stock of medication was the task of custodial staff with no medical training. The delegation was informed that the director's request to employ a full-time nurse had been preliminarily approved by the Ministry. Further, in their letter of 2 April 2003, the Azerbaijani authorities informed the CPT that a decision had been taken to employ a doctor at the Isolator.
The delegation was concerned about the poor quality of medical documentation: the register of medical consultations was succinct and incomplete, and there were no individual medical files. Further, confidentiality of medical data was not respected (such data being contained in detainees' administrative files) and consultations normally took place in the presence of a custodial officer.
The delegation was informed that newly arrived inmates underwent an external body check by the duty officer. A medical screening by a doctor took place at the latest on the following day. However, there was no register of medical examinations on arrival; doctors' notes about injuries or health complaints of newly arrived inmates were entered in the inmates' administrative files, and were extremely succinct.
...
The CPT has serious concerns as regards the possibilities for inmates to maintain contacts with the outside world. ... family visits and correspondence had to be expressly authorised by the investigator, prosecutor or court, and detainees had no access to a telephone. ...”