The case originated in an application (no. 13151/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Alla Petrovna Protsenko (“the applicant”), on 11 March 2004.
The applicant was represented by Ms E. Kiryanova, Mr A. Kiryanov and Mr K. Lugantsev, lawyers practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, the former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights, and subsequently by their Representative, Mrs V. Milinchuk.
The applicant complained about the quashing of the final judgment in her favour by way of supervisory review.
On 15 November 2005 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1951 and lives in , the Rostov Region.
On 12 March 2003 the applicant purchased a recreation centre (“the centre”), comprising a group of cottages, from a private company. The centre was situated on a plot of land belonging to a collective farm.
The applicant asked the Registration Office to register the transfer of the title to the centre from the company to her. However, the applicant’s request was dismissed, because the company had not duly registered its title to the centre, and therefore was unable to transfer it to the applicant.
The applicant brought proceedings against the company seeking to obtain acknowledgement of her title to the centre.
On 7 April 2003 the Neklinovskiy District Court of the Rostov Region granted the applicant’s claim.
No ordinary appeal was lodged against the judgment.
On 18 April 2003 the judgment became final and enforceable.
On 23 June 2003 the Registration Office registered the applicant’s title to the centre.
On an unspecified date in 2003 the collective farm lodged an application for supervisory review of the judgment of 7 April 2003. It alleged that the said judgment was unfounded since, even though the collective farm owned the plot on which the centre in question was situated, it had not been invited to take part in the proceedings and its interests had not been taken into consideration by the domestic court.
On 3 December 2003 the  remitted the supervisory-review application for examination on its merits by the Presidium.
On 25 December 2003 the Presidium of the  held a supervisory-review hearing. It held that the first-instance court adopted the judgment with significant violations of substantive and procedural law. In particular, the Presidium pointed out that the first-instance court did not investigate the circumstances of the case, that it failed to identify all the parties to the proceedings, to invite the owner of the land to participate in the proceedings and that it had pronounced judgment by which the rights of the latter were considerably affected. On these grounds the Presidium quashed the judgment of 7 April 2003 and remitted the matter for a fresh examination.
On 25 January 2005 the Neklinovskiy District Court of the Rostov Region dismissed the applicant’s claim, declared the purchase agreement void, annulled the registration of the applicant’s title to the centre and restored the parties to their original position.
On 30 March 2005 the  upheld the above judgment on appeal.
Article 376. Right to apply to a court exercising supervisory review
“1.  Judicial decisions that have become legally binding, with the exception for judicial decisions by the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation, may be appealed against ... to a court exercising supervisory review, by parties to the case and by other persons whose rights or legal interests have been adversely affected by these judicial decisions.
Judicial decisions may be appealed against to a court exercising supervisory review within one year after they became legally binding ...”
Article 387. Grounds for quashing or altering judicial decisions
by way of supervisory review
“Judicial decisions of lower courts may be quashed or altered by way of supervisory review on the grounds of substantial violations of substantive or procedural legal provisions.”
Article 390. Competence of the supervisory-review court
“1.  Having examined the case by way of supervisory review, the court may ...
(2)  quash the judicial decision issued by a court of first, second or supervisory-review instance in whole or in part and remit the matter for a fresh examination; ...
(5)  quash or alter the judicial decision issued by a court of first, second or supervisory-review instance and issue a new judicial decision, without remitting the matter for a fresh examination, if substantive legal provisions have been erroneously applied or interpreted.”