The case originated in an application (no. 12535/06) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Azerbaijani national, Mr Hasan Huseyn oglu Karimov (Həsən Hüseyn oğlu Kərimov – “the applicant”), on 22 March 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr I. Aliyev, a lawyer practising in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Asgarov.
The applicant alleged in particular that, in the electoral constituency where he had run as a candidate in the 2005 parliamentary elections, the organisation and conduct of the election process in several polling stations created exclusively for military voters and detainees had not complied with the requirements of Article 3 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 3 September 2008 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Baku.
The applicant was deputy chairman of the Popular Front Party. He stood in the elections to the National Assembly of 6 November 2005 as a candidate of the opposition bloc Azadliq. He was registered as a candidate by the Constituency Electoral Commission (“the ConEC”) for the singlemandate Sabail Electoral Constituency no. 29.
There were a total of thirty-two polling stations in the constituency, twenty-nine of which were ordinary polling stations. Polling Station no. 30 was set up on the premises of a temporary detention centre so that persons detained there could vote. Polling Stations nos. 31 and 32 were set up shortly before the elections exclusively for military servicemen belonging to two military units stationed within the constituency. Those military units were permanently stationed in the Bayil and Badamdar suburbs of Baku.
According to the minutes of the ConEC meeting of 29 September 2005, a copy of which was submitted by the Government, on that date the ConEC decided, inter alia, to appoint members to the precinct (polling station) electoral commissions (“the PEC”) for Polling Stations nos. 31 and 32. It appears from the minutes that five out of six members of each PEC in question were military officers or personnel of those military units, with the exception of one member nominated to each PEC by an opposition party. In each PEC, three of the five “military members” were nominated by the ruling party. According to the applicant, prior to the proceedings before the Court, he had never been provided with the full text of the minutes of the ConEC meeting of 29 September 2005.
The official election results in the constituency showed that the applicant had received an overall total of 3,454 votes and finished in second place. Of those votes, 3,301 had been cast in Polling Stations nos.  1 to 29 and 153 had been cast in Polling Stations nos. 30, 31 and 32.
The winning candidate (M.) received an overall total of 3,661 votes. Almost half of those, a total of 1,816 votes, had been cast in Polling Stations nos. 30, 31 and 32. Of those, 1,369 votes, which constituted over a third of his total vote count, had been cast in the polling stations (nos. 31 and 32) created exclusively for military voting (779 and 590 votes respectively).
On 8 November 2005 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Central Electoral Commission (“the CEC”) alleging a number of violations of electoral law in his constituency. He requested that the election results in Polling Stations nos. 30, 31 and 32 be invalidated. He complained, inter alia, of the following:
(a)  that the setting up of Polling Stations nos. 31 and 32 exclusively for military voting was in breach of Article 35.5 of the Electoral Code, which required that military servicemen should vote in ordinary polling stations and which stipulated that special military polling stations should be set up only in exceptional circumstances. In this case, there were no such exceptional circumstances and the personnel of each military unit in question should have voted in one or more of the several ordinary polling stations already located within very short walking distances of their barracks;
(b)  that the PECs of Polling Stations nos. 31 and 32, consisting mostly of military officers, had acted as if they were accountable to the Ministry of Defence and not the superior electoral commissions, and that two of the duly appointed PEC members, nominated by the opposition, had been denied access to the polling stations;
(c)  that in the three “closed” polling stations (nos. 30, 31 and 32) the elections had been unfair, and military servicemen and detainees had voted under coercion. It was noted by observers in Polling Stations nos. 31 and 32 that high-ranking military officers had pressured military servicemen to vote for M. Similarly, undue pressure had been put on detainees in Polling Station no. 30. As a result, M. received about as many votes in those three “closed” polling stations as in all twenty-nine of the other (ordinary) polling stations of the constituency (where he had clearly lost to the applicant by a large margin), which allowed him to pull slightly ahead in the overall vote count. The results of the voting in the three “closed” polling stations and their effect on the election clearly showed that the election had been rigged in favour of the candidate supported by the ruling party.
In support of the above complaints, the applicant submitted copies of written observations made by several observers at those polling stations.
On 21 November 2005 the CEC issued a decision invalidating the election results in Polling Stations nos. 20 and 21 of Sabail Electoral Constituency no. 29, having found that the electoral law had been breached in those polling stations. It did not provide any details as to the exact nature of those breaches. That decision did not affect the overall election results in the constituency. The CEC’s decision did not mention the applicant’s complaints concerning Polling Stations nos. 30, 31 and 32.
On 24 November 2005 the applicant lodged an appeal against the CEC decision, reiterating the complaints that he had made before the CEC. During the Court of Appeal hearing, a representative of the CEC argued generally, without addressing any of the applicant’s factual arguments in detail, that the elections in Polling Stations nos. 30, 31 and 32 had been lawful and that there were no grounds for invalidating the votes cast in those polling stations.
On 26 November 2005 the Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s complaint, finding that he had failed to substantiate his allegations. In particular, the judgment read as follows:
“Under Article 14.2 of the CCP, the court may examine, and rely on, only the evidence submitted by the parties.
Despite the requirement of the above-mentioned Article, the claimant, H.H. Karimov, and his counsel, [S.T.], have not been able to produce before the court any reliable evidence in support of the allegations made in the claim.
Under Article 77.1 of the CCP, each party must prove the facts to which it refers as a basis for its claims and objections.
Under Article 217.4 of the same Code, the court may rely in its judgment only on the evidence examined at the court hearing.
Having regard to the above, the court does not find any grounds for upholding the claim and rejects as unsubstantiated [the applicant’s] claim against [the CEC] requesting the invalidation of the election results in Polling Stations nos. 30, 31 and 32 of Sabail Electoral Constituency no. 29 ...”
The applicant appealed to the Supreme Court, reiterating his complaints.
On 30 November 2005 the Supreme Court dismissed the appeal, essentially on the same grounds as the Court of Appeal.
On 1 December 2005 the Constitutional Court confirmed the election results in the majority of the electoral constituencies, including Sabail Electoral Constituency no. 29.
Elections and referenda are organised and carried out by electoral commissions, which are competent to deal with a wide range of issues relating to the electoral process (Article 17). There are three levels of electoral commissions: (a) the Central Electoral Commission (“the CEC”); (b) constituency electoral commissions (“the ConEC”); and (c) precinct (polling station) electoral commissions (“the PEC”) (Article 18.1). A more detailed summary of the system of electoral commissions and their composition and decision-making procedures is provided in Namat Aliyev v. Azerbaijan (no. 18705/06, §§ 31-36, 8 April 2010).
Under Article 35.2, as in force at the material time, polling stations (election precincts) are set up by the relevant ConEC, in agreement with the relevant executive authority and municipality, taking into account the need to provide maximum convenience for voters as well as the local and other circumstances. If a polling station is to be set up immediately prior to a specific election or a referendum, this must be done at least fifty days before election day. The ConEC decision on the setting up of a polling station must indicate the precise boundary of the precinct (if the polling station is located on the territory of a settlement, the precise street names and building numbers must be indicated).
Article 35.5 of the Electoral Code, as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
“35.5.  Military servicemen shall vote in ordinary polling stations. The Central Electoral Commission shall determine the rules on transporting conscripted citizens of the Republic of Azerbaijan to polling stations. A polling station may be set up on the premises of a military unit located outside a settlement only if more than one hour is required to transport the military servicemen to a regular polling station by public transport and if the total number of military servicemen exceeds fifty. In such cases, the polling station shall be set up within the period defined by Article 35.2 of this Code; in exceptional cases, pursuant to a decision of the relevant Constituency Electoral Commission, such a polling station shall be set up by a commander of the military unit at least five days prior to election day. Military personnel serving in frontier units and military servicemen situated in zones of military conflict, as well as military servicemen serving in special-regime conditions shall vote in polling stations established within their respective military units. In polling stations set up in accordance with this Article, it shall be ensured that all members of the Precinct Electoral Commission and superior electoral commissions, registered candidates and their representatives, authorised representatives of political parties and electoral blocs of political parties, and observers have unimpeded access to the electoral commission’s working room and the voting room in accordance with the rules provided in this Code.”
The relevant excerpts from the Code of Good Practice in Electoral Matters (Guidelines and Explanatory Report) (CDL-AD (2002) 23 rev), adopted by the European Commission for Democracy Through Law (“the Venice Commission”) at its 51st and 52nd sessions (5-6 July and 1819 October 2002), read as follows:
“GUIDELINES ON ELECTIONS
...
2. Freedom of voters to express their wishes and action to combat electoral fraud
...
military personnel should vote at their place of residence whenever possible. Otherwise, it is advisable that they be registered to vote at the polling station nearest to their duty station; ...
...
EXPLANATORY REPORT
...
2.2.2. Military voting
Where servicemen cannot return home on polling day, they should preferably be registered at polling stations near their barracks. Details of the servicemen concerned are sent by the local command to the municipal authorities who then enter the names in the electoral list. The one exception to this rule is when the barracks are too far from the nearest polling station. Within the military units, special commissions should be set up to supervise the pre-election period, in order to prevent the risk of superior officers’ imposing or ordering certain political choices.
...”
The relevant excerpts from the report read as follows:
“The Election Code provides that military voting should take place in regular polling stations and should be conducted in special military polling stations set up only 5 days before election day only under exceptional circumstances. However, instead of being regarded as an exception, the creation of special military polling stations appeared to be the practice. The CEC delegated the responsibility for organization and conduct of military voting to the Ministry of Defence, resulting in a non-transparent process. The voting pattern in military polling stations differed significantly from that of ordinary polling stations with respect to turnout figures and the outcome of the vote. ...
Over 71,000 voters voted in the 110 PECs that the EOM [Election Observation Mission] was able to identify as dedicated to military voters. The average turnout in these PECs was approximately 88 per cent, as compared to the approximately 42 per cent turnout overall. In 34 of the military PECs, the winning candidate in that constituency obtained over 80 per cent of the vote. In 23 of the military PECs, there was both turnout higher than 95 per cent and more than 80 per cent of the vote for the winning candidate in that constituency.
...
RECOMMENDATIONS
...
ELECTION ADMINISTRATION
...
The authorities should respect the legal provisions for military voting. Only in the exceptional cases, and when the location of the unit is at a substantial distance from populated areas, should the CEC grant permission to establish a polling station in a military unit. The election administration should retain responsibility for the organization and conduct of military voting.
Where PECs are formed in military units in the exceptional case, members should not be military personnel, conscripts or members of their family. PEC members should be appointed by the same procedure as all other PECs. ...”