The case originated in an application (no. 72269/01) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Aleksandr Georgiyevich Strizhak (“the applicant”), on 10 February 2001.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr Renat Mukhamedzhanov, a lawyer practising in . The latter is also co-chairman of a non-governmental organisation, the Regional Human Rights Centre in Dnipropetrovs’k. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Ms Zoryana Bortnovska and Ms Valeria Lutkovska.
The applicant complained, in particular, under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, that no information was provided to him about the date and time of the hearing on 14 August 2000 in the Dnipropetrovs’k Regional Court and that no public hearing of his claims was held.
The application was allocated to the Second Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
By a decision of 15 June 2004 the Court declared the application partly admissible.
On 1 November 2004 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). This case was assigned to the newly composed Second Section (Rule 52 § 1).
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1938 and currently resides in Dnipropetrovs’k.
On 5 September 1938 the Troika tribunal of the Department of the NKVD of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic in the Dnipropetrovs’k Region (Трійка Управління Народного Комісаріату Внутрішніх Справ УPСР по Дніпропетровській області) resolved that the applicant’s father was a “socially harmful element” after a purported robbery (“соціально шкідливий елемент”), and sentenced him to 5 years’ imprisonment in a correctional labour camp.
The applicant’s father died on 26 March 1976.
On 28 March 1980 the  quashed the resolution of 5 September 1938 of the Troika tribunal upon the protest lodged by the prosecutor of the Dnipropetrovs’k Region. It also terminated the proceedings in the case. In particular it found that:
“... there is no evidence of ... robbery...
... the investigation in the case was conducted in grave violation of the rules of procedural law.
No criminal proceedings in the case were initiated; the [applicant’s father] was not charged; there was no indictment in the case. In the course of the investigation of the case, the elementary rights of the accused were not respected (the right to defend oneself, etc.).
In such circumstances the resolution of the Troika has to be annulled and the proceedings in the case shall be terminated on the basis of an absence of any corpus juris in his actions ...”
On 29 May 1980 the  issued written notice to the applicant that the proceedings in his father’s case had been terminated and that the Troika’s resolution of 5 September 1938 had been annulled.
On 24 February 1997 the Commission on Rehabilitation of the Dnipropetrovs’k Municipal Council requested the President of the  to provide information concerning the conviction of the applicant’s father on 5 September 1938, as the notice of 29 May 1980 contained insufficient information about it. The Commission was also requested to state whether the father’s conviction had been politically motivated.
On 4 March 1997 the Deputy President of the  issued written notice to the Commission on Rehabilitation of the Dnipropetrovs’k Municipal Council that:
“... by a resolution of the Dnipropetrovs’k Regional Court of 28 March 1980, the resolution of the Troika has been annulled and the proceedings in the case terminated due to the lack of proof of guilt.”
From March 1997 until May 2000, the applicant unsuccessfully appealed to the Deputy President of the Dnipropetrovs’k Regional Court and the President of that court, and wrote to the Supreme Court of Ukraine, claiming the untruthfulness of the notice and asking that it be reworded, since it did not correspond to the resolution of Dnipropetrovs’k Regional Court of 28 March 1980 and, accordingly, his father’s memory had been defamed. He also sought initiation of criminal proceedings against the Deputy President of the .
On 8 August 1997 the Deputy President of the Criminal Division of the Supreme Court remitted the applicant’s complaint about the notice of 4 March 1997 to the President of the  for consideration on the merits. He also requested that the notice be rectified and that a public apology be presented to the applicant.
By letters sent to the applicant by the Supreme Court of Ukraine on 26 September and 24 December 1997, the applicant’s claim was rejected as being unfounded. In particular, on 24 December 1997, the Deputy President of the Supreme Court of Ukraine recognised that the applicant’s father had been rehabilitated; the former also confirmed that he had been convicted for political reasons. On 8 September, 10 September 1997 and 22 April 1998, the President of the  refused to annul the written notice or to reword it.
On 1 April 2000 the applicant lodged complaints with the Zhovtnevy District Court of Dnipropetrovs’k to have the refusals of the Deputy President declared unlawful, and to rebut the information contained in the aforementioned notice of 4 March 1997. He also sought compensation for moral damage.
On 2 June 2000 the Zhovtnevy District Court of Dnipropetrovs’k refused to examine the applicant’s claims on the ground that they fell outside the court’s jurisdiction, as they concerned the actions of a judge in the course of the administration of justice.
On 20 July 2000 the Deputy President of the  remitted the applicant’s request to extend the time-limit for lodging his cassation appeal to the Zhovtnevy District Court of Dnipropetrovs’k.
On 27 July 2000 the Zhovtnevy District Court of Dnipropetrovs’k extended the term for lodging an appeal in cassation with the , as the applicant had not been informed until 7 July 2000 about the ruling of 2 June 2000, and would therefore have been unable to comply with the time limit for appeal in cassation.
The Government submitted that on 27 July 2000 the Zhovtnevy District Court notified the applicant that his case would be heard on 14 August 2000 in the . The applicant alleges that he did not receive this notification.
The case file arrived to the  on 7 August 2000.
On 14 August 2000 the , in the absence of the applicant, upheld the decision of 2 June 2000.
The applicant’s complaints, lodged with the President of the Dnipropetrovs’k Regional Court, for the initiation of a supervisory review of the decision of the Dnipropetrovs’k Regional Court, including a complaint about the lack of a public hearing in the consideration of his case before that court, were rejected on 24 October 2000 as being unsubstantiated. The President of the  informed the applicant that the lack of a public hearing before the  had not been an obstacle to that court’s examination of the matter, the applicant having been duly informed about the date and place of the hearing, of which he had been notified on 27 July 2000.
On 4 September 2003 the President of the Dnipropetrovs’k Regional Court of Appeal issued a written notice to the applicant informing him that, on 28 March 1980, the Presidium of the Dnipropetrovs’k Regional Court had quashed the resolution of the Troika of the Department of the NKVD of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic in the Dnipropetrovs’k Region of 5 September 1938 in respect of Mr G.I. Strizhak (the applicant’s father), and that the proceedings in the case were terminated on the basis of an absence of any corpus juris in the actions of his father. It also stated that Mr G.I. Strizhak had been declared to have been sentenced unlawfully, and rehabilitated.
In January 2002 the Commission on Rehabilitation of the Zhovtnevy District Council in Dnipropetrovs’k refused to declare that the applicant was also “rehabilitated” (реабілітованим) in view of the quashing of the conviction of his father. They also rejected his request to issue a special identification card in that respect (посвідчення реабілітованого). In particular, they stated that the applicant had failed to provide information as to the place of his and his mother’s residence after the conviction of his father in 1938.
In March 2002 the applicant instituted proceedings in the Zhovtnevy District Court of Dnipropetrovs’k against the Commission on Rehabilitation, seeking to declare their refusal to declare him rehabilitated unlawful.
On 20 November 2002 the Zhovtnevy District Court of Dnipropetrovs’k rejected these complaints as being unsubstantiated. This judgment was upheld on 10 February 2003 by the Dnipropetrovs’k Regional Court of Appeal, and on 1 April 2004 by the Supreme Court.
The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure relevant to notification arrangements read as follows:
Article 90
Judicial summons
“Judicial summons and notifications shall be served by subpoenas that shall be mailed to persons who take part in the case proceedings, witnesses, experts, representatives of non-governmental organisations and labour groups, to the address mentioned by the party, persons themselves or other participants in the case.
Subpoenas shall be sent together with acknowledgement of receipt or through deliverymen.
Exceptionally, the notification may be given to the party in person or its representative on the basis of their consent to transfer it to other interested persons.”
Article 93
Judicial notifications
“The judicial notifications shall be sent to persons who take part in the proceedings in the case, with regard to procedural actions that shall be undertaken, in which the participation of these persons is not deemed necessary.
The notification shall include the name and address of the court, the name of the case, reference to the procedural action to be undertaken, its place, date and time.”
Other relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure read as follows:
Article 297
Notification of the hearing of the case upon appeal in cassation, cassation petition
“Persons who introduce appeals in cassation directly with the court, shall be informed about the date of the hearing orally and, if their cases were sent by mail, by written notice.
... The list of cases, scheduled for a hearing in cassation shall be made public not later than a day before the hearing takes place.”
Article 305
Consequences of the failure of participants to appear before the court at the hearing of the case
“... In the event of the failure of any of the participants to appear before the court because they have not been duly notified about the date and time of the hearing, the court shall adjourn the hearing in the case.
The participants’ failure to appear before the court..., if they were duly informed about the date and time of the hearing, shall not be an obstacle for the examination of the case. However, should the court find that the reasons for the failure to appear are serious, it may decide to adjourn the hearing...”
The relevant extracts from the instruction as approved by Order no. 22/5 read as follows:
“4.1.  ... The notices and documents shall be issued by the registry of the court during the whole working day.
The court must have special rooms and adequate facilities for persons to examine the case files and prepare motions, appeals, etc.
12.  The secretary of the hearing shall draw up the list of cases designated for examination on a particular date beforehand and record these cases in the register of the hearings. The list of cases is to be posted on a special board on the date of the hearing.
14.  The secretary of the hearing concerned shall verify whether all the invited persons have appeared before the court, who is absent and what are the reasons for their absence before the hearing begins. The secretary shall report this to the court.
15.  The participants in the hearing, which is heard by the court of cassation, and other interested persons shall be informed about the time and place of the hearing by the court of first instance.
The panel’s secretary shall verify whether the interested persons were informed by the first instance court of the time and place of the hearing, and whether the copies of appeals or notifications were sent out.”