The case originated in two applications (nos. 19813/16 and 50781/16) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Russian nationals, Mr Ilya Viktorovich Vakhromeyev and Mr Aleksey Aleksandrovich Petrov (“the applicants”), on 29 March and 16 August 2016 respectively.
The first applicant was represented by Mr A. Romanov, a lawyer practising in Domodedovo, Moscow Region. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by, Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 9 February 2018 the Government were given notice of the complaints under Articles 6 §§ 1 and 3 (d) of the Convention and the remainder of the applications was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government objected to the examination of the applications by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1969 and lives in Kovrov, Vladimir Region.
On 8 December 2014 the applicant was involved in a road traffic accident. According to the ensuing investigation, the applicant’s negligent driving caused a collision between two other vehicles. As a result, one of the drivers was injured.
On an unspecified date the Kameshkovo District Court of Vladimir Region started the examination of the applicant’s case.
On 23 July 2015 the District Court allowed an application by the applicant to have B. summoned to testify on his behalf but refused to summon V., M. and P. B. was a paramedic who had arrived at the scene of the accident to provide medical assistance to an injured person. M. and P. were attesting witnesses who had been present when the police officers had inspected the scene of the accident and prepared an administrative-offence report. V. was the applicant’s ten-year old son, who had been in the applicant’s car when the accident had taken place. The court fixed the hearing of the case for 14 August 2015.
On 13 August 2015 B. informed the District Court by telephone that he was on sick leave and was unable to appear on 14 August 2015.
On 14 September 2015 the Court adjourned the hearing and fixed a new one for 8 September 2015 in order to obtain the attendance of a number of witnesses, including B.
On 8 September 2015 the Kameshkovo District Court of Vladimir Region found the applicant guilty of a violation of the rules of the road resulting in serious injuries and ordered him to pay a fine in the amount of 10,000 Russian roubles (RUB). The court heard evidence from the applicant, two other drivers involved in the road traffic accident, two police officers who had inspected the scene of the accident and had conducted an investigation; an eyewitness, L.B., failed to appear in court. According to the transcript of the hearing, the District Court did not discuss the reasons for B.’s absence. The applicant appealed.
On 11 November 2015 the Vladimir Regional Court upheld the judgment of 11 September 2015 on appeal.
On 18 December 2015 traffic police officers stopped the applicant’s car. The applicant refused to take a breathalyser test. Police Officer A.B. prepared an administrative-offence report. L. and R. signed it as attesting witnesses.
On 29 February 2016 the justice of the peace of judicial circuit no. 2 of the Volsk district of Saratov Region found the applicant guilty as charged and ordered him to pay a fine in the amount of RUB 30,000 and suspended his driving licence for a year and 10 months. The justice of the peace heard submissions from the applicant, his counsel and A.B. and examined the administrative-offence report. L. and R., who were attesting witnesses, failed to appear and the justice of the peace relied on their written statements. The applicant appealed.
On 23 May 2016 the Volsk District Court of Saratov Region upheld the judgment of 29 February 2016 on appeal. The court heard evidence from L., who confirmed that he had signed the administrative report stating that the applicant had refused to take a breathalyser test. He further submitted that R. had not been present at the time the administrative-offence report had been prepared. The applicant and his counsel were present. They made submissions to the court and put questions to the witness.