The case originated in an application (no. 53753/12) against the Republic of Finland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Finnish national, Mr Timo Veikko Kiiveri (“the applicant”), on 22 August 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr Jaakko Tuutti, a lawyer practising in Tampere. The Finnish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Arto Kosonen of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the ne bis in idem principle had been violated in his case.
On 20 December 2013 the complaint concerning the ne bis in idem principle was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The applicant was born in 1960 and lives in Tampere.
The applicant owns 90% of the shares in a limited liability company which is active in the construction and decoration business. The applicant is the managing director and a member of the board of directors of the company.
In 2005 the tax authorities carried out a tax inspection of the company and concluded that it had failed to declare and pay a considerable amount of taxes and that it had, inter alia, paid salaries off the books and undertaken other fraudulent activity.
On 8 September 2008 the tax authorities imposed additional income tax and also tax surcharges (veronkorotus, skatteförhöjning) both on the company and on the applicant for the tax years 2002, 2003, 2005 and 2006. The applicant apparently did not appeal against those decisions and the bailiff seized the imposed sums. The period set for appeal in tax matters is five years counted from the beginning of the calendar year following the year when the initial taxation decision was taken. Therefore the taxation concerning the tax years 2002, 2003 and 2005 became final on 31 December 2008, 31 December 2009, and 31 December 2011 respectively. The period for appeal for the tax year 2006 elapsed on 31 December 2012.
In June 2007 the police started a criminal investigation into the applicant’s activities. On 6 March 2009 the prosecutor brought charges against the applicant for accounting offence (kirjanpitorikos, bokföringsbrott) and aggravated tax fraud (törkeä veropetos, grovt skattebedrägeri) on two counts. The first count concerned the tax years from 2000 to 2006 and the applicant’s activities as the managing director and a member of the board of directors of the company. The applicant was accused of aggravated tax fraud as he had deducted fabricated receipts, failed to declare the company’s real income, paid salaries off the books and, consequently, the tax imposed on the company had been too low. The second count concerned the tax years from 2000 to 2003 and from 2005 to 2006. The applicant was accused of aggravated tax fraud as he had failed to declare his own income and, consequently, the tax imposed on him had been too low. The tax authorities joined the charges and presented a compensation claim totalling approximately the amount of avoided taxes.
On 9 September 2009 the District Court of Tampere (käräjäoikeus, tingsrätten) convicted the applicant of two counts of aggravated tax fraud as charged and of accounting offence. He was sentenced to imprisonment for three years and ordered to pay the tax authorities 685,080.66 euros (EUR) plus interest as compensation. It was noted that the sums already seized from the applicant in the administrative proceedings could be deducted from the compensation. In addition, he was banned from undertaking business activities for six years.
By letter dated 9 October 2009 the applicant appealed to the Court of Appeal of Turku (hovioikeus, hovrätten), requesting that the District Court’s judgment be quashed and the charges dismissed. He relied also on the principle of ne bis in idem and the Court’s case-law in that respect.
On 15 September 2010 the Court of Appeal, after having held an oral hearing, upheld the judgment for the most part, but considered in part that the accounting offence was aggravated and ordered the applicant to pay EUR 20,000 more compensation to the State. The court considered that, as long as the time-limit for appeal had not elapsed with regard to the tax years 2003, 2005 and 2006 at the moment of bringing the charges against the applicant in 2009, there was no issue of ne bis in idem. Furthermore, it considered that, as concerned the tax year 2002, the time-limit for appeal had elapsed on 31 December 2008 and thus the taxation had become final before the charges were brought against the applicant. However, as there still existed another kind of tax appeal which the applicant could have used, the Court of Appeal finally considered that the ne bis in idem principle did not prevent the examination of the charges against the applicant also concerning the tax year 2002.
By letter dated 12 October 2010 the applicant appealed to the Supreme Court (korkein oikeus, högsta domstolen), reiterating the grounds of appeal already presented before the Court of Appeal. He also requested an interim order staying the execution of the lower court’s judgment.
On 27 February 2012 the Supreme Court dismissed, without examining the merits, that part of the criminal conviction that concerned the tax year 2002 as it considered that the fact that the tax surcharges imposed on the applicant had become final in 2008, that is, before the charges had been brought against the applicant in March 2009, prevented the examination of the matter. Otherwise the lower court’s judgment was upheld. The court considered that as long as the time-limit for appeal had not elapsed with regard to the other tax years at the moment when the charges were brought against the applicant, there was no issue of ne bis in idem. As a part of the applicant’s conviction was dismissed without examining the merits, his sentence was accordingly also lowered to imprisonment for 2 years and 10 months.
On 21 August 2012 the applicant lodged an extraordinary appeal with the Supreme Court, requesting the reopening of the case on the basis of incorrect application of the law and the prohibition on self-incrimination.
Apparently in March 2013 this extraordinary appeal was refused by the Supreme Court.
Section 57, subsection 1, of the Tax Assessment Procedure Act (laki verotusmenettelystä, lagen om beskattningsförfarande, Act no. 1558/1995, as amended by Act no. 1079/2005) provides that if a person has failed to make the required tax returns or has given incomplete, misleading or false information to the tax authorities and tax has therefore been incompletely or partially levied, the taxpayer shall be ordered to pay unpaid taxes together with additional tax and a tax surcharge.
According to Chapter 29, sections 1 and 2, of the Penal Code (rikoslaki, strafflagen, as amended by Acts no. 1228/1997 and no. 769/1990), a person who (1) gives a tax authority false information on a fact that influences the assessment of tax, (2) files a tax return concealing a fact that influences the assessment of tax, (3) for the purpose of avoiding tax, fails to observe a duty pertaining to taxation, influencing the assessment of tax, or (4) acts otherwise fraudulently and thereby causes or attempts to cause a tax not to be assessed, or too low a tax to be assessed or a tax to be unduly refunded, shall be sentenced for tax fraud to a fine or to imprisonment for a period of up to two years. If by the tax fraud (1) considerable financial benefit is sought or (2) the offence is committed in a particularly methodical manner and the tax fraud is aggravated when assessed as a whole, the offender shall be sentenced for aggravated tax fraud to imprisonment for a period between four months and four years.
The Supreme Court has taken a stand on the ne bis in idem principle in its precedent case KKO 2010:46 which concerned tax surcharges and aggravated tax fraud. In that case it found, inter alia, that even though a final judgment in a taxation case, in which tax surcharges had been imposed, prevented criminal charges being brought about the same matter, such preventive effect could not be applied to pending cases (lis pendens) crossing from administrative proceedings to criminal proceedings or vice versa. However, in July 2013 the Supreme Court reversed its line of interpretation, finding that charges for tax fraud could no longer be brought if there was already a decision to order or not to order tax surcharges in the same matter (KKO 2013:59).
The Act on Tax Surcharges and Customs Duty Surcharges Imposed by a Separate Decision (laki erillisellä päätöksellä määrättävästä veron- tai tullinkorotuksesta, lagen om skatteförhöjning och tullhöjning som påförs genom ett särskilt beslut, Act no. 781/2013) entered into force on 1 December 2013. According to the Act, the tax authorities can, when making a tax decision, assess whether to impose a tax surcharge or to report the matter to the police. The tax authorities can decide not to impose a tax surcharge. If they have not reported the matter to the police, a tax surcharge can be imposed by a separate decision by the end of the calendar year following the actual tax decision. If the tax authorities have imposed tax surcharges, they can no longer report the same matter to the police unless, after imposing the tax surcharges, they have received evidence of new or recently revealed facts. If the tax authorities have reported the matter to the police, tax surcharges can, as a rule, no longer be imposed. The purpose of the Act is thus to ensure that a tax or a customs duty matter is processed and possibly punished in only one set of proceedings. The Act does not, however, contain any transitional provisions extending its scope retroactively.