The case originated in an application (no. 9765/10) against the Federal Republic of Germany lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a German national, Mr Klaus Günter Annen (“the applicant”), on 8 February 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr L. Eck, a lawyer practising in Passau. The German Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Mr H.J. Behrens and Ms K. Behr, of the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection.
The applicant alleged that an injunction ordering him to desist from addressing passers-by in the immediate vicinity of a medical practice and from labelling the abortions performed by the respective doctor unlawful had violated his freedom of expression under Article 10 of the Convention.
On 3 January 2017 the complaint concerning Article 10 of the Convention was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1951 and lives in Weinheim. He is a campaigner against abortion and operates an anti-abortion website.
On 12 and 13 April 2005 the applicant distributed leaflets in the vicinity of the medical practice of Dr St., who performed abortions there. The leaflets stated, inter alia, that the abortions performed by Dr St. in his practice, for which he gave the address, were unlawful according to the case-law of the Federal Constitutional Court. In addition the leaflet contained the following statements:
“According to international criminal law: Aggravated murder is the intentional ‘bringing-to-death’ of an innocent human being!” (Sinngemӓβ aus den internationalen Strafgesetzen: Mord ist das vorsӓtzliche “Zu-Tode-Bringen” eines unschuldigen Menschen!)
“The murder of human beings in Auschwitz was unlawful, but the morally degraded NS State allowed the murder of innocent people and did not make it subject to criminal liability.” (Die Ermordung der Menschen in Auschwitz war rechtswidrig, aber der moralisch verkommene NS-Staat hatte den Mord an den unschuldigen Menschen erlaubt und nicht unter Strafe gestellt.)
The applicant also addressed passers-by and the physician’s presumed patients and attempted to engage with them in conversations about abortion.
Dr St. lodged an application for a civil injunction against the applicant and on 25 October 2005 the Mannheim Regional Court granted the requested injunction. The court ordered the applicant to desist from speaking to passers-by in the immediate vicinity of the medical practice and labelling the abortions performed by the plaintiff unlawful with the objective of irritating female patients and preventing them from visiting Dr St.’s practice.
On 24 February 2007 the Karlsruhe Court of Appeal upheld the decision and slightly modified the wording specifying the geographical area concerned by the injunction. It also refused to grant leave to appeal on points of law.
The Regional Court as well as the Court of Appeal both referred to a previous decision of the Federal Court of Justice in which it had confirmed a civil injunction against similar conduct by the applicant (see paragraph 13 below). The courts held that in the case at issue there were no factual or legal differences justifying deviating from the case-law of the Federal Court of Justice. In so far that the doctor in the present case was slightly more well-known than the doctor in the original case, the Court of Appeal held that this was of minor relevance. The fact that Dr St. had appeared as an expert before the German Parliament many years previously did not have any substantial effects on Dr St’s public profile at that time. Moreover, the involvement of Dr St. in different legal disputes was irrelevant, as trying to enforce his rights in the appropriate legal procedure could not redound to Dr St.’s disadvantage. In sum, the applicant had vilified the noncriminal professional activities of Dr St. by implying that he committed criminal acts and interfered with the relationship of trust between doctor and patient, which deserved special protection against the interventions of others. The applicant had therefore severely interfered with Dr St.’s personality rights. This interference was not justified by the applicant’s freedom of expression in view of the massive “pillory effect” the applicant had created by singling out the plaintiff and criticising him in a harsh way in the immediate vicinity of his practice.
On 29 May 2007 the Federal Court of Justice refused a request by the applicant for legal aid on the grounds that the applicant’s intended appeal on points of law lacked sufficient prospect of success. On 20 July 2009 the Federal Constitutional Court refused to admit the applicant’s complaint for adjudication for being inadmissible, without providing reasons (no. 1 BvR 1670/07).
The relevant provisions of the German Basic Law (Grundgesetz), Criminal Code (Strafgesetzbuch) and Civil Code (Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch) have been set out in the Court’s judgment in Annen (no. 2) (no. 3682/10, §§ 13 – 18, 20 September 2018).
In addition, on 7 December 2004 the Federal Court of Justice confirmed an injunction, ordering the applicant to desist from addressing patients and passers-by in a specified area in front of a medical practice and from pointing out that in the practice abortions were performed (no. VI ZR 308/03). It pointed out that the doctor’s activities were legal and enjoyed protection under his constitutional right to freedom to exercise his profession. The court emphasised the important role which the legislature had attributed to gynaecologists both in the protection of unborn life and in the protection of the health of the women concerned. It was essential that the relationship of trust between the doctor and his patients was not disturbed by the intrusion of external parties. The applicant’s actions had adversely affected the plaintiff’s activities in an unacceptable way and had singled him out without any reason. Therefore, the court concluded that, under the circumstances of this particular case, the physician’s personality rights prevailed over the applicant’s freedom of expression. A constitutional complaint against the judgment of the Federal Court of Justice was not admitted for adjudication.