The case originated in an application (no. 68909/13) against the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a British national, Mr Daniel Faulkner (“the applicant”), on 23 October 2013.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Chivers Solicitors, a firm of solicitors based in Bingley. The United Kingdom Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Macmillan, of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the delay from March 2008 until January 2009 in holding a Parole Board hearing to review the lawfulness of his detention rendered his detention during that period arbitrary and thus unlawful under Article 5 § 1 (a) of the Convention.
On 26 May 2015 the complaint under Article 5 § 1 was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1982 and is detained in HM Prison Dovegate, Uttoxeter.
On 3 August 2001 the applicant was sentenced by the Crown Court to custody for life for causing grievous bodily harm. The minimum period (“tariff”) was set at two years, eight and a half months, less time spent on remand. The tariff expired on 18 April 2004 and he became eligible for parole.
The Parole Board subsequently examined his case in order to review whether his detention remained necessary for the protection of the public. On 26 May 2005 it decided not to direct his release but recommended that he be transferred to open conditions. That recommendation was rejected by the Secretary of State.
A second recommendation to the same effect was made, following the applicant’s second Parole Board review on 31 January 2007 and rejected by the Secretary of State on 23 May 2007. At the conclusion of its statement of reasons for rejecting the Board’s recommendation, the National Offender Management Service (“NOMS”) wrote:
“The Secretary of State has therefore decided that you should remain in closed conditions and your next review will conclude in January 2008.”
The accompanying letter stated:
“It has been decided that your case will next be referred to the Parole Board for a provisional hearing to take place in JANUARY 2008.
...
You will be notified by the Parole Board nearer the time about the exact date of that hearing.
At your next review the Parole Board will consider your suitability for release by way of a paper panel. This consideration will take place approximately 12 weeks prior to your provisional hearing [in January 2008]. If you are not content with the paper panel’s decision you may request that the case proceeds to the arranged oral hearing.”
The case was referred to the Parole Board on 21 December 2007. On 6 May 2008 the applicant and the Parole Board were sent relevant reports as required by the applicable rules. On 16 May 2008 the Parole Board gave case-management directions requiring additional reports. On 8 October 2008 the Parole Board received the further reports requested. The hearing took place on 8 January 2009. On 23 January 2009 the Parole Board directed the applicant’s release. He was released from prison four days later.
Meanwhile, in autumn 2008, the applicant commenced judicial review proceedings against the Secretary of State and the Parole Board seeking damages for the delay in holding the hearing. He relied on Article 5 § 4 of the Convention. He was granted permission to bring proceedings on 13 October 2008.
On 5 June 2009 the claim was dismissed by the High Court. Leave to appeal was granted by the Court of Appeal on 27 October 2009.
On 14 December 2010 the Court of Appeal handed down its judgment. After carefully reviewing the facts and the individual periods of delay encountered, it concluded that there had been a delay of ten months, from March 2008 to January 2009, in the holding of the Parole Board hearing which was unjustified and for which the Secretary of State was responsible. This delay had prevented the applicant from having the lawfulness of his continued detention decided in accordance with Article 5 § 4. On the question of damages, the court was satisfied that the applicant had shown, on a balance of probabilities, that he would have been released had the review taken place in March 2008. Damages on the basis of a loss of liberty were therefore appropriate.
In its judgment of 29 March 2011 on the amount of damages to be awarded, the court considered a number of just satisfaction awards in cases before this Court in which breaches of Article 5 § 4 had been found. It distinguished between cases where the delay had merely led to feelings of frustration and those where it had been established that, but for the delay in the holding of the hearing, the applicant would have been released earlier. It awarded the sum of 10,000 pounds sterling (“GBP”) by way of compensation for the loss of ten months’ conditional liberty.
The applicant sought leave to appeal to the Supreme Court on the ground that the award was inadequate. The Parole Board sought leave to appeal on the ground that the award was excessive. Leave was granted to both parties, and the applicant was in addition given permission to argue that his detention after March 2008 constituted false imprisonment at common law or a violation of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention. In respect of his latter argument, he relied on this Court’s findings in James, Wells and Lee v. the United Kingdom, nos. 25119/09, 57715/09 and 57877/09, 18 September 2012.
In its judgment of 1 May 2013 the Supreme Court unanimously rejected the applicant’s appeal and allowed the appeal of the Parole Board, reducing the damages award to GBP 6,500.
As regards the alleged violation of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention, Lord Reed, giving the leading opinion, observed that Article 5 § 4 provided a procedural entitlement designed to ensure that persons were not detained in violation of their rights under Article 5 § 1. However, he added, a violation of Article 5 § 4 did not necessarily result in a violation of Article 5 § 1. He considered this Court’s judgment in James, Wells and Lee, cited above, not to be directly relevant to the applicant’s case since that judgment concerned lack of access to rehabilitation courses and the just satisfaction awards made were for the feelings of distress and frustration resulting from continued detention without access to courses, and not for loss of liberty. Lord Reed noted that the delay in the applicant’s case appeared to have been the result of errors by administrative staff, “of a kind which occur from time to time in any system which is vulnerable to human error”. While it was extremely unfortunate that the errors had occurred and had resulted in the prolongation of the applicant’s detention, they were not of such a character, and the delay was not of such a degree, as to warrant the conclusion that there had been a breach of Article 5 § 1.
On the matter of damages for the violation of Article 5 § 4 of the Convention, Lord Reed reviewed relevant case-law of this Court where a violation of Article 5 §§ 1, 3 or 4 had been found, focusing in particular on cases concerning a delay in holding a hearing intended to address the question whether a convicted prisoner should be released. He considered that no clear guidance could be derived from the cases since none concerned awards for loss of liberty resulting from a violation of the speedy decision guarantee in Article 5 § 4. While, he said, an appellate court would not interfere with an award of damages simply because it would have awarded a different figure if it had tried the case at first instance, in the applicant’s appeal the court was being invited to give guidance as to the appropriate level of awards in cases of this character. For that purpose, the court had undertaken a fuller analysis of the case-law of this Court than the Court of Appeal. Lord Reed concluded:
“87.  ... In the light of that analysis, and applying the general approach which I have described ..., it appears to me that an award in the region of £6,500 would adequately compensate Mr Faulkner for his delayed release, bearing in mind the conditional and precarious nature of the liberty foregone. That amount falls well short of the award of £10,000 made by the Court of Appeal. In the circumstances, it is in my view appropriate for this court to allow the Board’s appeal and to reduce the award accordingly.”
A prisoner sentenced to custody for life is entitled to be released on parole after the expiry of his tariff if the Parole Board, being satisfied that it is no longer necessary for the protection of the public that he should be detained in prison, directs his release. If the Board gives such a direction, then the Secretary of State is required to release him (see section 28 of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997). A prisoner is entitled to request the Secretary of State to refer his case to the Parole Board for a review every two years (section 28(7) of the 1997 Act).
On 10 December 2014 the Supreme Court handed down its judgment in Kaiyam and Others v. Secretary of State ([2014] UKSC 66), in which it considered this Court’s judgment in James, Wells and Lee. It accepted that the State was under a duty to provide an opportunity reasonable in all the circumstances for a prisoner serving an indeterminate sentence for the public protection to rehabilitate himself and to demonstrate that he no longer presented an unacceptable danger to the public. However, it did not consider that this duty could be brought within the express language of either Article 5 § 1 (a) or Article 5 § 4. Instead, the court concluded that the duty should be implied as an “ancillary duty”, not affecting the lawfulness of the detention, in the overall scheme of Article 5 (for more details, see Kaiyam and Others v. the United Kingdom (dec.), nos. 28160/15, 28103/15 and 28443/15, 12 January 2016).