The case was referred to the Court by the Government of the  ("the Government") on 10 June 1994, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 para. 1 and Article 47 (art. 32-1, art. 47) of the Convention. It originated in an application (no. 17506/90) against  lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission") under Article 25 (art. 25) by a Finnish citizen, Mr Erkki Kerojärvi, on 25 August 1990.
The Government’s application referred to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48). The object of the application was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) of the Convention.
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 35 para. 3 (d) of Rules of Court B, the applicant stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings and designated the lawyer who would represent him (Rule 31).
The Chamber to be constituted included ex officio Mr R. Pekkanen, the elected judge of Finnish nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr R. Ryssdal, the President of the Court (Rule 21 para. 3 (b)). On 25 June 1994, in the presence of the Registrar, the President drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr Thór Vilhjálmsson, Mr I. Foighel, Mr F. Bigi, Sir John Freeland, Mr A.B. Baka, Mr L. Wildhaber and Mr K. Jungwiert (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 para. 4) (art. 43). Subsequently, Mr P. Kuris, substitute judge, replaced Mr Bigi, who was unable to take part in the further consideration of the case (Rules 22 para. 1 and 24 para. 1).
As President of the Chamber (Rule 21 para. 5), Mr Ryssdal, acting through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Government, the applicant’s lawyer and the Delegate of the Commission on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 39 para. 1 and 40). Pursuant to the order made in consequence on 6 July 1994, the Registrar received both the applicant’s and the Government’s memorial on 2 November 1994. On 12 December 1994 the Delegate of the Commission submitted a memorial in reply. Subsequently, Mr R. Bernhardt, Vice-President of the Court, replaced Mr Ryssdal, who was unable to take part in the further consideration of the case (Rule 21 para. 5, second sub-paragraph).
On various dates between 25 January and 20 February 1995, the Government, the Commission and the applicant produced to the Court a number of documents and other particulars, as requested by the Registrar on the President’s instructions.
In accordance with the President’s decision, the hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, , on 22 February 1995. The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:
(a) for the Government
b) for the Commission
(c) for the applicant
The Court heard addresses by Mr Pellonpää, Mr Rotkirch, Mr Kosonen and Mr Fredman, and also replies to questions put by the Court and by two of its members.
Mr Erkki Kerojärvi, a Finnish citizen born in 1924, is retired and lives in .
On 5 September 1985 the State Office for Accident Compensation (tapaturmavirasto, olycksfallsverket - "the Compensation Office") gave its decision on a request by the applicant for compensation under the 1948 Military Injuries Act (sotilasvammalaki, lag om skada, ådragen i militärtjänst, 28.5.1948/404 - "the 1948 Act") from the Finnish State in respect of certain conditions which he claimed resulted from his service in the wars between 1939 and 1945 between  and the Soviet Union. The Compensation Office accepted that a shrapnel wound to the applicant’s back was a military injury but rejected his claims in respect of inguinal hernia, chronic prostatitis, acute tonsillitis and a number of other conditions. Considering that the degree of his disability was less than ten per cent, the minimum required to qualify for a life annuity (elinkorko, livränta) under section 8 of the 1948 Act (see paragraph 19 below), the Compensation Office refused to grant him such a benefit.
On appeal, the  (vakuutusoikeus, försäkringsdomstolen) recognised that the applicant in addition suffered from tonsillitis entitling him in principle to compensation but found that the degree of his disability nevertheless remained less than ten per cent. On 4 September 1986 it therefore dismissed the applicant’s request for compensation. This decision was upheld by the Supreme Court on 15 December 1987.
In January 1988 the applicant asked the Compensation Office to adjust the degree of his disability. He cited a medical report of 3 June 1987 to establish that he suffered from the above-mentioned conditions. In May 1988 he submitted a further report.
The Compensation Office rejected the request on 23 August 1988 on the ground that the applicant had failed to show a fundamental change in the circumstances on the basis of which his disability had initially been assessed.
The applicant appealed from that decision to the . He adduced additional evidence, including the results of an X-ray examination and laboratory tests of 17 April 1989, and renewed his previous request for compensation in so far as it had been refused in the proceedings referred to in paragraph 7 above.
In the course of the proceedings the  obtained an opinion from the Compensation Office, dated 24 October 1988, which, without giving reasons, recommended the rejection of the appeal. It also received copies of a master file concerning the applicant, and a medical file containing a record of his war-time medical examinations, from the Headquarters of the Military District of Western Uusimaa (Länsi-Uudenmaan sotilaspiirin esikunta, staben för Västra Nylands militärdistrikt). These documents showed, inter alia, that in 1940 the applicant had been treated in a military hospital for inguinal hernia and that in 1943 he had undergone an operation for this condition.
The  did not communicate copies of the opinion or files to the applicant. They were, however, included in the Insurance Court’s case file, which was available to the applicant throughout the proceedings in that court (section 19 of the 1951 Act on the Access to Public Documents - laki yleisten asiakirjain julkisuudesta, lagen om allmänna handlingars offentlighet, 9.2.1951/83).
In a decision of 19 October 1989 the  rejected the applicant’s appeal on the assessment of the degree of his disability, finding that his shrapnel injuries and acute tonsillitis still represented a disability of less than ten per cent. It also rejected his claim for compensation on the ground that it had been decided with legal force (see paragraph 21 below) by the Supreme Court’s judgment of 15 December 1987 (see paragraph 7 above). The decision stated that the  had obtained the above-mentioned opinion from the Compensation Office and files from the Headquarters of the Military District. It further indicated that the  would return the master file and the file pertaining to the applicant’s war-time medical examinations to the Headquarters and that an appeal could be lodged with the Supreme Court "if the matter [concerned] entitlement to compensation".
On 31 December 1989 the applicant appealed to the Supreme Court, challenging the Insurance Court’s ruling that a final decision on his compensation claim had been given by the Supreme Court on 15 December 1987. He requested rehabilitation treatment on an annual basis and the reimbursement of certain subsistence expenses. He claimed that his war injuries were permanent. His appeal did not mention that the documents obtained by the  had not been communicated to him.
The Insurance Court transmitted the case file to the Supreme Court; it included the Compensation Office’s opinion but not the master and medical files, which had been returned to the Headquarters of the Military District (see paragraph 11 above). According to the Government, copies of the master file had been included in the case file relating to the first set of proceedings in the Supreme Court. The Government further stated that, in the second set of proceedings, the  and the Supreme Court had based their decisions at least in part on the master and medical files.
The Agent of the Government stated at the public hearing on 22 February 1995 that at the material time it was consistent practice of the  and the Supreme Court not to communicate documents of the kind in question even if they had been obtained at the court’s own request and irrespective of whether the issue at stake was one of admissibility or merits.
On 7 June 1990 the Supreme Court upheld the Insurance Court’s decision of 19 October 1989. The Supreme Court’s decision stated:
"The appeal to the Supreme Court Kerojärvi has requested compensation for [certain alleged illnesses]. The finding of the Supreme Court The decision of the  is not varied.
..."
The applicant was not legally represented either in the  or in the Supreme Court. At no stage of the proceedings did he consult the case file.
A compensation scheme, entirely funded by the , for injury and illness suffered as a result of military service was set up under the 1948 Act. Pursuant to section 1 of the 1956 Act on Extended Application of the Military Injuries Act (laki sotilasvammalain soveltamisalan laajentamisesta, lag angående utvidgad tillämpning av lagen om skada, ådragen i militärtjänst, 15.6.1956/390) the 1948 Act applies to, among others, Finnish soldiers wounded in the wars between Finland and the Soviet Union from 1939 to 1945.
The general rule in section 1 (1) of the 1948 Act provides that compensation under the Act "shall be granted" to persons for injury or illness suffered by them as a result of service, inter alia, as conscripts. Detailed rules on the kind of injury and illness which may be regarded as caused by military service for the purpose of compensation under the Act are contained in sections 2 and 3.
Section 8 (1) in "Chapter 2. On Compensation" (Korvaukset, Ersättingar) reads:
"A wounded or ill person whose degree of disability is at least ten per cent shall be entitled to a life annuity. The figure representing the degree of disability corresponds to the extent to which the injury or illness suffered reduces the ability of the person concerned to support himself or herself."
Section 29 (2), as applicable at the material time, provided that an appeal against a decision by the  on entitlement to compensation under the 1948 Act lay to the Supreme Court. A decision by the  was however to be final in certain matters.
The Supreme Court has interpreted the above provision to mean that the person concerned can appeal on entitlement to compensation but not on the degree of disability, so that an appeal on the latter is inadmissible.
According to a general principle of law in , a decision by the Supreme Court rejecting, in full or in part, a claim by an individual to be granted a benefit from a public authority has legal force (lainvoima, laga kraft), in the sense that it may not be the subject of a further appeal. However, it is not res judicata (oikeusvoima, rättskraft). The claimant may at any time, by means of a fresh application, request the competent authority to reconsider the claim (see, inter alia, Jaakko Uotila, Seppo Laakso, Teuvo Pohjolainen, Jarmo Vuorinen, pp. 186-89 in Yleishallinto-oikeus pääpiirteittäin,  1989). This principle also applies to a request for compensation under the 1948 Act.
Pursuant to the new version of section 29 (2), as amended with effect from 1 January 1994 (by Act no. 1225/93), decisions taken by the  under the Act are final. However, subject to certain strict conditions, section 25 (also amended) provides for reopening of proceedings in the Compensation Office or in the .
Where appropriate, the provisions governing the proceedings in the ordinary courts may be applied to those in the  (section 9 (4) of the  Act - laki vakuutusoikeudesta, lag om försäkringsdomstolen, 17.1.1958/14).
Under Article 6 of chapter 26 of the Code of Judicial Procedure (oikeudenkäymiskaari, rättegångsbalken), if the Court of Appeal (hovioikeus, hovrätten) has obtained of its own motion an opinion or other written statement which may have an impact on its determination of the case, the Court of Appeal must, unless it is clearly unnecessary, request the parties concerned to comment thereon in writing.
In his application (no. 17506/90) of 25 August 1990 to the Commission the applicant made a number of complaints concerning the examination of his claim for recognition of a higher degree of disability. He alleged violations of Article 6 para. 1 and Article 14 (art. 6-1, art. 14) of the Convention. 25.  On 7 April 1993 the Commission declared admissible the complaint under Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) relating to the non-communication of documents in the proceedings before the Supreme Court and declared the remainder of his application inadmissible. In its report of 11 January 1994 (Article 31) (art. 31), the Commission expressed the opinion that there had been a violation of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) (unanimously). The full text of the Commission’s opinion is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.
At the hearing on 22 February 1995 the Government invited the Court to hold, as requested in their memorial, that there had been no violation of the Convention in the present case.
On the same occasion the applicant maintained his requests to the Court set out in his memorial, namely (1) to find that the proceedings in the Supreme Court gave rise to a violation of his right to a fair trial as guaranteed by Article 6 (art. 6) of the Convention; and (2) to award him just satisfaction under Article 50 (art. 50).