The case originated in an application (no. 60802/09) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Azerbaijani national, Mr Faig Mammadov (“the applicant”), on 9 November 2009.
The applicant was represented by Ms S. Salimova, a lawyer practising in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Asgarov.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the authorities had failed to take measures to ensure his or his lawyer’s attendance at the proceedings following his appeal on points of law.
On 30 April 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1962 and is detained in Baku.
On 9 June 2008 the Assize Court (Ağır Cinayətlər Məhkəməsi – hereinafter “the Assize Court”), sitting as a court of first instance for serious offences, convicted the applicant and his wife of fraud. The applicant was sentenced to nine years’ imprisonment with confiscation of property, and his wife to seven years’ imprisonment, suspended for five years on probation.
On 23 January 2009 the Baku Court of Appeal (Bakı Apellyasiya Məhkəməsi – hereinafter “the Court of Appeal”) overturned the judgment of 9 June 2008, reducing the applicant’s term of imprisonment to seven years and lifting the confiscation of property sanction.
The applicant lodged a cassation appeal with the Supreme Court (Ali Məhkəmə – hereinafter “the Supreme Court”). The prosecutor lodged a cassation protest in respect of the judgment of 23 January 2009 with the Supreme Court, requesting that it be set aside and the case remitted to the Court of Appeal.
The Supreme Court scheduled the first hearing for 10 June 2009 but adjourned the proceedings until 24 June 2009 at the request of the applicant’s lawyer who pleaded that he had not enough time to familiarise himself with the case-file and collect further evidence.
At the hearing of 24 June 2009 the applicant’s lawyer requested another adjournment referring to health problems and lack of time for familiarisation with the case-file. The Supreme Court scheduled the next hearing for 1 July 2009. According to the minutes of the hearing of 24 June 2009 provided by the Government, the applicant’s lawyer was present when the court declared that his request had been granted and that the proceedings were adjourned until 1 July 2009.
On 1 July 2009, having examined the case in the absence of the applicant and his lawyer but in the presence of the prosecutor, the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal and accepted the prosecutor’s application for supervisory review in part. The prosecutor made oral submissions during the hearing, seeking the dismissal of the applicant’s appeal.
The Supreme Court upheld the Court of Appeal’s judgment as regards the applicant’s conviction, but quashed his wife’s conviction, remitting that part of the case to the Court of Appeal for fresh examination. The Supreme Court found that proof of the applicant’s guilt had been duly established during the trial in the first-instance court and the Court of Appeal and that his actions had been properly classified under criminal law. Citing Article 419.4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the Supreme Court’s decision stated that the examination of the case was possible in the absence of the applicant and his lawyer given that the lawyer had failed to appear despite having been duly notified and the applicant, who was serving his prison sentence, had made no request to attend.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Azərbaycan Respublikasının Cinayət Prosessual Məcəlləsi – hereinafter the “CCrP”), adopted on 20 July 2000 and published in the Official Gazette (Azərbaycan Respublikasının qanunvericilik toplusu), 2000, No 8 (Book II), Article 585, provided as follows:
“5.25. An accused has the right to participate in hearings before the first-instance and appellate courts and in the examination of the case materials ...”
“1. Witnesses, victims, suspects, accused and other persons shall be called [for questioning] to the investigator in person or, in the event that they are not present, by means of a summons addressed to their adult family members, neighbours, or a representative from their housing organisation, work or place of study. They may also be called by telegram, telephone or facsimile message.”
“5. After a court hearing has been scheduled the person presiding at the court hearing shall order the court office to arrange for measures which are necessary in order for the court hearing to be held. Persons whose presence at the court hearing is required shall be called in accordance with the rules stipulated by Article 226.”
“1. The following persons have the right to lodge a cassation appeal:
1. An accused, an acquitted person, or his [or her] counsel or legal representative.”
“1. A cassation appeal lodged with the Supreme Court is allocated to one of the judges of the relevant chamber of the Supreme Court for preliminary examination.
The judge carrying out the preliminary examination ... shall ... no later than 3 (three) months after receiving the appeal on points of law or application for supervisory review:
7 ... inform the public prosecutor, the accused (or acquitted) person, the victim and other interested parties about the time and place of the examination of the merits of the appeal on points of law or application for supervisory review.”
“1. When examining the merits of a cassation appeal or a cassation protest, the Supreme Court deals only with the points of law and verifies whether the rules of criminal law and this Code were applied correctly.
The examination of the merits of a cassation appeal or a cassation protest is carried out by a chamber composed of three judges. Persons who lodged the appeal in question and the public prosecutor representing the prosecution before the Supreme Court have the right to be present at the court hearing.
...
The Supreme Court hearing is opened by the president of the chamber, who announces which court decision is to be examined and on what grounds, the composition of the chamber examining the case, and which of the parties to the criminal proceedings are to be present at the hearing. The absence of the person who has lodged the appeal, if he [she] has been duly informed about the hearing, does not prevent the Supreme Court from deciding to proceed with the hearing in his or her absence.”