The case originated in an application (no. 72098/14) against the Republic of Iceland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Icelandic national, Mr Bjarni Ármannsson (“the applicant”), on 11 November 2014.
The applicant was represented by Mr Stefán Geir Þórisson, a lawyer practising in Reykjavik. The Icelandic Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Einar Karl Hallvarðsson, the State Attorney General.
On 13 June 2017 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1968 and lives in Fredriksberg, Denmark. The applicant was the CEO of one of Iceland’s largest banks, Glitnir, from September 1997 to the end of April 2007.
On 30 July 2009 the Directorate of Tax Investigation (Skattrannsóknarstjóri ríkisins) initiated an audit of the applicant’s tax returns. The Directorate’s reason for initiating the investigation was to examine whether the applicant had declared profits from selling shares he received when he stepped down as the CEO of Glitnir. The applicant was questioned by the Directorate of Tax Investigation on 17 August and 2 October 2009. The investigation was concluded with a report issued on 5 October 2010.
By a letter of 6 October 2010, the Directorate informed the applicant of its findings and that the case had been referred to the Directorate of Internal Revenue (Ríkisskattstjóri) for possible reassessment of his taxes. It also informed the applicant about the Directorate’s upcoming decision on possible criminal proceedings, listed possible ways of finalising the criminal proceedings in the case and gave the applicant 30 days to comment thereon.
In an email of 11 November 2010, the Directorate of Tax Investigation stated that a decision on possible criminal proceedings would be postponed until the Directorate of Internal Revenue had issued its notification letter (boðunarbréf) on the re-assessment of the applicant’s taxes.
By a letter of 2 May 2011, the Directorate of Internal Revenue notified the applicant that his taxes for the tax years 2007 to 2009 had been reassessed. The applicant objected to the re-assessment.
On 16 January 2012, in the light of the applicant’s objections, the Directorate of Internal Revenue sent the applicant an amended notification letter (boðunarbréf) which stated that his taxes for the tax years of 2007 to 2009 had been re-assessed. The Directorate cancelled the prior reassessment of taxes relating to the profits for selling shares received when the applicant stepped down as the CEO of Glitnir.
Based on the report issued by the Directorate of Tax Investigation, and taking into account the applicants’ objections, the Directorate of Internal Revenue, ruling on 15 May 2012, found that the applicant had failed to declare significant capital income received from 2006 to 2008. Therefore, it revised upwards the amount declared as capital in his tax returns for 2007 to 2009 and, consequently, re-assessed his taxes and imposed a 25% surcharge. The applicant paid the taxes owed and the imposed surcharge.
The applicant did not appeal against the decision to the State Internal Revenue Board, which thus acquired legal force 3 months later, in August 2012, when the time-limit for an appeal had expired.
On 1 March 2012 the Directorate of Tax Investigation reported the matter to the Special Prosecutor and forwarded its report concerning the applicant. The Directorate reported the full matter for investigation, including the possible tax violation related to profits for selling shares received when the applicant stepped down as the CEO of Glitnir. The applicant was informed by letter the same day.
By email of 2 March 2012, the applicant’s lawyer protested at the case being sent to the Special Prosecutor. The lawyer argued that the deadline to object to the Directorate of Internal Revenue’s reassessment had not expired, that the referral was ill-founded and requested that it be withdrawn.
By email of 5 March 2012, the Directorate of Tax Investigation replied and stated that the deadline for the applicant to express his opinion had expired as the Directorate of Internal Revenue’s notification letter (boðunarbréf) had already been issued and sent to the applicant on 16 January 2012 (see paragraph 9 above). Furthermore, it was stated that the Special Prosecutor would make an independent assessment of the applicant’s case, repeat an investigation and issue an indictment if there was reason to do so. Any questions about the procedure before the Special Prosecutor had to be taken up with the Special Prosecutor as he was responsible for the criminal proceedings in the case.
On 26 September 2012 the applicant was interviewed by the Special Prosecutor. The applicant was informed that the investigation concerned the case as it was concluded by the Directorate of Internal Revenue. Certain aspects of the case reported to the Special Prosecutor had been dropped.
On 17 December 2012 the Special Prosecutor indicted the applicant for aggravated tax offences. The applicant was indicted for having failed to declare income in his tax returns of 2007 to 2009. This included the failure to declare his capital income in the form of property sale profits, dividend payments, interest payments and foreign exchange rate gains, received from 2006 to 2008.
The applicant requested that the case be dismissed, inter alia, on the basis of Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention. By a ruling of 23 April 2013, the District Court rejected his claim.
By a judgment of 28 June 2013, the District Court found that the applicant had acted with gross negligence, which was sufficient for criminal liability under the relevant provisions of the tax law, and thus convicted the applicant of the charges against him. The court sentenced him to six months’ imprisonment, suspended for two years, and the payment of a fine in the amount of 38,850,000 Icelandic Krónur (ISK; approximately 241,000 euro (EUR) at the material time). In fixing the fine the court had regard to the tax surcharges imposed, without describing any calculation made in this respect.
The applicant lodged an appeal against the District Court’s judgment.
By a judgment of 15 May 2014 the Supreme Court rejected the applicant’s request to dismiss the case on the basis of Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention. The court upheld the applicant’s conviction and confirmed the fine imposed by the District Court. However, the court sentenced the applicant to eight months’ imprisonment, suspended for two years.
The relevant Sections of the Income Tax Act (Lög um tekjuskatt, no. 90/2003) read as follows:
“If an entity that is obliged to submit a tax return does not do so within the given deadline, the Director of Internal Revenue is permitted to add up to a 15% charge to his tax-base estimate. The Director of Internal Revenue is nonetheless required to take notice of the extent to which taxation has taken place through withheld taxes. The Director of Internal Revenue sets further rules on that point. If a tax return on which the levying of taxes will be based is submitted after the filing deadline, but before a Local Tax Commissioner completes assessing taxes, there can only be added a 0.5% charge to the tax base for each day that the filing of a tax return has been delayed after the given deadline, although no more than a 10% charge.
If a tax return is faulty, as noted in Article 96, or specific items declared wrongly, the Director of Internal Revenue can add a 25% charge to estimated or wrongly declared tax bases. If a tax entity corrects the errors or adjusts specific items in the tax return before taxes are assessed, the charge of the Director of Internal Revenue may not be higher than 15%.
Additional charges, in accordance with this Section, are to be cancelled if a tax entity can show with justification that it is not to blame for limitations in the tax return, the failure to file, that force majeure made it impossible to file the tax return in the given time, it rectifies faults in the tax return or corrects specific items therein.
Complaints to the Directorate of Internal Revenue and the State Internal Revenue Board are subject to the provisions of Article 99 of the Act and the provisions of Act No. 30/1992 on the State Internal Revenue Board.”
“If a taxable person, intentionally or out of gross negligence, makes false or misleading statements about something that matters in relation to its income tax, such person shall pay a fine of up to tenfold the tax amount from the tax base that was concealed and never a lower fine than double the tax amount. Tax from a charge in accordance with Article 108 is deducted from the fine. Paragraph 1 of Article 262 of the Penal Code applies to major offences against this provision.
If a taxable person, intentionally or out of gross negligence, neglects to file a tax return, the violation calls for a fine that is never to be lower than double the tax amount from the tax base that was lacking, if the tax evaluation proved to be too low when taxes were re-assessed in accordance with paragraph 2 of Article 96 of this Act, in which case the tax on the added charge shall be deducted from the amount of the fine in accordance with Article 108. Paragraph 1 of Article 262 of the Penal Code applies to major offences against this provision.
If a taxable person gives false or misleading information on any aspects regarding his tax return, then that person can be made to pay a fine, even if the information cannot affect his liability to pay taxes or tax payments.
If violations of paragraph 1 or paragraph 2 of the provision are discovered when the estate of a deceased person is wound up, then the estate shall pay a fine of up to quadruple the tax amount from the tax base that was evaded and never less than the tax amount plus half of the tax amount. Tax from a charge in accordance with Article 108 is deducted from the fine. Under circumstances stated in Paragraph 3, the estate may be fined.
Any person who wilfully or by gross negligence provides tax authorities with wrongful or misleading information or documentation regarding the tax returns of other parties or assists a wrongful or misleading tax return to tax authorities, shall be subject to punishment as stated in Paragraph 1 of this Article.
If a person, intentionally or out of gross negligence, has neglected his duties according to the provisions of Articles 90, 92 or 94 he shall pay a fine or be sentenced to imprisonment for up to 2 years.
An attempted violation and accessory to a violation of this Act is punishable according to the provisions of Chapter III of the Penal Code and is subject to a fine up to the maximum stated in other provisions of this Article.
A legal entity may be fined for a violation of this Act, irrespective of whether the violation may be attributable to the criminal act of an officer or employee of the legal entity. If its officer or employee has been guilty of violating this Act, the legal entity may be subject to a fine and withdrawal of its operating licence in addition to a punishment inflicted on it, provided the violation is committed for the benefit of the legal entity and it has profited from the violation.”
“The State Internal Revenue Board rules on fines in accordance with Article 109 unless a case is referred for investigation and judicial treatment in accordance with paragraph 4. Act 30/1992 on the State Internal Revenue Board, applies to the Board’s handling of cases.
The Directorate of Tax Investigations in Iceland appears before the Board on behalf of the state when it rules on fines. The rulings of the Board are final.
Despite the provision of paragraph 1, the Directorate of Tax Investigations or its representative learned in law is permitted to offer a party the option to end the penal proceedings of a case by paying a fine to the Treasury, provided that an offence is considered proved beyond doubt, and then the case is neither to be sent to be investigated by the police nor to fine proceedings with the State Internal Revenue Board. When deciding the amount of a fine, notice is to be taken of the nature and scale of the offence. Fines can amount to between 100 thousand krónur and 6 million krónur. The entity in the case is to be informed of the proposed amount of a fine before it agrees to end a case in such a manner. A decision on the amount of a fine according to this provision is to have been made within six months from the end of the investigation of the Directorate of Tax Investigations.
An alternative penalty is not included in the decision of the Directorate of Tax Investigations. On the collection of a fine imposed by the Directorate of Tax Investigations the same rules apply as to taxes according to this Act, the right to carry out distraint included. The State Prosecutor is to be sent a record of all cases that have been closed according to this provision. If the State Prosecutor believes that an innocent person has been made to suffer a fine in accordance with paragraph 2, or that the closure of the case has been improbable in other ways, he can refer the case to a judge in order to overthrow the decision of the Directorate of Tax Investigations.
The Directorate of Tax Investigations can, of its own accord, refer a case to be investigated by the police as well as at the request of the accused, if he is opposed to the case being dealt with by the State Internal Revenue Board in accordance with paragraph 1.
Tax claims can be upheld and judged in criminal proceedings because of offences against the Act.
Fines for offences against this Act go to the Treasury.
An alternative penalty does not accompany the State Internal Revenue Board’s rulings of a fine. On the collection of a fine issued by the State Internal Revenue Board the same rules apply as to taxes according to this Act, the right to carry out distraint included.
Charges in accordance with Article 109 have a six-year limitation period from the time an investigation by the Directorate of Tax Investigations commences, as long as that there are no unnecessary delays in the investigation of a case or the issue of punishment.”
Article 262 of the Penal Code (Almenn hegningarlög, no. 19/1940) stipulates:
“Any person who intentionally or through gross negligence is guilty of a major violation of the first, second or fifth paragraphs of Article 109 of Act No. 90/2003 on income tax, cf. also Article 22 of the act on municipal tax revenues, the first, second or seventh paragraphs of Article 30 of the Act on the withholding of public levies at source, cf. also Article 11 of the Act on payroll taxes, and of the first or sixth paragraphs of Article 40 of the Act on value added tax, shall be subject to a maximum of 6 years’ imprisonment. An additional fine may be imposed by virtue of the provisions of the tax laws cited above.
The same punishment may be imposed on a person who intentionally or through gross negligence is guilty of a major violation of the third paragraph of Article 30 of the Act on the withholding of public levies at source, the second paragraph of Article 40 of the Act on value added tax, Articles 37 and 28, cf. Article 36, of the Act on accounting or Articles 83-85, cf. Article 82, of the Act on annual accounts, including any intent to conceal an acquisitive offence committed by oneself or others.
An action constitutes a major violation pursuant to the first and second paragraphs of this Act if the violation involves significant amounts, if the action is committed in a particularly flagrant manner or under circumstances which greatly exacerbate the culpability of the violation, and also if a person to be sentenced to punishment for any of the violations referred to in the first or second paragraph has previously been convicted for a similar violation or any other violation covered by the provisions.”