The case originated in an application (no. 44689/09) against the Republic of Austria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Afghan national, Mr Hanif Safaii (“the applicant”), on 10 August 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr H. Pochieser, a lawyer practising in Vienna. The Austrian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ambassador H. Tichy, Head of the International Law Department at the Federal Ministry of European and International Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his transfer to Greece had subjected him to treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Convention.
On 23 September 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1983. His address is unknown.
The applicant and his wife came to Austria in August 2008 and applied for asylum on 19 August 2008. They had travelled from Afghanistan via Iran to Greece. When the applicant and his wife first arrived in Greece they lived in a camp. They subsequently lived with people traffickers for approximately three months, and then in public parks. The applicant claimed that he had queued to apply for asylum in Greece, but had been beaten by the police and driven away. He and his wife had no access to financial support and had had to live in the parks after their money had run out. After four failed attempts, the traffickers managed to take the applicant and his wife to Austria.
In his request for asylum in Austria the applicant claimed in substance to have had problems with the Taliban in Afghanistan. He submitted inter alia that eight years earlier the Taliban had kidnapped two of his brothers.
On 14 October 2008, the Federal Asylum Office East (Bundesasylamt Erstaufnahmestelle Ost) rejected the applicant’s asylum application on the grounds that Greece was responsible for examining it, pursuant to section 5 of the 2005 Asylum Act (Asylgesetz 2005) in connection with Article 10 § 1 of Council Regulation (EC) No. 343/2003 (“Dublin II Regulation”, hereinafter “the Dublin Regulation”), and ordered his expulsion to Greece. It found that the applicant was not facing any real risk of illtreatment within the meaning of Article 3 of the Convention upon his return to Greece. The authority referred to a number of country reports, in particular those of the UNHCR of April 2008 and of the Swedish Migration Board. It acknowledged the ongoing criticism with regard to proceedings and treatment of asylum-seekers in Greece, but did not consider the applicant’s story of his experiences in Greece credible. The Asylum Office noted the UNHCR’s concern about the difficulties with which many asylum-seekers in Greece were confronted. This applied particularly to the facilities for asylum-seekers, access to asylum proceedings and the quality of the proceedings. On the other hand, the Asylum Office noted that Norway was the only country to have declared that it would no longer transfer asylum-seekers to Greece under the Dublin Regulation. The Asylum Office also mentioned a recent decision by the Aliens Litigation Council, according to which there was no reason to suspend further transfers to Greece. The Asylum Office quoted the UNHCR position paper, which welcomed Greece’s reform attempts aimed at strengthening its asylum system. It further noted that a working group had been established, including members of the Greek authorities and the UNHCR, to tackle the “most burning” problems with the asylum system. Furthermore, the Asylum Office held that the relevant European directives were binding for Greece. Lastly, the Asylum Office referred to a fact-finding mission conducted by the Swedish Migration Board in April 2008 reacting to the harsh criticism voiced by various NGOs. The final report of that mission had concluded that there were no humanitarian or other reasons to refrain from returning asylum-seekers to Greece under the Dublin Regulation. In view of the fact that the asylum authorities of the other EU countries had not stopped transferring asylum-seekers back to Greece, the Asylum Office concluded that it was not necessary to make use of the sovereignty clause in the present case. It further noted that people who had never before lodged an asylum application in Greece and had been transferred to Greece under the Dublin Regulation had full access to asylum proceedings.
The applicant lodged a complaint against that decision, referring again to the deficiencies of the Greek asylum system, the danger of refoulement to Afghanistan and the lack of subsistence for asylum-seekers.
On 11 November 2008, the Asylum Court (Asylgerichtshof) dismissed the applicant’s complaint as unfounded. It found that an accumulation of proceedings under the sovereignty clause would endanger the “effet utile” principle of Community law. Furthermore, the Dublin Regulation was based on the assumption that all member States were safe countries and that a deportation to one of them could not constitute a human-rights violation. Therefore, arguments against such a deportation would need to be especially substantiated. Referring to the report of a mission of the Swedish Migration Board to Greece in April 2008 that showed that all twenty-six monitored cases had had access to Greek asylum proceedings, it found that there were no deficiencies in the conditions of access to asylum proceedings in Greece. With regard to the present case, the Greek authorities had already stated that the applicant would have access to asylum proceedings once he returned to Greece. Again referring to the mission report of the Swedish Migration Board, it found that the support of asylum-seekers in Greece was acceptable. Asylum-seekers were allowed to work in Greece. Lastly, there would be no risk of refoulement. In conclusion, the applicant would not be at real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 on being returned to Greece.
On 30 January 2009, the Constitutional Court refused to deal with the applicant’s complaint for lack of prospects of success.
That decision was served on the applicant’s counsel on 11 February 2009.
The applicant’s wife was expelled to Greece on 25 November 2008.
The applicant was expelled to Greece on 8 April 2009.
At the Court’s request, on 4 August 2011 the applicant’s representative informed the Court of the exact date of the applicant’s transfer to Greece, namely 8 April 2009. He stated that despite being his counsel, he had not received any further information about his client since then. In later submissions he stated that he could establish contact with the applicant, if necessary, via trustworthy persons the applicant still knew in Vienna. He did not, however, provide the applicant’s current address to the Court.
For detailed information on proceedings under the Dublin Regulation, see M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece ([GC], no. 30696/09, §§ 65-75, ECHR 2011).
Section 5 of the 2005 Asylum Act provides that an asylum request must be rejected as inadmissible if, under treaty provisions or pursuant to the Dublin Regulation, another country has jurisdiction for examining the application for asylum or the application for international protection. When rendering the decision to reject, the authority must also specify which country has jurisdiction in the matter.
International documents describing the conditions of detention and reception of asylum-seekers and the asylum procedure in Greece are extensively summarised in the judgment in M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece (cited above, §§ 159-95). In the paragraphs that follow, reference will be made to the documents cited therein.
A number of pertinent reports on the situation faced by asylum-seekers in Greece have been freely available from as early as 2005 onwards. For instance, the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) published reports in December 2006 and February 2008 following visits to Greece, examining, inter alia, the detention conditions of foreigners in specific holding facilities (ibid., §§ 160 and 163-64).
In October 2007 the German NGO, Pro Asyl, published a report entitled “The Truth may be bitter but it must be told”, documenting serious human-rights abuses against refugees who had tried to reach Greece by sea. On 27 February 2008 Amnesty International published a report and recommendations entitled “Greece: no place for asylum-seekers” on the conditions of detention for asylum-seekers. In its “Amnesty International Report 2008 – Greece” of 28 May 2008, the NGO stated that “Greece [had] failed to provide asylum to the vast majority who [had] requested it. Migrants [had] suffered ill-treatment, and arbitrary and lengthy detention of asylum-seekers, including children, continued”.
That and similar information was complemented by two UNHCR reports, the first of which was dated November 2007 and entitled “Asylum in the European Union. A study of the Implementation of the Qualification Directive”. In its executive summary, the UNHCR observed that the Greek asylum system failed to grant asylum of any kind and rejected applications in a standardised format, without giving individual reasons, and identifying all of the 305 cases examined as concerning “economic migrants without protection needs”. A review of the files was conducted by the authors of the study, who established that in 294 of the cases examined the files did not contain any of the asylum-seekers’ answers to standard questions asked by the interviewing police officers. Furthermore, there was no information in the files regarding the asylum-seekers’ fears of persecution, and in an overwhelming majority of the cases the interviewing police officer had registered the reasons for departure from the country of origin as “economic”. The authors of the study concluded that in view of the insufficient documentation and reasoning, it was not possible to discern legal practice in Greece.
The UNHCR position paper of 15 April 2008 undeniably welcomed the steps taken by the Greek Government to strengthen its asylum system as required by international and European standards, just as the Austrian authorities had noted in their reasoning. However, it continued by stating:
“26.  In view of EU Member States’ obligation to ensure access to fair and effective asylum procedures, including in cases subject to the Dublin Regulation, UNHCR advises Governments to refrain from returning asylum-seekers to Greece under the Dublin Regulation until further notice. UNHCR recommends that Governments make use of Article 3 (2) of the Dublin Regulation, allowing States to examine an asylum application lodged even if such examination is not its responsibility under the criteria laid down in this Regulation”.
On 7 February 2008 Norway announced that it would be suspending all transfers of asylum-seekers to Greece. However, on 3 September 2008 the Norwegian Prime Minister told the media that Norway would no longer suspend transfers to Greece under the Dublin Regulation on a blanket basis, but rather that an individual assessment of each case would be carried out (reported in the article “Stuck in a Revolving Door” by Human Rights Watch, November 2008, page 25).
On 6 May 2008 the Swedish Migration Board published a report on a delegation’s visit to Greece between 21 and 23 April 2008 (Rapport från besök i Grekland den 21- 23 april 2008). The report described the increasing challenges faced by the Greek asylum system because of the increasing number of cases it had had to deal with in recent years. It referred to problems with the provision of housing for asylum-seekers, and stated that more often than not they had to arrange housing for themselves. The report concluded by stating that the risk of refoulement was minimal. However, a particular problem had arisen in relation to unaccompanied minors: there was a risk that such asylum-seekers would be placed in a reception unit in Amygdaleza, a closed facility. This was regarded as a radical measure, comparable to placing minors in custody. In the light of the report’s conclusions, the director general’s guidelines of 7 May 2008 (Generaldirektörens riktlinjer avseende tillämpningen av Dublinförordningen i förhållande till Grekland) established that asylum proceedings in Greece were generally acceptable for adults, but that there were problems regarding the reception of unaccompanied minors in relation to the above-mentioned reception facility. The Migration Board therefore decided to maintain its suspension of transfers of unaccompanied minors to Greece.
On 2 April 2009 the UNHCR sent a letter to the Belgian Minister of Migration and Asylum Policy criticising the deficiencies in the asylum procedure and the conditions of reception of asylum-seekers in Greece and recommending the suspension of transfers to Greece. A copy was sent to the Aliens Office. The letter read as follows (extracts):
“The UNHCR is aware that the Court, in its decision in K.R.S. v. the United Kingdom ... recently decided that the transfer of an asylum seeker to Greece did not present a risk of refoulement for the purposes of Article 3 of the Convention. However, the Court did not give judgment on compliance by Greece with its obligations under international law on refugees. In particular, the Court said nothing about whether the conditions of reception of asylum seekers were in conformity with regional and international standards of human rights protection, or whether asylum seekers had access to fair consideration of their asylum applications, or even whether refugees were effectively able to exercise their rights under the Geneva Convention. The UNHCR believes that this is still not the case.”
It concluded:
“For the above reasons the UNHCR maintains its assessment of the Greek asylum system and the recommendations formulated in its position of April 2008, namely that Governments should refrain from transferring asylum seekers to Greece and take responsibility for examining the corresponding asylum applications themselves, in keeping with Article 3 § 2 of the Dublin Regulation.”