The case originated in eleven applications (nos. 27236/05, 44223/05, 53304/07, 40232/11, 60052/11, 76438/11, 14919/12, 19929/12, 42389/12, 57043/12 and 67481/12) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by eleven Russian nationals (“the applicants”), whose names and the dates on which they introduced their applications are set out in Annex I.
Some of the applicants were represented by lawyers whose names are listed in Annex II. The applicants Mr Makhov, Mr Gromovoy and Mr Martirosyan had been granted legal aid. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants complained, in particular, that they had been denied an opportunity to appear in person before the court in the civil proceedings to which they were parties.
At the material time all the applicants were detained in Russian penal facilities. Where relevant, the dates of their detention are listed in Annex I.
While in detention, the applicants Mr Yevdokimov, Mr Rezanov, and Mr Morozov lodged defamation claims against private third parties; the applicants Mr Makhov, Mr Resin, Mr Anikanov, Mr Lebetskiy, Mr Gromovoy, Mr Gordeyev and Mr Vinokhodov brought claims seeking compensation for the allegedly inhuman conditions of their detention; and the applicant Mr Martirosyan lodged a civil claim for compensation, alleging that the criminal proceedings had been instituted unlawfully.
None of the applicants were able to attend the hearings at which their claims were examined. The domestic courts refused them the possibility to be present at the hearing, on the ground that there was no domestic legal provision for bringing detainees to courts. In particular, they quoted Article 77.1 of the Code on the Execution of Sentences (see paragraph 11 below) and the relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure. In the other cases, the issue of the applicants’ presence in court was not addressed.
The applicants appealed, raising the question of their appearance in court in the appeal statement. Some submitted a separate request seeking leave to appear before the appeal court. The appeal courts either dismissed the applicants’ arguments or concluded that their absence from the court was in line with the legislation and did not contravene the principle of fairness.
The applicants’ claims were refused at two levels of jurisdiction. The dates of the final judgments are set out in Annex I.
The relevant provisions of the Code read as follows:
“1.  Citizens may conduct their business in court in person or through a representative ...”
“Any legally capable individual ... who has a duly formalised authority to conduct business in court may be a representative before the court ...”
“The court may appoint a lawyer to represent a defendant who is not represented and whose place of residence is unknown. The court may also appoint a lawyer in other situations set out in federal laws ...”
“1.  If the trial court needs to obtain evidence which is located in a different town or region, it may request that the competent court carry out certain procedural acts.
The decision on sending a letter of request shall state briefly the nature of the dispute, information about the parties, including their place of residence or stay, the facts that need to be ascertained and the evidence to be collected by the requested court ...”
“1.  The request must be fulfilled in a hearing in accordance with the requirements of the present Code. The parties must be notified of the time and place of the hearing but their absence shall not prevent the request from being fulfilled ...”
“Civil cases shall be examined in a hearing upon mandatory provision of information to the parties about the time and place of the hearing.”
“1.  If the court has facilities for organising a video-conference, the parties and their representatives, as well as witnesses, experts, specialists and interpreters, can take part in the hearing by means of a video-conference. The video-conference is organised at the initiative of the court or at the request of the parties.
The parties and their representatives ... participate in the hearing by means of a video-conference using the video-conferencing equipment that is installed in the competent courts at their place of residence, stay or location. For persons who are in remand centres or in penitentiary facilities, the equipment installed in such facilities can be used ...”
“1.  The court must take direct cognizance of the evidence in the case, including by hearing the parties and third parties, witness testimony ...”
Proceedings are conducted orally before the same judicial formation...”
“At the scheduled time the presiding judge opens the hearing and announces the case to be examined.”
“1.  The clerk to the court reports to the bench which of the summonsed persons are in attendance, whether the absent persons have been notified [of the hearing] and what information is available about the reasons for their absence.”
“Motions by the parties relating to the proceedings in the case are decided upon by means of a judicial decision, after the views of the other participants have been heard.”
“1.  The participants must inform the court of the reasons for their failure to attend and produce evidence of valid reasons.
If there is no information in the case file that the absent person has been notified [of the hearing], the hearing must be adjourned.
If the parties have been notified of the time and place of the hearing, the court adjourns the proceedings if it finds that they have valid reasons for being absent.
The court may still examine the case in the absence of a party that was notified of the time and date of the hearing if it finds that the party failed to explain the reasons for its absence or does not have valid reasons for the absence.”
“1.  The appellate court notifies the parties about the time and place of the appellate hearing.
The appellate court carries out a new examination of the case in a hearing in accordance with the rules of procedure in the first-instance court ...
The parties, their representatives ... may participate in the hearing by means of a video-conference in accordance with the procedure set out in Article 155.1 ...”
“Hearings in the court of cassation shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of the present Code that govern the conduct of a hearing before the first-instance court ...”
“2.  Judicial decisions that have come into force may be reviewed in the following cases:
...
(2)  [on account of] new circumstances listed in paragraph 4 of this Article which emerged after the adoption of the judicial decision and which have significant importance for the correct determination of the matter.
...
New circumstances include:
...
(4)  the finding of a violation of the European Convention on Human Rights by the European Court of Human Rights with regard to the specific case that was examined by the court, provided that the applicant lodged an application with the European Court of Human Rights in connection with the decision in that case ...”
Section 6(1)(3) establishes that legal aid can in particular take the form of legal representation of individuals before the courts. Section 20(1)(1) provides that indigent persons whose household income is below the regional minimum subsistence level are eligible for legal aid. Section 20(3) describes the categories of disputes in which the State may provide legal aid for representation of individuals before the courts. The disputes listed concern immovable property, alimony, compensation for health damage, legal capacity, reparation for political repression, and mandatory commitment to a psychiatric hospital.
Article 77.1 provides that a convicted person may be transferred from a correctional colony to a temporary detention facility if his or her participation is required as a witness, a victim or a suspect in connection with certain investigative measures in a criminal case. It does not mention the possibility for a convicted person to take part in civil proceedings, whether as a claimant or a defendant.
The Constitutional Court has on several occasions examined complaints by incarcerated individuals whose requests to appear in civil proceedings had been refused by the courts. It declared the complaints inadmissible, finding that the contested provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure and the Code on the Execution of Sentences did not, as such, restrict the convicted person’s access to court or undermine the fairness of the proceedings. It emphasised, nonetheless, that the detainee should be able to make submissions to the court, either through a representative or in some other way provided for by law, such as by means of a video link. If necessary, the hearing may be held at the location where the convicted person is serving his or her sentence or, alternatively, the court hearing the case may instruct the court with territorial jurisdiction over the correctional colony to obtain the detainee’s submissions and carry out any other procedural measures (decisions no. 478-O of 16 October 2003, no. 335-O of 14 October 2004, no. 94-O-O of 21 February 2008 and no. 576-O-P of 19 May 2009).
The relevant part of decision no. 94-O-O of 21 February 2008 read as follows:
“It must be borne in mind that a person who is in detention and who is a party to a civil case must be able to exercise his rights: the judge at the preliminary stage ... must send him a letter setting out his rights, including the right to appoint a representative; he should be served in advance with a copy of the claim form ... and other documents, including judicial decisions; he should be allowed sufficient time in view of his situation to appoint a representative, to prepare his legal position and to submit it to the court ...”
In decision no. 576-O-P of 19 May 2009, the Constitutional Court held:
“[Article 77.1 of the Code on the Execution of Sentences] does not prevent the court from deciding that the detainee’s presence at the hearing is mandatory as long as it considers that the interests of justice and of the protection of human rights so require.
... [T]here is an obligation on the court which determines the issue of the detainee’s personal participation at the hearing ... on his civil claim, to take into account all the relevant circumstances, including the [legal] character of the constitutional rights involved and the need to take oral evidence from the detainee at the hearing, and adopt a reasoned decision as to means of ensuring [his] participation in the proceedings.”
In Resolution no. 21 of 27 June 2013 on the “Application of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of 4 November 1950 and its Protocols by the courts of general jurisdiction”, the Plenary Supreme Court issued the following guidance to the courts:
“16.  It follows from Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, as interpreted by the European Court of Human Rights, that an imprisoned person has the right to participate in hearings of his civil case.”
Annex I
Annex II