The case originated in an application (no. 57467/15) against the Kingdom of Denmark lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Arıf Savran (“the applicant”), on 16 November 2015.
The applicant was represented by Mr Tyge Trier and Mr Anders Boelskifte, lawyers practising in Copenhagen. The Danish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their former Agent, Mr Tobias Elling Rehfeld, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and their Co-Agent, Ms Nina Holst-Christensen, from the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged that his deportation to Turkey would be in violation of Articles 3 and 8 of the Convention.
On 20 June 2017 notice of the application was given to the Government.
In accordance with Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 of the Rules of Court, the Court informed the Turkish Government of their right to submit written comments. They did not wish to avail themselves of that right.
The applicant is a Turkish national, born in 1985, who in 1991, when he was six years old, entered Denmark together with his mother and four siblings to join his father.
On 9 January 2001, by judgment of the City Court of Copenhagen (Københavns Byret), henceforth the City Court, the applicant was convicted of robbery and sentenced to imprisonment for one year and three months, nine months of which were suspended and subject to probation for two years.
On 9 October 2007, the High Court of Eastern Denmark (Østre Landsret), henceforth the High Court, convicted the applicant of assault under highly aggravating circumstances under articles 246 and 245 of the Penal Code (straffeloven): on 29 May 2006, acting together with several unidentified persons, he had dealt several blows or kicks to the head and body of a man with cudgels or other blunt objects, thereby inflicting on him serious traumatic brain injury that caused his death on 30 May 2006. The applicant was sentenced to 7 years’ imprisonment and expulsion from Denmark. On appeal, on 22 May 2008, the Supreme Court (Højesteret) quashed the judgment and returned the case to the High Court which, by a judgment of 17 October 2008, again convicted the applicant.
During the proceedings a medical opinion was obtained by the Ministry of Justice (Justitsministeriet) from the Department of Forensic Psychiatry (Retspsykiatrisk Klinik), on 13 March 2008, which concluded, inter alia, as follows:
“... [the applicant] is not found to suffer from a mental disorder and cannot be assumed to have suffered from a mental disorder at the time when he committed the crime of which he has been found guilty. It is highly likely that he is a slightly mentally retarded person. ... [The applicant] does not suffer from epilepsy or other organic brain injury.”
On 16 April 2008, the Medico-Legal Council (Retslægerådet) stated as follows, based on the mental status examination report and other details of the case:
“... [the applicant] does not suffer from a mental disorder and did not suffer from a mental disorder at the time when the crime with which he has been charged was committed. He is mentally retarded, but otherwise he does not show any signs of organic brain injury. He might have been under the influence of cannabis at the time when the crime with which he has been charged was committed, but nothing seems to indicate an abnormal condition of intoxication.
[The applicant] originates from Turkey and lived in that country until the age of six before moving to Denmark. He had a disadvantaged childhood and adolescence in Denmark characterised by inadequate parental care, violence and poor social conditions. He was removed from home and placed in foster care for that very reason. He has presented pronounced behavioural disturbance since his childhood, and later he became involved in criminal activities. He has also smoked a lot of cannabis. He has been attached to several socio-educational institutions and projects, but the efforts have not had any impact on his disturbed behaviour. He has received a disability pension since his 19th birthday, among other reasons, due to his low intellectual capacity. He has been in contact with the mental health system several times, but no certain diagnosis of psychotic disorder has been made despite complaints of psychotic symptoms.
In this medical assessment it was found that his complaints of auditory hallucination could be characterised as simulation. In the medical assessment, including in the psychological test of his intellectual ability, he was found to be mentally retarded with a mild to moderate level of functional disability and to suffer from personality disorder characterised by immaturity, lack of empathy, emotional instability and impulsivity. He has a great need for clear boundaries to give structure and support.
Hence, [the applicant] falls within article 16(2) of the Penal Code and probably also the second sentence of article 16(1) of the same Code. If he is found guilty as charged, the Medico-Legal Council therefore recommends in accordance with the second sentence of section 68 of the Penal Code that the most expedient measure is that he be committed to the secure unit of a residential institution for the severely mentally impaired.”
For the purpose of the court proceedings, on 17 September 2007 the Immigration Service (Udlændingeservice) had issued a report on the applicant, including, inter alia, the following:
“...[the applicant] has been lawfully resident in Denmark for approximately 14 years and eight months ... [the applicant’s] mother and four siblings live in Denmark ... [the applicant] has been to Turkey five to ten times for a period of two months to visit his family. However, he has not been to Turkey since 2000. He has stated that he has no contact with persons living in Turkey. [The applicant] has stated that he does not speak Turkish and only a little Kurdish ... In view of the information given by the prosecution on the nature of the crime [...] in conjunction with the considerations mentioned in section 26(1) of the Aliens Act, the Immigration Service endorses the prosecution’s recommendation of expulsion.”
The applicant was sentenced to committal to the secure unit of a residential institution for the severely mentally impaired for an indefinite period and expelled from Denmark with a permanent ban on his re-entry.
In respect of the expulsion order, the High Court emphasised: that the applicant had moved to Denmark at the age of six when granted family reunification with his father, who lived in Denmark; that he had been lawfully resident in Denmark for about 14 years and eight months; that he was not married and did not have any children; and that his entire family, comprising his mother and four siblings, lived in Denmark, the only exception being his maternal aunt, who lived in Turkey. It was also emphasised that he had attended elementary school in Denmark for seven years and had been attached to the Danish labour market for about five years, but that he now received a disability pension; that he had been to Turkey five to ten times for a period of two months to visit his family, but not since 2000, and that he did not speak Turkish, but a little Kurdish. On the other hand, it was emphasised that the applicant had been found guilty of a very serious offence. Against that background the High Court found, based on an overall assessment, that expulsion would not be inappropriate or in breach of Article 8 of the Convention.
The applicant appealed against the judgment to the Supreme Court.
In the meantime, on 11 March 2008, a supplementary interview had been made with the applicant during which he stated, inter alia, that he had last visited Turkey in 2001, that he is fluent in Kurdish, and that his family in the village of Koduchar lived in a house owned by his mother.
By a judgment of 10 August 2009, the Supreme Court, sentenced the applicant to committal to forensic psychiatric care, and upheld the expulsion order. It stated:
“[The applicant], who is now 24 years old, moved to Denmark from Turkey at the age of six. He has attended school in Denmark, and his close family members comprising his mother and his four siblings live in Denmark. He is not married and has no children. He receives disability pension and is not otherwise integrated into Danish society. He speaks Kurdish, and during his childhood and adolescence in Denmark he went to Turkey five to ten times for a period of two months to visit his family. He last visited Turkey in 2001, where his mother owns a property.
Having regard to the nature and gravity of the offence, we find no circumstances making expulsion conclusively inappropriate, see section 26(2) of the Aliens Act, nor do we find expulsion to be contrary to Article 8 of the Convention.”
On 3 January 2012, by virtue of article 72(2) of the Penal Code, the applicant’s guardian ad litem requested that the prosecution perform a review of the applicant’s sanction measure. For this purpose, various opinions and statements were obtained, including the following.
K.A., Consultant Psychiatrist at the Mental Health Centre of the Hospital of Saint John, made a statement on 5 April 2013, which concluded as follows:
“...
[The applicant] ... has been in psychiatric care since 2008 due to the diagnoses of paranoid schizophrenia, mild intellectual disability and cannabis dependence. However, it was discovered during the relevant period [2006 to 2013] that his intellectual capacity level was higher, for which reason he did not meet the criteria for the diagnosis of mental retardation. The initial three to four years of the relevant period was characterised by continuous cannabis abuse, incidental abuse of hard drugs and numerous instances of absconding. [The applicant] has succeeded in recent years in quitting his abuse of hard drugs, and the frequency of his absconding has been reduced over time, and no instances of absconding have been recorded since the autumn of 2012. Moreover, there has been a considerable reduction in his externalising behaviour problems since he has ceased taking hard drugs. Over the last couple of months, [the applicant] has not abused cannabis, and he is making targeted efforts to stay clean in the open psychiatric unit. [The applicant] has previously been complicit in smuggling cannabis to fellow patients, which was his ‘old’ way of living, but he has managed to resist doing so for the past six months. He is prepared to collaborate, and he has agreed without problems to undergo antipsychotic therapy. The department therefore recommends that the current sanction measure be modified from a sentence of forensic psychiatric care to treatment at a psychiatric department under supervision by both the Prison and Probation Service and the department following his discharge so that, in consultation with the consultant psychiatrist, the Prison and Probation Service may make a decision on readmission under section 72(1) of the Penal Code. ...”
A statement of 18 July 2013 from M.H., Consultant Psychiatrist at the Mental Health Centre of the Hospital of Saint John, read, inter alia:
“... As regards the treatment given previously, please see the medical reports to the Regional Public Prosecutor dated 29 March 2012 and 19 November 2012. The following has occurred since the [latter] report was issued ...:
On 5 February 2013, [the applicant] was transferred to an open ward (R3) for substance abuse treatment. Around March he claimed to have progressive symptoms, and his doses of antipsychotics were increased, whereas his doses had been lowered a bit some months before. Since the patient’s anger was found to be increasing despite the increase in doses, it was decided that he was to be transferred to a closed ward on 5 April 2013; however, he left the area and an alert had to be circulated, but he quickly returned again by himself. Having been moved back, he absconded again briefly on 18 April 2013, but returned and did not appear to be under the influence of drugs. On 21 April 2013, [the applicant] threatened and beat a carer in the head without any warning. The following day he had to be immobilised by belts because of new threats. On 5 May 2013, he attacked and beat a carer without any warning, and he was found severely psychotic. Immobilisation by belts applied until 12 May 2013, and during that period he was severely fluctuating, at times severely psychotic and aggressively threatening. He willingly accepted a change in medications to Leponex tablets with simultaneous stepping down of treatment with Cisordinol (antipsychotics). The patient’s condition quickly improved, and he now appears to have his usual condition, is friendly, cooperative and motivated for continuing therapy. The patient’s abuse is very limited and he only uses cannabis, although he cannot distance himself from continuing to use that substance.
For your information, [the applicant] is highly motivated for psychiatric treatment, including treatment with psychoactive drugs. However, he expresses strong doubt as to whether he will be able to continue this treatment to an adequate extent if he is deported from Denmark and the treatment offered to him does not comprise an offer with a rather intensive psychiatric element. It is a clear fear that [the applicant] will not have the resources to continue the necessary psychiatric therapy, including pharmacotherapy, if deported from Denmark. In this connection there is deemed to be a high risk of pharmaceutical failure and resumed abuse and consequently the worsening of his psychotic symptoms and a risk of aggressive behaviour. It should be noted that the current medication in the form of Leponex tablets is an antipsychotic that must be administered on a daily basis, which is deemed to constitute a risk of pharmaceutical failure and consequently the worsening of his psychotic symptoms and a greater risk of aggressive behaviour if he is deported from Denmark. It is the overall assessment that a potential interruption of the treatment would give rise to a significantly higher risk of offences against the person of others due to a worsening of his psychotic symptoms.
The medications currently administered to the patient:
Risperdal Consta [risperidone] 50mg every 2 weeks (prolonged-release antipsychotic suspension for injection).
Clozapine [Leponex] 250mg tablets daily (antipsychotics).
...”
The Immigration Service issued an opinion of 8 October 2013, stating as follows:
“... Against this background, the Copenhagen Police (Københavns Politi) has requested an opinion on the treatment options in Turkey, and for the purpose of this case, we have been informed that the following medicinal products are currently being administered to [the applicant]:
Risperdal Consta, which contains the active pharmaceutical ingredient risperidone, and Clozapine, which contains the active pharmaceutical ingredient clozapine.
According to data from MedCOI, a database financed by the European Commission to provide information on the availability of medical treatment, the medicinal products Risperdal [risperidone] and Clozapine are available in Turkey, but their prices are not given.
As regards the treatment options in Turkey, it also appears from data from MedCOI that all primary healthcare services are free and are provided by general practitioners, but that patients have to pay themselves if they are tested at a hospital laboratory in connection with primary healthcare services and in connection with prescriptions. ...”
On 1 December 2013, the prosecution brought the applicant’s case before the City Court in pursuance of article 72(2) of the Penal Code, requesting that the sanction measure be changed from a sentence of forensic psychiatric care to treatment at a psychiatric department. In pursuance of section 50a of the Aliens Act (udlændingeloven), the prosecution petitioned the court to decide simultaneously whether the order to expel the applicant was to be upheld. Section 50a of the Aliens Act states that the court must revoke an expulsion where the alien’s state of health makes it conclusively inappropriate to enforce the expulsion. The prosecution argued that the expulsion order be upheld.
A medical statement of 13 January 2014 from consultant psychiatrist P.L. was submitted to the City Court. It set out, among other things:
“...
I have been the Consultant Psychiatrist responsible for the treatment of [the applicant] since mid-July 2013. He is still in a closed ward (R1). His condition is deemed to have been stable for the past six months, and he has abstained from smoking cannabis for long periods. Consequently, [he] has been allowed leave to an increasing extent in accordance with the rights granted by the Circular on Leave. [The applicant] is cooperative, does not appear productively psychotic in any way. He is generally forthcoming, but like previously his behaviour continues to be characterised by some impulsivity and immaturity. [The applicant] has relapsed with smoking cannabis although he has understood the importance of abstaining from having such abuse. ... [The applicant] also says that he is doing well with the current antipsychotic treatment regime, which he is completely prepared to continue when he is ready for discharge at some point. ... it is found that [the applicant] has responded well to the combination therapy with Risperdal and Leponex. He denies having any psychotic symptoms like delusions and hallucinations. Except for one single incident in which [the applicant] was seriously incited by a fellow patient and kicked that person, he has not exhibited any externalising behaviour for the past six months. ...
Based on the course of his treatment, I support the recommendation of a variation of the sanction measure from a sentence of forensic psychiatric care to a sentence of forced psychiatric treatment.
[The applicant’s] recovery prospect is good if, when released, he can be reintegrated into society by being offered a suitable home and intensive outpatient therapy in the following years. [The applicant] is aware of his disease and clearly acknowledges his need for therapy.
On the other hand, [the applicant’s] recovery prospect is bad if he were to be discharged without follow-up and control. I agree with M.H., Consultant Psychiatrist, that a potential interruption of the treatment gives rise to a significantly higher risk of offences against the person of others due to a worsening of his psychotic symptoms. ...”
The applicant was heard on 6 February and 7 October 2014, and stated, inter alia:
A supplementary opinion by the Immigration Service of 4 July 2014 set out:
“... On 19 March 2014, the Copenhagen Police requested a supplementary opinion concerning a new medical statement of 13 January 2014 from the Mental Health Centre of the Hospital of Saint John and the language problems mentioned in the medical report.
It appears from the medical statement of 13 January 2014 that [the applicant’s] recovery prospects are good if, when released, he can be reintegrated into society by being offered a suitable home and intensive outpatient therapy in the following years. On the other hand, his recovery prospects are bad if he is discharged without followup and control.
[The applicant] has pointed out that he has no social network in the village in Turkey in which he was born and lived with his family for the first years of his life, that he will be far away from psychiatric assistance in that village, and that he only understands a little Turkish because he is Kurdish-speaking.
Opinion
The Immigration Service has obtained information on the treatment options in Konya, Turkey, through the Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The following appears from the consultation response of 4 July 2014 from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs:
By letter of 1 May 2014, which relates to the return of a Turkish national, the Immigration Service has asked the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for assistance in obtaining information on treatment options in Konya, Turkey. The patient has been diagnosed with ‘paranoid schizophrenia, sentenced to psychiatric placement, cannabis dependence syndrome, abstinent, overweight without specification’ and receives Risperdal Consta injections and Clozapine tablets.
The Immigration Service asked for a reply to the following questions:
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has obtained the information from the SGK, the social security institution in Turkey, and a physician at a rehabilitation clinic in Konya under the auspices of the public hospital named ‘Konya Egitim ve Arastirma Hastanesi’. The public hospital in Konya named ‘Numune Hastanesi’ has also been contacted and asked [the following] questions:
1)  Is it possible for the patient to receive intensive care in a psychiatric hospital matching the needs of a person with the stated diagnosis in the province of Konya?
Mentally ill patients are generally eligible for treatment at public hospitals and from private healthcare providers who have concluded an agreement with the Turkish Ministry of Health on an equal footing with other patients who inquire at treatment facilities with a non-mental disease.
Turkish nationals living in Turkey who are not covered by health insurance in another country will be covered by the general healthcare scheme in Turkey upon application. In order to be covered, the citizen must register with the Turkish Civil Register and subsequently inquire at the District Governor’s office to lodge an application. The person has to pay a certain amount, depending on income, for being enrolled in the scheme. Examples of payment [...]
Monthly income of TL 0 to 357: No contribution is payable as the citizen’s contribution is paid by the Treasury
Monthly income of TL 358 to TL 1,071: TL 42 (approximately DKK 105)
Monthly income of TL 1,072 to TL 2,142: TL 128 (approximately DKK 320)
Monthly income exceeding TL 2,143: TL 257 (approximately DKK 645)
2)  Is the mentioned medication available in the province of Konya?
The physician has confirmed that Risperdal Consta 50mg (in packs containing solution for 1 injection, manufacturer Johnson & Johnson, retail price: TL 352.52, corresponding to [approximately] DKK 925) is generally available at pharmacies in Konya and is used for the treatment of patients suffering from paranoid schizophrenia. If a specific medication is sold out by one pharmacy, it is possible to inquire with another pharmacy or order the medication for later pick-up. It is a prescription drug.
Medication with clozapine as the active pharmaceutical ingredient is available in two forms:
Leponex 100mg, packs containing 50 tablets, manufacturer Novartis, retail price TL 25.27 (corresponding to approximately DKK 66). Active pharmaceutical ingredient: Clozapine. Is generally available at pharmacies in Turkey. It is a prescription drug.
Clonex 100mg, packs containing 50 tablets. Manufacturer Adeka Ilac, retail price TL 25.27 (corresponding to approximately DKK 66). Active pharmaceutical ingredient: Clozapine. Is generally available at pharmacies in Turkey. It is a prescription drug.
if yes, what [are] the costs for the patient?
As the relevant medications are prescription drugs, the patient normally has to pay the full price unless he or she is covered by the general healthcare scheme. In that case, the patient has to pay 20 per cent of the retail price, and the remaining 80 per cent are covered by the general healthcare scheme. However, patients covered by the general healthcare scheme may be exempted from paying the 20 per cent patient’s share if the physician writes a special Committee report which has been approved and signed by several physicians. Such report will be made if, in the assessment of the physician, the patient has an existing and real need for long-term treatment and it is deemed unreasonable that the patient has to pay the costs himself of herself. This assessment does not take into account the patient’s financial situation.
3)  Do health care personnel in Konya speak Kurdish?
According to the physician, the hospitals employ Kurdish-speaking staff, who can offer language assistance should the need arise. The public hospital in Konya named ‘Numune Hastanesi’ gave the same reply.
Conclusion
The medical report issued by the Mental Health Centre of the Hospital of Saint John does not give rise to any supplementary observations in addition to those made in our opinion of 8 October 2013 providing information on treatment options in Turkey.
Accordingly, we refer to our opinion of 8 October 2013 in general. ...”
Consultant psychiatrist P.L. was heard before the City Court on 7 October 2014. He stated, inter alia:
“... he is a psychiatric specialist and Consultant Psychiatrist at Department R at the Hospital of Saint John. He first met [the applicant] in June 2013. He has followed [the applicant’s] development ever since as the physician in charge. Since [P.L.] made his medical statement on 13 January 2014, [the applicant] has been doing well in the safe environment at the department. He has kept to the agreements made, and he has been able to have a job. In the assessment of [P.L.], [the applicant] will lose focus if he does not have a solid framework. [The applicant’s] personal history shows this. [The applicant] has shown violent behaviour for a long time, including at school and while in forensic psychiatric care. The violent behaviour has diminished as a result of the treatment. The medical treatment of [the applicant] is an expert task. He is given complex treatment, and the treatment plan has to be carefully followed, including the taking of blood samples for somatic reasons on a weekly or monthly basis. [The applicant] needs to get his medicine to avoid serious relapses. It is a condition for making a recommendation to amend the sanction measure, that [the applicant] is taken care of through a range of treatment initiatives, in addition to the correct administration of medicines and the necessary arrangements for blood sampling. Some of the other treatment initiatives are a regular contact person for supervision of [the applicant], a follow-up scheme to make sure that [the applicant] pays attention to the medical treatment administered, assistance from a social worker to deal with any dependence and other problems and assistance for making sure that he is in the right environment and is offered an occupation. These elements of his treatment are essential to prevent relapses. These initiatives are taken as an element of his treatment in Denmark. It is the assessment of [P.L.] that the same treatment offers will not be available to [the applicant] in Turkey. If [the applicant] relapses, it may have serious consequences to himself and his environment. [P.L.] believes that [the applicant] may become very dangerous if he relapses, which is likely to happen if he is not given the right medication and support as he is currently receiving. [P.L.] believes that there are highly-skilled psychiatrists in the cities in Turkey, but probably not in a small village in which [the applicant] is likely to settle, and that [the applicant] will not be taken care of like in Denmark. ...”
In addition, the City Court had before it a letter of 3 January 2012 from R.B., guardian ad litem, an email of 11 June 2013 from R.B, an email from the Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Copenhagen Police of 15 November 2013 and a letter of 25 November 2013 from the Police Section of the National Aliens Division (Nationalt UdlændingeCenter).
By decision of 14 October 2014, the City Court amended the sentence imposed on the applicant from a sentence of forensic psychiatric care to treatment at a psychiatric department. As regards the expulsion order, the City Court found, regardless of the nature and gravity of the crime committed, that the applicant’s health made it conclusively inappropriate to enforce the expulsion order. In so far as relevant, its reasoning set out:
“... The applicant has been in psychiatric care since 2008 due to the diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia.
Based on the medical information available, including in particular the fact that [the applicant] is highly motivated for psychiatric treatment, including treatment with psychoactive drugs, that he is aware of his disease and clearly acknowledges his need for therapy, and that his recovery prospect is good if he is subjected to follow-up and control in connection with intensive outpatient therapy when discharged, the City Court finds that it will suffice in order to prevent reoffending and to satisfy the offender’s need for treatment that the sanction measure be amended to treatment at a psychiatric department under supervision by both the Prison and Probation Service and the department following his discharge so that, in consultation with the consultant psychiatrist, the Prison and Probation Service may make a decision on readmission under section 72(1) of the Penal Code.
[The applicant], a 29-year-old Turkish national, moved to Denmark from Turkey at the age of six under the family reunification programme. He has stated that he has no family in Turkey, that he has no social network, and that the village in which he lived with his family for the first years of his life is located 100 km away from Konya, the closest city, and accordingly far away from psychiatric assistance, and that he only understands a little Turkish because he is Kurdish-speaking.
Based on the medical information, it is accepted as fact that there is a high risk of pharmaceutical failure and resumed abuse and consequently worsening of his psychotic symptoms if he is not subjected to follow-up and control in connection with intensive outpatient therapy when discharged and that this gives rise to a significantly higher risk that [the applicant] will again commit offences against the person of others.
It is also considered a fact that mentally ill patients are generally entitled to receive treatment in Turkey, that it is possible to apply for enrolment in the general healthcare scheme with contributions adapted to income, and that the relevant medication is available as is also assistance from Kurdish-speaking staff at the hospitals.
However, what is crucial is that [the applicant] has access to relevant treatment in his country of origin when he has been returned to Turkey.
Based on the information provided, it is not clear whether [the applicant] has a real possibility of receiving relevant psychiatric treatment, including the necessary followup and control in connection with intensive outpatient therapy, if returned to Turkey.
Regardless of the nature and gravity of the crime committed, the Court finds on this basis, in consideration of the offender’s health, that it is conclusively inappropriate to enforce the expulsion order, see section 50a of the Aliens Act, and the offender’s petition for revocation of the expulsion order is therefore allowed.”
The prosecution appealed against the decision concerning the revocation of the expulsion order to the High Court, before which the applicant and P.L. were heard on 6 January 2015.
The latter stated, among other things:
“... The applicant has, which is essential, complete awareness of his illness. However, it is important that he is followed regularly to adhere to the treatment. It is also important, that he be followed somatically, since Leponex can have the side-effect that the patient develops an immune defect. Blood samples are taken regularly to control that such defect has not occurred. The patient must attend a doctor, if sudden fever occurs, since this can be a sign of the immune defect. If the applicant gets this side-effect, he must be followed closely, as in that case, he must be taken off Leponex, despite it having a [positive] effect on his aggressive behaviour”.
In a decision of 13 January 2015, the High Court reversed the decision of the City Court, and stated as follows:
“According to the data of the MedCOI database and the information provided by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and in particular in its consultation response of 4 July 2014, the High Court finds that [the applicant] can continue the same medical treatment in the Konya area in Turkey as he is given in Denmark, and that psychiatric treatment is available at public hospitals and from private healthcare providers who have concluded an agreement with the Turkish Ministry of Health. According to the information obtained, [the applicant] will be eligible to apply for free or subsidised treatment in Turkey if he has no or limited income, and in certain cases it is also possible to be exempted from paying the 20 per cent patient’s share of medicines. It is also possible to be assisted by Kurdish-speaking staff at hospitals.
The High Court emphasises the information provided on specific treatment options and finds in these circumstances, considering the fact that [the applicant] is aware of his disease and, according to his own statement, is aware of the importance of adhering to his medical treatment and taking the drugs prescribed, that [the applicant’s] health does not make removal conclusively inappropriate.
When making the decision, the High Court also emphasises the nature and the gravity of the crime committed in May 2006 of which [the applicant] has been convicted as well as the facts that [the applicant] has not founded his own family and does not have any children in Denmark.”
Leave to appeal against the decision to the Supreme Court was refused by the Appeals Permission Board (Procesbevillingsnævnet) on 20 May 2015.
The relevant articles of the Penal Code read as follows:
(1) Persons of unsound mind due to a mental disorder or a comparable condition at the time of committing the act are not punished. The same applies to persons who are severely mentally retarded. If the offender was temporarily in a condition of mental disorder or a comparable condition due to the consumption of alcohol or other intoxicants, he may be punished if justified by special circumstances.
(2) Persons who, at the time of the act, were slightly mentally defective are not punishable, except in special circumstances. The same shall apply to persons in a state of affairs comparable to mental deficiency.
If an accused is exempt from punishment pursuant to section 16, the court may decide on the use of other measures considered expedient to prevent further offences. If less radical measures such as supervision, decisions on place of residence or work, rehabilitation treatment, psychiatric treatment, etc., are considered insufficient, it may be decided that the relevant person must be committed to a hospital for the mentally ill or to an institution for the severely mentally impaired, or placed under supervision with a possibility of administrative placement or in a suitable home or institution offering special attention or care. A person can be committed to safe custody on the conditions referred to in section 70.
(1) The Prosecution Service shall ensure that measures under section 68, 69 or 70 are not upheld for longer and to a greater extent than necessary.
(2) A decision to vary or finally remove a measure under section 68, 69 or 70 must be made by court order at the request of the convicted person, his guardian ad litem, the Prosecution Service, the management of the institution or the Prison and Probation Service (Kriminalforsorgen). Any request from the convicted person, the guardian ad litem, the management of the institution or the Prison and Probation Service must be made to the Prosecution Service, which must bring it before the court as soon as possible. Where a request from a convicted person or his guardian ad litem is not allowed, a new request cannot be made for the first six months following the date of the order.
...
(1) Any person who commits an assault on the person of another in a particularly offensive, brutal or dangerous manner, or is guilty of mistreatment, is sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six years. It must be considered a particularly aggravating circumstance if such assault causes serious harm to the body or health of another person.
...
The sentence may increase to imprisonment for ten years if an assault on the person of another falling within section 245 or section 245a is considered to be committed in highly aggravating circumstances because it was an act of a particularly aggravating nature or an act causing serious harm or death.
The relevant provisions of the Aliens Act concerning expulsion read as follows:
(1) An alien who has been lawfully resident in Denmark for more than the last 9 years and an alien issued with a residence permit under section 7 or section 8(1) or (2) who has been lawfully resident in Denmark for more than the last 8 years may be expelled if –
...
(vi) the alien is sentenced, pursuant to provisions of Parts 12 and 13 of the Penal Code or pursuant to section 119(1) or (2), section 119(3), second sentence, cf. the first sentence thereof, section 123, 136, 180 or 181, section 183(1) or (2), section 183a, 184(1), 186(1), 187(1), 193(1), 208(1) or 210(1), section 210(3), cf. subsection (1) thereof, section 215, 216 or 222, section 224 or 225, cf. section 216 or 222, section 230, 235, 237, 244, 245, 245a, 246 or 250, section 252(1) or (2), section 261(2) or 262a, section 276, cf. section 286, sections 278 to 283, cf. section 286, section 279, cf. section 285, if the offence is social fraud, section 288, 289, 289a or 290(2), section 291(1), cf. subsection (4) thereof, or section 291(2) of the Penal Code, to imprisonment or other criminal sanction involving or allowing deprivation of liberty for an offence that would have resulted in a punishment of this nature;
(1) In deciding on expulsion, regard must be had to the question whether expulsion must be assumed to be particularly burdensome, in particular because of –
(i) the alien’s ties with Danish society;
(ii) the alien’s age, health and other personal circumstances;
(iii) the alien’s ties with persons living in Denmark;
(iv) the consequences of the expulsion for the alien’s close relatives living in Denmark, including the impact on family unity;
(v) the alien’s slight or non-existent ties with his country of origin or any other country in which he may be expected to take up residence; and
(vi) the risk that, in cases other than those mentioned in section 7(1) and (2) and section 8(1) and (2), the alien will be ill-treated in his country of origin or any other country in which he may be expected to take up residence.
(2) An alien must be expelled under section 22(1)(iv) to (vii) and section 25 unless the circumstances mentioned in subsection (1) make it conclusively inappropriate.
In cases involving expulsion under section 22(1)(iv) to (vii) of the Aliens Act (serious crime), it follows from the wording of section 26(2) of the Aliens Act applicable at the time of the offence that the circumstances mentioned in section 26(1) of the Aliens Act must make expulsion conclusively inappropriate to justify the non-enforcement of an expulsion order. As regards Denmark’s international obligations, the travaux préparatoires to Act No. 429 of 10 May 2006 amending the Aliens Act set out that expulsion will be inappropriate in the circumstances mentioned in section 26(1) of the Aliens Act if it would be contrary to international obligations, see Article 8 of the Convention, to expel the alien.
(1) The periods mentioned in section 11(4), section 17(1), third sentence, and sections 22, 23 and 25a are reckoned from the date of the alien’s registration with the Central National Register or, if his application for a residence permit was submitted in Denmark, from the date of submission of that application or from the date when the conditions for the residence permit are satisfied if such date is after the date of application.
...
(5) The time the alien has spent in custody prior to conviction or served in prison or been subject to other criminal sanction involving or allowing deprivation of liberty for an offence that would have resulted in imprisonment is not included in the periods mentioned in subsection (1).
(1) As a consequence of a court judgment, court order or decision ordering an alien to be expelled, the alien’s visa and residence permit will lapse, and the alien will not be allowed to re-enter Denmark and stay in this country without special permission (re-entry ban). A re-entry ban may be time-limited and is reckoned from the first day of the month following departure or return. The re-entry ban applies from the time of the departure or return.
(2) A re-entry ban in connection with expulsion under sections 22 to 24 is imposed –
...
(v) permanently if the alien is sentenced to imprisonment for more than 2 years or other criminal sanction involving or allowing deprivation of liberty for an offence that would have resulted in a punishment of this duration.
(1) When an alien is convicted of an offence, the court shall decide in its judgment, upon the public prosecutor’s claim, whether the alien will be expelled pursuant to sections 22 to 24 or section 25c or be sentenced to suspended expulsion pursuant to section 24b. If the judgment stipulates expulsion, the judgment must state the period of the re-entry ban, see section 32(1) to (4).
(1) Where expulsion has been decided by a judgment sentencing an alien to safe custody or committal under the rules of sections 68 to 70 of the Criminal Code, the court shall, in connection with a decision under section 72 of the Criminal Code on variation of the measure that involves discharge from hospital or safe custody, decide at the same time on revocation of the expulsion if the alien’s state of health makes it conclusively inappropriate to enforce the expulsion.
(2) If an expelled alien is subject to a criminal sanction involving deprivation of liberty under the rules of sections 68 to 70 of the Criminal Code in cases other than those mentioned in subsection (1), the public prosecutor shall, in connection with discharge from hospital, bring the matter of revocation of the expulsion before the court. Where the alien’s state of health makes it conclusively inappropriate to enforce the expulsion, the court shall revoke the expulsion. The court shall assign counsel to defend the alien. The court shall make its decision by court order, which is subject to interlocutory appeal under the rules of Part 85 of the Administration of Justice Act. The court may decide that the alien must be remanded in custody when on definite grounds this is found to be necessary to ensure the alien’s presence.