The case originated in an application (no. 78241/13) against the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four Macedonian nationals, Ms Dževrije Selami (“the first applicant”), Ms Nedžmije Aliu (“the second applicant”), Mr Mesut Selami (“the third applicant”) and Mr Nedžmi Selami (“the fourth applicant”), on 6 December 2013. The first applicant is the widow of Mr S. Selami, who died on 6 April 2011. The remaining applicants are the children of the first applicant and the late Mr S. Selami.
The applicants were represented by Mr Lj. Lazareski, a lawyer practising in Gostivar. The Macedonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr K. Bogdanov succeeded by Ms D. Djonova.
The applicants complained that the compensation awarded by the domestic courts for the unjustified detention of Mr S. Selami and the illtreatment to which he had been subjected while detained by the police had been too low.
On 10 June 2015 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicants alleged, before the domestic courts and before the Court, that on 26 August 2002 police detained Mr S. Selami and took him from Gostivar to Skopje where he was severely beaten. Mr S. Selami sustained serious injuries to his head including a brain haemorrhage and fell into a coma. The police brought him to Skopje Hospital, where he underwent brain surgery. He was in a coma for two weeks and was connected to a ventilator for assisted breathing.
By a letter of 28 August 2002 the applicants contacted the Ministry of the Interior seeking information about Mr S. Selami’s whereabouts. By a letter of 29 August 2002, the Ministry had informed them that Mr S. Selami had been admitted to Skopje Hospital.
According to a medical certificate from Tetovo Medical Centre issued on 29 January 2003 on the basis of the available medical evidence, Mr S. Selami was in a post-operative state (following medical trepanation of his skull and evacuation of the internal brain haemorrhage); parts of his skull and the tough brain membrane had been seriously damaged; he had suffered reduced mobility of all limbs, muscle hypotonia and neck and rib fractures. According to the report, those injuries had qualified as serious and had had permanent effects on the life and body of Mr S. Selami.
As to the subsequent establishment of facts by the domestic civil courts, see paragraphs 15-18 below.
On 31 August 2002, five days after first having been detained and beaten by the police (see paragraphs 15 to 22 below), an investigating judge of the Skopje Court of First Instance (“the trial court”) opened an investigation against Mr S. Selami and three other persons in connection with their alleged involvement in enemy activities against the State and ordered their pre-trial detention. The investigating judge specified that Mr S. Selami had been hospitalised and that the detention order would be enforced as soon as he was discharged from hospital. Mr S. Selami’s detention was extended on three occasions. The extension orders specified that he had been deprived of his liberty on 18 September 2002 and that he had been held under the detention order in Skopje Hospital until 18 October 2002.
On 14 November 2002 Mr S. Selami was indicted for membership of a terrorist group whose aim had been to organise terrorist attacks on the police in order to endanger the security and constitutional order of the State. On 10 December 2002 Mr S. Selami was released on bail on account of, inter alia, the “serious deterioration of [his] health”.
By a judgment of 9 September 2003 the trial court discontinued (запира) the criminal proceedings against Mr S. Selami since the prosecution had withdrawn the charges. The remaining accused were acquitted (ослободени од обвинение).
On 18 November 2003 Mr S. Selami contacted the Ministry of Justice with a view to securing an out-of-court settlement and payment of 16,170,000 Macedonian denars (MKD – equivalent to 263,000 euros (EUR)) in respect of pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage caused, so it was asserted, by the unlawful deprivation of his liberty and the serious injuries that he had sustained at the hands of the police on 26 August 2002. In support he submitted the medical certificate from Tetovo Medical Centre (see paragraph 7 above).
In the absence of any response from the Ministry, on 30 January 2004 Mr S. Selami and the applicants submitted two separate lawsuits, one in relation to his unlawful detention and one in relation to his physical ill-treatment by the police, claiming pecuniary and non-pecuniary damages in both. They reiterated that on 26 August 2002 Mr S. Selami had been unlawfully deprived of his liberty; that he had been taken to police stations where he had been beaten and physically ill-treated; and that the police had taken him to Skopje Hospital where he had undergone head surgery. On 19 September 2002 he had been transferred from the hospital to Skopje detention facility in view of his detention on remand. The applicants’ claim was based on section 190(3) of the Obligations Act (Закон за облигационите односи), which entitles a spouse and children to obtain non-pecuniary damages in a case of severe disability of the victim (see paragraph 27 below).
Both claims were joined and decided in a single set of proceedings. During the proceedings, the domestic courts commissioned two expert opinions and admitted into evidence extensive medical material issued by relevant medical institutions in Switzerland concerning Mr S. Selami’s earlier injury while at work in that State.
In a judgment of 22 April 2010, the Gostivar Court of First Instance ruled partly for Mr S. Selami and, relying on section 189 of the Obligations Act (see paragraph 26 below), it awarded him the equivalent of EUR 18,000 in non-pecuniary damages for the unjustified detention between 19 September and 10 December 2002. It dismissed the remaining part of Mr S. Selami’s claim. As to the applicants’ claims, the court held that the consequences suffered by Mr S. Selami as a consequence of “the unjustified detention” could not be regarded “extremely severe disability”, as required by section 190(3) of the Obligations Act.
On the basis of the available medical evidence, the court established that in 1985, while at work in Switzerland, Mr S. Selami had fallen and injured his spine and right leg, which had become dysfunctional. As a result of that injury, he had been certified as disabled for the purposes of work in Switzerland and he had had to use crutches and a disability-adapted car.
Relying on the expert evidence admitted at the trial, the court established, as a matter of fact, that during the “incriminating event of 26 August 2002 ... Mr S. Selami had sustained serious bodily injury. As a result of the head trauma, there was haemorrhage ... in the right (part of the brain) ... After the surgery, Mr S. Selami had remained in coma and ... had been connected to a ventilator for assisted breathing. He had recovered after three weeks ...”. The court further referred to the expert opinion according to which Mr S. Selami had sustained strong and intensive physical pain, as well as strong emotional pain and humiliation while being beaten. He had sustained serious head injuries, which had affected, though not permanently, the left side of his body and had provoked other negative psychological effects.
Relying on the statements of Mr S. Selami and the first and fourth applicants, the court established that in August 2002 the police had searched their house. They had asked Mr S. Selami to come with them to Gostivar police station. There, he had been questioned in relation to an incident in which two policemen had been killed. He had denied having any connection to that incident. He had been taken by police car to Skopje, where he had been placed in “a cellar or a garage” and beaten. The applicants had not been aware of Mr S. Selami’s whereabouts for several days after which they had discovered that he had been hospitalised in Skopje Hospital. Despite these findings of fact, the Court of First Instance expressed no conclusion about the lawfulness of any detention prior to 19 September 2002 or the treatment suffered by Mr S. Selami during that detention.
Both Mr S. Selami and the applicants appealed to the Skopje Court of Appeal. They argued that the first-instance court had not determined their claim in relation to the serious injuries inflicted on him by the police, as a result of which he had had his skull broken; had suffered a brain haemorrhage; had required head surgery; had been immobilised and had lost the full use of his hands. The Solicitor General also challenged the judgment.
On 6 April 2011 Mr S. Selami died.
On 24 August 2012 the Skopje Court of Appeal dismissed the appeals by Mr S. Selami and the applicants and allowed the appeal by the Solicitor General. It overturned the lower court’s judgment and awarded Mr S. Selami the equivalent of EUR 9,800 in respect of non-pecuniary damage due to his “unjustified detention between 19 September and 10 December 2002”. The court, inter alia, stated:
“In the impugned judgment, the first-instance court established ... on the basis of the expert opinion [that Mr S. Selami] had experienced intense pain on his head and body when he had been physically attacked ... every blow had caused physical pain of different intensity, accompanied by swelling and bruises on his body ... Regarding the intensity and duration of the fear, the experts are of the opinion that when arrested and physically assaulted and hit, particularly on his head, [Mr S. Selami] had had intense, unpleasant, emotional experiences of primary fear ... which persisted until he had fallen into a coma ... Regarding the emotional suffering due to his unjustified deprivation of liberty and detention, the experts are of the opinion that the basis for an award of non-pecuniary damages ... is the time calculated as of 26 August 2002 ... when [Mr S. Selami] was arrested by the police ..., transferred to other police stations, where he was subjected to serious physical ill-treatment and beaten, which caused serious bodily injury ...
This court considers that the [above] facts were correctly established.
...
... This court established on the basis of medical evidence that in 1989 [Mr S. Selami] had been certified disabled in Switzerland and that he had been receiving disability benefits ever since. The serious injury inflicted on him (during the 2002 detention) had caused his left limbs to become dysfunctional to a minor extent, which cannot be regarded as an extremely severe disability.”
The court rejected the applicants’ arguments that the first-instance court had not decided the claim for compensation for damage sustained as a result of Mr S. Selami’s physical ill-treatment. In this connection it stated that:
“the operative provisions and the reasons given in the [impugned] judgment clearly and unequivocally confirm that the court had decided the entire claim ... This court considers that the emotional suffering due to unjustified detention is a single type of damage which includes all the detrimental effects on the victim, including his physical ill-treatment ... In assessing the amount of the award, this court took into consideration all the circumstances of the case, including the duration of the unjustified deprivation of liberty, the respect with which the plaintiff was held in his family and in the community, that during the unjustified deprivation of liberty he was physically ill-treated and sustained serious bodily injury, as a result of which his left limbs became dysfunctional to a minor extent, that he was hospitalised and operated on and that he had been disabled before ...”
By a final decision of 31 October 2012, delivered by a notary public, the fourth applicant was declared the sole heir of Mr S. Selami’s inheritance, including the compensation awarded to him. The remaining applicants refused to accept being declared heirs of the late Mr S. Selami.
On 1 November 2012 the applicants lodged an appeal on points of law against the judgment of the Skopje Court of Appeal reiterating their earlier arguments. The fourth applicant, as the statutory successor of the late Mr S. Selami, lodged the appeal in his name and on behalf of Mr S. Selami.
On 11 July 2013 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicants’ appeal on points of law finding no grounds to depart from the established facts and the reasoning given by the lower courts.
Section 189 of the Obligations Act provides for an award of non pecuniary damages in respect of physical pain, emotional suffering, disfigurement and fear, as well as violation of reputation, honour and human rights and freedoms.
Under section 190(3) of the Obligations Act, a spouse and children of a victim are entitled to obtain non-pecuniary damages in a case of the victim’s “extremely severe disability” (особено тежок инвалидитет).
Section 16 of the Criminal Procedure Act, as applicable at the relevant time, provided that criminal proceedings had to be instituted at the request of an authorised prosecutor. In cases involving offences subject to prosecution by the State of its own motion or on an application by the injured party, the authorised prosecutor was the public prosecutor, whereas in cases involving offences for which only private charges could be brought, the authorised prosecutor was the private prosecutor.
Section 17 set forth the duty of the public prosecutor to proceed with a criminal prosecution if there was sufficient evidence that a crime subject to ex officio prosecution had been committed.
Section 96 provided that a civil-party claim (имотно-правно барање) of the victim relating to a criminal offence was to be decided in criminal proceedings, unless the determination of the claim would significantly delay them. The civil-party claim could concern monetary compensation, restitution of property or annulment of a legal act.
Section 101 provided that the trial court was competent to decide a civil-party claim. If the court found the accused guilty as charged, the victim could be awarded full or partial compensation. In the latter case, the court could advise him or her to seek the remainder by way of civil proceedings.
The same rules applied if evidence taken in the criminal proceedings was insufficient for the court to award any damages (section 101(2)). In case of an acquittal or dismissal of the prosecution, if the proceedings were discontinued or the indictment was rejected, the court was to advise the victim to pursue his or her civil-party claim by way of civil proceedings (section 101(3)).
Section 140(1) provided that State bodies and public authorities were obliged to report a criminal offence subject to prosecution by the State of which they had been alerted or had found out in any other way.
Under section 141(2) and (4), the criminal complaint was to be lodged with the authorised public prosecutor. If the complaint was submitted to a court or unauthorised prosecutor, they would forward it to the competent prosecutor without delay.
Section 142 of the Criminal Code prohibits torture and provides for imprisonment between three months and five years.