The case originated in an application (no. 46082/14) against the Republic of North Macedonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Macedonian/citizen of the Republic of North Macedonia, Mr Mite Anastasov (“the applicant”), on 13 June 2014.
The applicant was represented by Mr T. Dimkovski, a lawyer practising in Veles. The Government of North Macedonia (“the Government”) were represented by their former Agent, Mr K. Bogdanov, and subsequently by their present Agent, Ms D. Djonova.
On 20 October 2017 notice of the complaint under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1966 and lives in Veles.
On 5 June 2006 he bought a car in Germany for which he paid 1,400 euros (EUR). The car was subsequently brought into the respondent State by a third person.
On 31 January 2008 the applicant arrived at a border-crossing point with Bulgaria with the above car. The customs authorities seized the vehicle and fined him for having failed to undergo the relevant import procedures with respect to the car. The applicant contested the fine along with the seizure order.
Following the case having been returned to them once by the Administrative Court (Управен суд), the customs authorities found him in contravention of the customs regulations for having received and kept the above car (примил на чување и користење) in full knowledge that import procedures and duties had not been complied with. He was fined EUR 800 and the car was confiscated pursuant to section 267 of the Customs Act, which provided for mandatory confiscation of goods in respect of the above misdemeanour.
On 14 December 2012 the Administrative Court allowed an action on the part of the applicant and discontinued the proceedings, holding that the prescription period for the above misdemeanour had expired. However, citing section 100-A of the Criminal Code which envisaged mandatory confiscation of any object used in the commission of a crime, or which was the product thereof, it refused the applicant’s request to have the car restored to him, holding that its confiscation had been mandatory.
On 12 July 2013 the Higher Administrative Court (Виш управен суд) dismissed an appeal by the applicant, holding that the title to the car had never been transferred to him in accordance with the law of the respondent State.