The case originated in an application (no. 9929/12) against the Swiss Confederation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Swiss national, Mr Stanislaw Jean Garcia Buchs (“the applicant”), on 3 February 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr N. Perret, a lawyer practising in Nyon. The Swiss Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr F. Schürmann, of the Federal Office of Justice.
The applicant alleged that the domestic courts had infringed his right to the enjoyment of his family life and discriminated against him as a father on the ground of his sex.
On 7 September 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
On 1 February 2014 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). This case remained with the Second Section (Rule 52 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1960 and lives in Cully, Canton of Vaud.
The applicant is the father of three children. His eldest daughter, born in 1986, is from a former relationship and lives with him. In 1995 the applicant married his (now ex-)wife, with whom he had two more children, born in 1996 and 1999.
The applicant and his wife separated in 2002. The separation was pronounced by the Civil Court of the District of East Vaud (Tribunal Civil de l’Arrondissement de l’Est Vaudois – hereinafter “the Civil Court”) on 16 May 2002 and the mother was given custody (garde) of the two children, particularly in view of their young age (the younger child was three at the time of the decision). In turn, the applicant was granted extensive contact rights, which he had to exercise by agreement with his wife. He confirmed that since then his children usually stayed with him every Thursday after school until Friday morning, and every other week, from Thursday after school until Monday morning. Additionally, they spent half of the school holidays – around seven weeks a year – with him. He calculated that that amounted to approximately 42% of the time. His daughter from his former relationship resided with him.
On 11 January 2005 the applicant filed for divorce with the Civil Court. After his wife’s reply to the court on 8 March 2005, the couple submitted a joint petition for divorce on 17 January 2006. In addition, both parties applied for sole parental authority (autorité parentale exclusive) over and custody of the children.
In order to decide to whom parental authority should be awarded, the Civil Court commissioned an expert opinion from the psychiatry and psychotherapy service for children and adolescents in the Canton of Vaud. The expert’s report, based on several interviews with the parents as well as with the children, was issued on 18 July 2006. It revealed that owing to major disagreements between their parents, both children were caught in conflicts of loyalty towards them, which they tried to resolve by wishing to divide their time equally between the parents. Furthermore, while the applicant wished for shared parental authority (autorité parentale conjointe) for the children, his wife opposed it. She justified her opposition by alleging that the applicant had attempted to pressure her and had made incessant requests regarding the children. She feared that he would use shared parental authority to increase his influence over the children in order to distance them from her. In this regard, she also mentioned that he had used inappropriate strategies to obtain custody of his eldest daughter, who was living with him, and had influenced the daughter negatively against her mother. However, the applicant’s wife was largely in favour of the children maintaining contact with their father and supported his extensive contact rights. Regarding the applicant, the expert observed that while he acknowledged that he had regular contact with his children, he had also expressed the feeling that he was not accepted as the other parent and had been made to feel like a mere “paying father”. The expert also noted that the couple disagreed on many child-related issues, which had had a negative impact on the children. In view of the fact that the applicant’s wife was a good mother and had shown her willingness to cooperate with the applicant, the expert recommended that parental authority be awarded to her and that the applicant be granted extensive contact rights. Furthermore, the youngest child had expressed the wish to stay close to his mother and the children were socially well integrated at their mother’s place and at the local school.
The applicant contested the expert opinion and the Civil Court therefore ordered a second one. On 31 March 2008 the second expert, also specialised in child and adolescent psychiatry and psychotherapy, confirmed the findings of the first expert. He based his findings on numerous documents received from the Civil Court and the parents, as well as on various interviews conducted with all the family members. At the outset he observed that despite the fact that two years had elapsed between the drawing up of the first and second expert reports, the applicant and his wife had maintained their conflict and had been unable to find any common ground for agreement regarding the children. Furthermore, they both had difficulties recognising each other’s parenting abilities. Nevertheless, the expert acknowledged that both parents had good parenting skills and were able to create an adequate environment for their children. Owing to the ongoing tensions between them, however, the expert found that there was no common ground for shared parental authority and custody and that that would therefore not be in the best interests of the children, who were still caught in conflicts of loyalty towards their parents. The expert further recommended that the applicant should not be awarded sole parental authority over the children. In his view, the applicant still appeared to be very affected by the divorce proceedings. He had criticised the parenting skills of the children’s mother on various occasions and had shown that he had difficulties in distinguishing his feelings towards her from those aroused by the separation from his children. Despite having exercised extensive contact rights with the full support of his wife, he still claimed that he sometimes felt like a mere “paying parent”. In that context, the expert also mentioned the inappropriate ways in which the applicant had obtained custody of his eldest daughter. The expert concluded that it was in the best interests of the children for the courts to award parental authority to the mother and to maintain the applicant’s extensive contact rights. That solution would furthermore provide continuity for the children.
Following that expert opinion, the applicant informed the Civil Court by letter of 27 May 2008 that he was withdrawing his application for parental authority and custody. At the subsequent hearing, the Civil Court questioned various witnesses, who testified that the applicant was fully exercising his contact rights and was undertaking many activities with the children. They also stated that the parents’ relationship had remained conflictual and that the applicant felt much more animosity towards his exwife than she did towards him. By a final judgment of 15 December 2009 the Civil Court pronounced the divorce of the parties and awarded parental authority over and custody of the children to the mother, while maintaining the applicant’s previous extensive contact rights.
On 9 January and 2 February 2010, the applicant lodged a “partial appeal” against the Civil Court’s judgment with the Appeal Court of the Canton of Vaud (le Tribunal Cantonal, chambre des recours, Canton de Vaud - hereinafter “the Appeal Court”). He complained that the granting of parental authority to his ex-wife by the Civil Court was not in accordance with the European Court’s judgment in the case of Zaunegger v. Germany (no. 22028/04, 3 December 2009). He claimed that parental authority could not be withdrawn from a father who had, since the separation from his wife in 2002, extensively proved his parenting abilities. He reproached his ex-wife for behaving inappropriately towards the children in several respects and claimed that that was why he disagreed with the award of sole parental authority to her. Lastly, he stated that he no longer had the financial means to be represented by a lawyer.
The Appeal Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal by a judgment of 9 February 2010, ruling that under Article 133 § 1 of the Swiss Civil Code (hereinafter “the Civil Code” – see paragraph 20 below), on divorce proceedings, parental authority could only be awarded to one of the parents. The maintenance of shared parental authority would require, under Article 133 § 3 of the Civil Code (see paragraph 20 below), a joint request by both parents, and shared parenting could not be imposed on a parent who opposed it, such as the mother in the present case. The Appeal Court also found that despite the applicant’s criticism of his ex-wife’s parenting abilities, there were no grounds for changing the award of parental authority. Furthermore, such a solution would be contrary to the experts’ findings. As provided for in Article 133 § 2 of the Civil Code (see paragraph 20 below), the judge’s paramount consideration when deciding on parental authority was what was in the child’s best interests. All relevant circumstances had to be taken into account, including any possible joint request by the parents for shared parental authority and, where possible, the children’s views. In cases such as the present one, in which experts had recognised that both parents had good parenting abilities, a parent’s willingness to cooperate with the other parent in the children’s best interests was conclusive. As shown by the experts’ opinions before the Civil Court, it had been the mother in the present case who had shown fewer difficulties in cooperating with the father. The Appeal Court therefore upheld the Civil Court’s judgment.
In his appeal to the Federal Supreme Court, the applicant held that, owing to Article 133 § 1 of the Swiss Civil Code (see paragraph 20 below) and his wife’s refusal to make a joint request, he had not been given the opportunity to apply to the domestic courts for shared parental authority. Referring to the case of Zaunegger (cited above), he stated that every father should be able to apply to the domestic courts for shared parental authority, even if the mother was opposed to it, as that was in the children’s best interests.
The Federal Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal on 11 August 2011. It held that it was doubtful whether the applicant had sufficiently substantiated his appeal. Even assuming that he had done so, his case differed substantially from Zaunegger (cited above). First, while in Zaunegger the parents had not been married, in the present case the applicant was a divorced father. Second, Swiss law not only provided that the applicant, like his (ex-)wife, could apply for sole parental authority but both parents had also been treated equally. Unlike the German law regarding parents of children born out of wedlock, as established in Zaunegger, Article 133 § 1 of the Swiss Civil Code (see paragraph 20 below) did not privilege one of the parents on the basis of his or her sex when awarding parental authority, and the mother had no right to veto the father’s request in this regard. Under Article 133 § 3 of the Swiss Civil Code (see paragraph 20 below), the decision was based solely on the children’s best interests. The Federal Supreme Court concluded that the applicant’s case could not be compared to Zaunegger because there was no indication that he had been treated differently, when deciding on parental authority, from the children’s mother.
On 21 June 2013 the Swiss Parliament adopted amendments to the Civil Code provisions on parental authority, which will enter into force on
The statutory provisions on custody and contact are to be found in the Swiss Civil Code.
Parental authority (Article 296 of the Civil Code) comprises upbringing, education and legal representation of the child vis-à-vis third persons (Articles 301 to 306 of the Civil Code). It also includes the administration of the child’s property (Article 318 of the Civil Code). The domicile of a child under parental authority is furthermore deemed to be that of the parents or, if the parents have different places of residence, that of the parent who has custody of the child (Article 25 of the Civil Code).
When married, the father and the mother exercise parental authority over a minor child jointly (Article 297 § 1 of the Civil Code). In the event of the parents’ divorce, the court awards parental authority to one parent and, in accordance with the provisions governing the legal effects of the parent-child relationship, rules on access entitlements and the maintenance contribution of the other parent (Article 133 § 1 of the Civil Code). Furthermore, when awarding parental authority and determining access arrangements, the child’s welfare is the paramount consideration for the courts. Due account is therefore taken of any joint request submitted by the parents and, wherever feasible, to the child’s opinion (Article 133 § 2 of the Civil Code). If the parents have concluded a valid agreement regulating their contributions to child care and the division of maintenance costs, at their joint request the courts may award parental authority to both of them, provided this is in the child’s best interests (Article 133 § 3 of the Civil Code).
Parents who are not granted parental authority or custody and their minor children are mutually entitled to reasonable access to each other (Article 273 of the Civil Code). Non-custodial parents should be informed of special events in the child’s life and consulted before important decisions affecting its development are taken (Article 275a § 1 of the Civil Code). They are also entitled to obtain information concerning the child’s condition and development from third parties involved in its care, such as teachers and doctors, in the same manner as the person with parental authority (Article 275a § 2 of the Civil Code).
The Court has examined the national laws of a selection of twentynine Member States of the Council of Europe other than Switzerland. It appears that all twenty-nine Member States provide for shared parental authority by divorced parents if they have submitted a joint request or if the domestic courts have so decided.
In addition, provisions comparable to those in force in Switzerland at the time of the domestic decisions in this case (see paragraph 20 above), exist in sixteen of those twenty-nine Member States, where the domestic courts favour shared parental authority if the parents have submitted a joint request (which can also be the result of mediation) in the divorce proceedings.
Moreover, like in Switzerland at the time of the domestic decisions, in seventeen of the Member States surveyed, the domestic judge could also award parental authority to only one of the parents if it was in the child’s best interests. Meanwhile, the other parent was granted contact rights and the right to be consulted regarding important decisions in the child’s life.