The case originated in an application (no. 53363/99) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Slovakian national, Mr Richard Vanek (“the applicant”), on 3 November 1999.
The applicant was represented by Mr J. Klimko, a lawyer practising in . The Government of the  (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms A. Poláčková.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the length of two sets of proceedings in which he was involved was excessive.
The application was allocated to the Fourth Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
By a decision of 31 May 2005 the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant was born in 1939 and lives in .
The inhabitants of the house in which the applicant lives asked the owner of the house to transfer to them the ownership of the respective flats pursuant to the Flat and Other Premises Ownership Act of 1993. The administrator of the house, the  - Staré mesto municipality, proposed to sell the flats to the inhabitants. However, it excluded the loft from the sales contracts as it envisaged selling it to a third person who planned to build new flats there. Subsequently the following relevant facts occurred and decisions were taken.
On 4 November 1998 the applicant and nine other inhabitants challenged the validity of the construction contract concluded between the municipality  - Staré mesto and the company RAFT, s.r.o. concerning the construction of flats at the roof level of the house in which the plaintiffs lived.
On 11 July 2001 the President of the Bratislava I District Court informed the applicant that the judge dealing with the case had a heavy workload and that she had therefore not yet started examining the case.
On 18 October 2002 the Bratislava I District Court declared the contract void. The defendants appealed. The proceedings are pending before the .
On 23 July 1999 the applicant and the other inhabitants of the house claimed that the Bratislava I District Court should deliver a judgment replacing the declaration of intent of the  - Staré mesto municipality and permitting the transfer of ownership of the flats, including the loft, to them under the Flats and Other Premises Ownership Act of 1993. The plaintiffs claimed that the defendant municipality had failed to comply with its statutory obligation to do so.
On 4 November 1999 the plaintiffs submitted further information at the court’s request.
On 28 February 2000 the District Court discontinued the proceedings on the ground that the action was incomplete.
The plaintiffs appealed and the , on 25 May 2000, quashed the first instance decision.
The appellate court’s decision was served in June 2000. On 1 February 2001 the District Court requested the defendant to submit comments on the action.
On 10 May 2001 the applicant submitted further information at the District Court’s request.
On 26 November 2002 the Bratislava I District Court dismissed the action. It noted that several plaintiffs had already concluded purchase contracts in respect of their apartments and that in the draft contracts attached to their action the plaintiffs proposed to buy the apartments from a person other than the defendant.
On 5 February 2003 the applicant and the other plaintiffs appealed.
On 9 September 2003 the  upheld the first instance judgment concluding that the plaintiffs had failed to comply with the relevant statutory requirements.
On 31 August 2001 the  found that the applicant’s constitutional right to a hearing without undue delay had been violated by the Bratislava I District Court in both the above sets of proceedings. It held that the District Court had failed to proceed with the cases in an appropriate manner as a result of which there had been unjustified delays in the proceedings. As regards the proceedings concerning the sale of the apartments in particular, the  held that the District Court had remained inactive for a period of 7 months between 16 June 2000 and 1 February 2001.
At the moment of delivery of its finding the Constitutional Court lacked power to provide redress to plaintiffs whose right to a hearing within a reasonable time had been violated (for further details see, e.g., Švolík v. Slovakia, no. 51545/99, §§ 24-28, 15 February 2005).