The case concerns the applicant’s complaints concerning the alleged lack of adequate medical treatment and, in particular, dental care he received while in detention.
The applicant was born in 1971 and lives in Bacău.
The applicant was granted leave to present his own case under Rule 36 § 2 in fine of the Rules of Court.
The Government were represented by their Agent, most recently Ms O. Ezer, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 29 October 2013 a medical committee issued a certificate attesting that the applicant had been classified as a person with a permanent, severe physical disability on account of his visual impairment. The medical commission granted the applicant the right to a personal care assistant (for further details, see Mihăilescu v. Romania [Committee], no. 11220/14, 14 February 2017, and Mihăilescu v. Romania [Committee], no. 72608/14, 24 September 2019). The applicant also suffers from various other medical disorders, including coronary heart disease and hepatic steatosis.
In 2012 the applicant was convicted of human trafficking. He was sentenced to ten years’ imprisonment and sent to Bacău Prison.
The medical report drawn up upon the applicant’s incarceration did not refer to the dentition model the applicant had at the time, allegedly for lack of appropriate staff.
The applicant served his prison sentence in Iaşi, Bacău, Vaslui and Găeşti prisons. He transited through several other prisons in order to take part in judicial proceedings and for medical reasons.
On 26 September 2018 he was released on parole after serving six years of his sentence.
On 24 July 2019 the applicant was arrested under suspicion of having committed deception and placed firstly in Bacău Detention Centre and subsequently in Bacău Prison. On 13 December 2019 he was released from prison.
The applicant submitted that throughout his detention, the medical attention he received for his significant dental problems had been completely inadequate. He claimed that his teeth had been extracted without any further investigation or proposal of alternative treatment, and that this had happened only after he had repeatedly insisted that he should be examined and receive treatment.
He further argued that he had submitted a request to the prison authorities to have a dental prosthesis prescribed, for which he had expressed his willingness to pay the fees; although his request had been granted, it had never been implemented. The applicant did not submit any document in support of this allegation.
The Government submitted that in general the applicant had not followed the medical recommendations he had received. They argued that his complaints referring to the alleged lack of adequate dental care were not aimed at obtaining better care, but as a way of justifying a claim for compensation.
Relying on the applicant’s medical file, the Government submitted details about the dental treatment he had received while in detention, as described below.
The applicant had not made any requests for dental examinations until 6 March 2015, when he had a cavity treated and filled. On 28 May 2015 the applicant had an appointment with the dentist but in the end refused to be examined; lastly, on 16 June and 8 July 2015 he made requests for copies of his medical file, which were duly granted.
Besides the treatment described in the domestic proceedings brought by the applicant before the post-sentencing judge (see paragraph 23 below), while in Iaşi Prison he had also been seen by the dentist on the following occasions.
On 27 July 2017 the applicant refused to have a fractured root extracted, claiming that he was due to go on one day’s prison leave (permisie) the following day. On 6 September 2017 he was diagnosed with acute pulpitis and was given painkillers; on 20 September 2017 he had a fractured root removed and was given medication; on 1 November 2017 he underwent an extraction of a fractured root and received medication; on 7 December 2017 he was diagnosed with acute pulpitis, for which painkillers were prescribed; on 20 December 2017 he had a fractured root extracted and received medication for it. On 3 May 2018 he underwent a fractured root extraction and received medication; on 4 May 2018 he went for an examination following the extraction and good progress was noted. Lastly, on 12 July 2018, he was diagnosed with acute pulpitis, for which he received painkillers.
On 11 June 2018 the applicant’s dentition model was drawn up. The report noted that the applicant was diagnosed with partial edentulism on the frontal maxilla (where seven teeth were missing) and on the lateral side of the mandible (where four teeth were missing). It further noted the existence of two fractured roots, one tooth cavity and one filling.
On 4 September 2018 the applicant gave his written consent to have one tooth extracted; on 8 September 2018 he was diagnosed with a complication from a tooth cavity, for which an X-ray was recommended.
On 10 July 2017 the applicant lodged a complaint with the postsentencing judge, pursuant to Article 56 of Law no. 254/2013 (see paragraph 27 below), complaining that he had not received adequate medical treatment for his dental problems. He alleged that he had suffered excruciating pain because he had not been examined in good time by the dentist and that such failure to act amounted to ill-treatment.
The Iaşi Prison authorities submitted that since 19 September 2016, when a dentist had been hired to work in the prison, the applicant had been examined eight times for his dental problems, as follows.
On 29 September, and 6 and 13 October 2016 he received medication for painful dental pulp; on 14 October he received medication for a chronic periodontal disease; on 17 October he underwent an extraction; on 19 January and 24 May 2017 he underwent extractions of fractured roots and received appropriate medication. On 14 July 2017 he was examined for a fractured root and was recommended to return to the dental unit for an extraction, within working hours of the practice, namely between 2 and 3 p.m. daily, or, if the dentist was not present, to present himself to the medical unit.
The applicant submitted that he had been scheduled for the extraction on 19 July but that that appointment had not been kept.
On 25 July 2017 the post-sentencing judge allowed the applicant’s claims. He found that the applicant had been suffering with dental problems from at least 2016; even if he had been examined by a dentist eight times, the treatment he had received was more symptomatic rather than coordinated and effective. There was no evidence to show whether there had been any follow-up care, whether any other investigative acts were needed or whether the applicant’s dental problems had been alleviated. The fact that the applicant had been treated several times, at long intervals, for the same problem of fractured roots proved that according to the domestic law, namely Article 71 § 2 of Law no. 254/2013 (see paragraph 28 below), he had not received appropriate medical assistance.
The judge further held that even after the applicant had lodged his complaint, his request to be examined had not been appropriately taken into consideration in so far as he still did not have an appointment with the dentist. The prison authorities needed therefore to ensure that the applicant’s right to adequate medical assistance in relation to his dental problems was respected.
Article 56 of Law no. 254/2013 on the serving of prison sentences, which entered into force on 1 February 2014, provides that detainees may complain to a post-sentencing judge about measures taken by the prison authorities in respect of their rights within ten days of becoming aware of such measures. The judge’s decision may be challenged before the domestic courts within five days of the detainee being notified of the decision.
Article 71 § 2 of the law provides that medical assistance, treatment and care in prison were to be provided upon request or whenever necessary, free of charge, as provided by the law, and by qualified staff.