The case originated in an application (no. 688/11) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Asli Gayeva (“the applicant”), on 24 December 2010.
The applicant was represented by lawyers of Memorial Human Rights Centre and Ms Larisa Dorogova, a lawyer practicing in Nalchik. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 17 December 2015 notice of the complaints concerning Articles 2, 3 (in respect of Mr Gayev’s alleged torture), 5 and 13 was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1958 and lives in the village of Gerpegezh (in the documents submitted also spelled as Gerpezh), Cherekskiy District, Republic of Kabardino-Balkaria. She is the mother of Mr Zeytun Gayev, who was born in 1977.
At about 7 p.m. on 15 November 2007 Zeytun Gayev and his fellow villager, Mr Zh., were on their way from Nalchik to Gerpegezh when the transport police stopped their car for a check. After searching the car, the police apprehended the two men and took them to the Nalchik Department for the Fight against Organised Crime at the KabardinoBalkaria Ministry of the Interior (hereinafter “the UBOP”). Mr Zh. was released on the following day and returned home. It can be seen from the documents submitted that Mr Gayev was subsequently taken to Nalchik Department of the Interior no. 1 (hereinafter “the police station”).
At about 9 p.m. on the same evening two brothers of Mr Gayev (Mr A.G. and Mr Z.G.) and a lawyer (Mr R.E.) arrived at the UBOP to visit him. They were told that Zeytun Gayev was not there; however, his car was parked in the courtyard of the UBOP premises. Sometime later, at about midnight, they went to the Nalchik town prosecutor’s office and complained to an officer on duty, Mr T., that Zeytun Gayev was being held in unacknowledged detention. Mr T. immediately called the UBOP and obtained informal confirmation that Mr Gayev was being detained on the UBOP premises.
At 2 p.m. on 16 November 2007 several UBOP officers arrived at the applicant’s home in Gerpegezh, searched the house and left. They arrived again at 8 p.m. on the same date. The applicant and her husband, Mr M.G. (Mr Gayev’s father), were at home. The officers were all wearing balaclavas, except for one of them (named Aslan), who was in charge of the group. At some point during the search Aslan phoned another UBOP officer, whose name was Arsen. From their conversation, the applicant understood that they were searching for a gun. Aslan passed the telephone to Mr M.G. so that he could talk to Mr Gayev and ask him where the gun was hidden. Mr M.G. spoke to his son, who told him where the gun was to be found. During the conversation, Mr M.G. noticed that his son’s voice was very weak and that he could barely speak. Having found no gun or anything else that was prohibited, the UBOP officers left.
At about 3.30 p.m. on 16 November 2007 the applicant’s relatives lodged a complaint with the UBOP stating that Zeytun Gayev had, most probably, been subjected to ill-treatment by police officers on the UBOP premises.
At about 8 p.m. on 16 November 2007 Mr A.G. went to the UBOP to take some food to Zeytun Gayev. He asked an officer on duty to pass the food on to his brother. The officer agreed and took delivery of the food. Then Mr A.G. asked the officer whether his brother looked as though he had been beaten. The officer replied that he looked “normal”.
At about 10 p.m. on the same date the police telephoned the applicant and informed her that Mr Gayev had committed suicide, having jumped out of the window located on the fourth floor of the police station.
Several days later, the applicant and Mr M.G. were summoned to the UBOP to be interviewed. They were interviewed by an officer who introduced himself as Arsen. The latter confirmed Mr Gayev’s detention at the UBOP by telling them that their late son had been questioned in the same office as the one in which they were being interviewed and that nobody had beaten him.
Between 17 November 2007 and 14 December 2007 an expert from the Kabardino-Balkaria forensic assessments office carried out an autopsy of Mr Zeytun Gayev’s corpse. The expert’s findings read as follows:
“Blunt complex trauma to the head, body and extremities: [f]ocal subarachnoid hemorrhages, breastbone fracture, double-sided multiple rib fractures, contusion of the left kidney, multiple bruising of the head, body and extremities.
Complication: [p]ost-traumatic shock. Cephaloedema.”
The expert concluded, inter alia, that:
“... Z. Gayev’s death was caused by blunt complex trauma to the head, body and extremities, accompanied by: focal haemorrhages under the cerebral meninges, breastbone fracture, double-sided multiple rib fractures, left kidney contusion, and multiple bruising to the head, body and extremities.
... The injuries were caused by repeated impact with hard blunt items ... which may have been fingers clenched into a fist, a shod foot, a stick, or something else. [They] are cumulatively assessed as GRIEVOUS bodily harm on the grounds of danger to life. All the injuries are intravital in nature and were sustained between six and twelve hours before the moment of death. ... [That t]he injuries [resulted from] ... a fall from an altitude exceeding a human’s height is improbable. ... [Following their infliction, Mr Zeytun Gayev] was able for some time (up to several hours) to make independent movements ...
Apart from the above-mentioned injuries, the autopsy ... revealed a fracture of the right thigh bone ... [which was sustained] after death...
The estimated length of time that Mr Z. Gayev had been dead as at the moment of the autopsy is twelve to twenty-four hours, [judging by] the character of the post mortem changes.”
On 26 November 2007 the Nalchik inter-district investigation department of the Kabardino-Balkarian Investigation Committee (the district investigation department) decided not to open a criminal investigation into Zeytun Gayev’s death. The reasons for that decision are unknown.
On 5 December 2007 the investigators’ supervisor quashed that decision and ordered that an investigation be opened.
On 15 December 2007 (in the documents submitted the date was also referred to as 14 December 2007) the district investigation department opened criminal case no. 71/478-07 under Article 286 § 3 of the Criminal Code (Aggravated abuse of authority). Concerning the sequence of the events, the decision read as follows:
“... at about 8:50 p.m. [on 15 November 2007 traffic police officers] stopped ... [Zeytun Gayev’s car] ... In the course of the search of the car ... two RGD-5 hand grenades, two detonation fuses for hand grenades ... and twenty 7.62 mm bullets were found ...
Then Z. Gayev was taken to the UBOP ... where he was unlawfully detained until 8 p.m. on 16 November 2007.
... at 5:30 p.m. [on 16 November 2007] ... a criminal case was instituted against Z. Gayev under Article 222 § 1 of the Criminal Code [Illegal possession of firearms], and at 8.20 p.m. on the same date ... [he] was arrested ... [and questioned in the police station].
On 16 November 2007 the Nalchik inter-district investigation department of the Kabardino-Balkaria Investigation Committee was informed of ... Z. Gayev’s death.”
On 18 December 2007 the father of Mr Gayev, Mr M.G., was granted victim status in the case and questioned. His official statement was similar to the applicant’s submission before the Court.
On 28 January 2008 Mr M.G. was informed that the criminal case had been transferred to the Special Cases Directorate at the KabardinoBalkaria Investigation Committee (Отдел по расследованию особо важных дел следственного управления Следственного комитета при прокуратуре РФ по КБР – hereinafter “the investigators”) for further investigation.
On unspecified dates between 2007 and 2008 the investigators questioned a number of witnesses, who made submissions regarding the circumstances surrounding Mr Gayev’s death. Copies of their statements as submitted to the Court can be summarised as follows.
Mr A.A., a UBOP officer, stated in particular that after the traffic police had apprehended Zeytun Gayev and handed him over to the UBOP, one or two grenades and several bullets had been found hidden in his car. Thereafter, a UBOP investigator had interviewed him and obtained from him a confession of complicity with an illegal armed group hiding in the mountains. On the morning of the following day operational search activities had started. He and a group of about fifty law-enforcement officers had taken Mr Gayev into the mountains in search of the illegal armed group. In the course of the operation, Mr Gayev had on several occasions fallen striking the ground, rocks and trees. At some point, Mr  Gayev and another UBOP officer, Mr A.S., had fallen off a ledge and struck a tree. Subsequently, Mr Gayev had neither complained nor requested medical assistance. The operation had lasted for several hours and had finished in the afternoon, with no positive results. At about 8 p.m. on the same date he (that is to say Mr A.A.) had taken Mr Gayev to the police station, where the investigator had questioned him in the presence of a legal-aid lawyer, Mr Zh.M. During the questioning (which had lasted for about an hour) Mr  Gayev had not made any complaints. At the end of the questioning, he and the UBOP officer, Mr A.S., had led Mr Gayev out of the investigator’s office into the corridor, prior to taking him to a temporary detention centre. Suddenly, Mr Gayev had broken away, run towards the window shouting Allāhu akbar and jumped from the fourth floor. He and Mr A.S. had immediately gone downstairs. They had found Zeytun Gayev lying on the ground in the courtyard of the police station. The latter had still been alive and had been able to talk. He (Mr A.A.) had heard him answering questions that Mr A.S. had asked him. After about ten minutes, the ambulance had arrived and taken him to hospital. He had subsequently been told that Mr Gayev had died in the ambulance on the way to hospital.
Mr Zh.M., a lawyer, submitted that on 16 November 2007 he had been appointed as Zeytun Gayev’s legal-aid lawyer in connection with the criminal proceedings instituted against him. At about 8 p.m. on that date he had arrived at the police station to advise Mr Gayev during his questioning as a suspect. Upon arrival, he had been given time to speak to his client. He had not noticed any injuries on his body, but had nevertheless asked him whether he had been subject to any physical or psychological pressure. Mr Gayev had replied in the negative and had said that he had been neither beaten nor intimidated. The questioning had taken place in the presence of two UBOP officers in the investigator’s office located on the fourth floor and had lasted for about an hour. No physical violence had been applied to Mr Gayev during the questioning. After the questioning, one of the UBOP officers had handcuffed Mr Gayev and had taken him into the corridor. Suddenly, he had heard somebody shouting “Akbar” and the sound of breaking glass. Having rushed into the corridor, he had seen the UBOP officers standing around a window, the glass of which had been smashed. One of the officers had told him that Mr Gayev had jumped out of the window. He and the officers had immediately gone downstairs and found Mr Gayev lying on the ground. The latter had been unconscious, but still alive. After about five minutes an ambulance had arrived and had taken him to hospital.
Ms M.L. and Mr Y.B., the emergency unit paramedics who attended the scene of Mr Gayev’s fall, stated that at about 9.30 p.m. on 16 November 2007 they had received an emergency call from the police station. After arriving at the scene, they had found a man lying unconscious on the ground in the courtyard of the police station. The man had been alive when the ambulance had arrived, albeit in a critical state. They had examined him and noticed in particular the “abnormal movement” of the ribs and of the right thigh bone. Then they had loaded him into the ambulance in order to take him to hospital; however, he had died en route several minutes later.
On 24 April 2008 the investigators questioned the applicant. Her statement was similar to the submissions that she provided to the Court.
On 12 May 2008 the investigators ordered a forensic medical examination of Mr Gayev’s body. A panel of five medical experts carried out the examination between 13 May and 23 June 2008. The expert panel upheld the previous findings as to the nature and cause of the injuries to Mr Gayev and the length of time that had elapsed since they had been inflicted; it also found that after their infliction he had been able to move and talk for a certain period of time. The cause of the death was found to be:
“... traumatic shock, sustained as a result of blunt complex trauma to the head, body and extremities, accompanied by focal haemorrhaging under the cerebral meninges, a breastbone fracture, double-sided multiple rib fractures, contusion of the left kidney and multiple bruising to the head, body and extremities.”
On 6 August 2008 Mr M.G. requested the investigators to inform him about the progress of the criminal case and to provide him with copies of the case-file materials. The request was granted.
On 18 September 2008 the investigators ordered another forensic medical examination, which was carried out between 14 January and 25 February 2009 by a panel of four experts. The panel concluded that Mr  Gayev’s death had been caused by blunt complex trauma complicated by traumatic shock, cephaloedema (brain swelling) and pulmonary oedema. The blunt complex trauma was found to consist of the following injuries:
“... focal haemorrhages under the cerebral meninges ..., haemorrhaging into the paranephric body of the left kidney, haemorrhages under the epicardium ..., fractures of the third-ninth ribs ..., [fractures] of the fifth-eighth ribs ..., massive bruising (of the left shoulder ..., the left hip ..., the lower left leg ..., the left posterior surface of the thorax, the lumbar region), bruising around the right eye [and] on the left malar region, and also a fracture of the right thigh ..., bruising of the right shoulder ..., the right forearm ..., the right thigh ... and the right lower leg ...”.
As to how the trauma was inflicted, the experts found the following:
“... injuries indicating blunt complex trauma to Z. Gayev’s body were sustained as a result of impact with hard blunt objects ... [It might well have been sustained] as a result of [Mr Gayev’s] fall ... from a high altitude onto the left side of the body.
 ... [T]he injuries are intra vitam ... [They] were sustained no more than twenty-four hours before the moment of Z. Gayev’s death.
... [A]fter the infliction of the blunt trauma on Z. Gayev, the possibility of independent, active movements was excluded, owing to the severity of the injuries.”
The experts furthermore found:
“... Apart from that, the forensic medical examination of Z. Gayev’s corpse revealed the following injuries:
- A transverse breast bone fracture ...
- Fracture[s] of the sixth ... seventh, and eighth ribs ...
The above injuries were sustained as a result of an impact with a hard blunt object (or objects) ... [I]t cannot be excluded that ... [they] were sustained ... as a result of [attempts to] resuscitation of Z. Gayev.
“... [I]t should be noted that no indications of fighting or [attempts at] self-defence, or [indications] that the position of [Mr Zeytun Gayev’s] corpse had been altered was evident from the material submitted for examination.”
As for the time of Mr Gayev’s death, the experts concluded that:
“... Z. Gayev had not been dead more than two-four hours, as at the moment when the post-mortem changes were recorded during the site inspection (the inspection started at 10.20 p.m. [and] ended at 11.30 p.m.) on 16 November 2007.”
On an unspecified date in 2008 or 2009 the applicant was granted victim status in the case.
On 18 April 2009 the investigation was suspended for failure to identify the perpetrators.
On 28 April 2009 the investigators’ superior overruled the decision to suspend the investigation as unlawful and premature and ordered that it be resumed in order that a number of steps be taken, including the following:
“[E]stablish whether Z. Gayev complained of ill-treatment [and] whether anyone heard screams and other sounds from a beating or a fight; clarify the circumstance of Z. Gayev’s fall from the fourth floor; ...
... additionally, question the investigators M. and G. and find out what state Z. Gayev was in while in ... the police station, whether he moved around on his own or with assistance, and which ... police staff members were on the fourth floor at the time; ...
... in addition, question [officers] T., S. and A. and find out how they can explain Z. Gayev’s bodily injuries and haematomas on his face, given that in their statements [to the investigation] they indicated that there had been no visible injuries on the uncovered parts of Z. Gayev’s body and face;
... take [disciplinary] steps ... concerning the violations noted in forensic export report no. 19/09 of 14 January 2009 that were committed by the staff of the forensic assessments office; ...”
On 28 April 2009 the investigation was resumed, but on 4 June 2009 the investigators again suspended it, without complying with the abovementioned orders.
On 30 July 2009 the deputy Kabardino-Balkaria regional prosecutor ordered the investigators to “rectify the breaches of federal legislation committed in the course of the preliminary investigation” (требование об устранении нарушений федерального законодательства допущенных в ходе предварительного следствия) in which he criticised the investigation and ordered that a number of steps be taken. In particular, the wording of the request stated:
“[T]he investigation established that at about 8.50 p.m. on 15 November 2007 Z. Gayev had been detained by [the police] officers ... and taken to the police station ... where he had been unlawfully detained until 8 p.m. on 16 November 2007.
... to date the police officers T., M., R., and A. who arrived with investigator Kh. to detain Z. Gayev, have not been questioned by the investigators;
... the investigation has not established the identities of the officers who carried out the operational search measures in the mountainous area between Gerpegezh and Khasanya during which, according to the statements of witnesses A. and S., Z. Gayev fell and may have hurt himself; ...
According to the statement of M.G. [the father of Z. Gayev], as well as those of the witnesses A.G., Z.G., and A.G. [the applicant], at about 8 p.m. on 16 November 2007 unidentified police officers searched their household; ... during the search M.G. spoke with Zeytun Gayev, who had been detained prior to the search at the UBOP building, by mobile telephone ... A police officer named Aslan threatened M.G. on account of their failure to find the handgun they were looking for.
In order to confirm that allegation, witness A.G. [the applicant] provided the names of [eight] local residents who had been present during the search and who had heard the threats that the police officer had made to M.G.;...
... Up to the present, there is no information regarding the basis on which Zeytun Gayev was detained at the police station ...
... From the statement of Mr. Zh., who had been in Z. Gayev’s car during his arrest, it can be seen that he was also unlawfully detained at the UBOP from the time of his apprehension until 6 p.m. on 16 November 2007; however, the investigation has not duly examined his submission ...”
Following the criticism voiced by the deputy Kabardino-Balkaria regional prosecutor (see paragraph 30 above), on 8 August 2009 the investigators’ supervisor ordered that the investigation be resumed and number of steps taken – including those listed in the above-mentioned request, as well as the steps that had been ordered previously.
On 8 August 2009 the investigation was resumed; it was suspended again on 19 September 2009.
On 25 September 2009 the investigation was resumed again in order that a number of steps could be taken.
On 25 October 2009 the investigators again suspended the proceedings for failure to identify the perpetrators.
According to the information that the Government submitted on 8 April 2016 together with their observations on the admissibility and merits of the application, on 14 March 2016 the investigators’ superior overruled the decision of 25 October 2009 as unlawful and premature, and ordered that the proceedings be resumed and a number of previously ordered steps taken. Those steps included “establishing whether the convoy officers took the necessary steps to protect the detainee’s [that is to say Zeytun Gayev’s] life and to pre-empt his possible suicide” and “establishing the circumstances under which Z. Gayev received his bodily injuries – including fractures of the chest, ribs and the hip”. It is unclear whether those orders were complied with.
The investigation in respect of the criminal case is still pending.
In reply to the Court’s request for a copy of criminal case file no. 71/478-07, the Government furnished a copy of its contents, which amounted to 716 pages.
On 20 April 2010 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Nalchik Town Court challenging the effectiveness of the investigation.
On 27 April 2010 the court terminated the proceedings, referring the applicant’s wish to withdraw the complaint. On 25 June 2010 the Supreme Court of the Kabardino-Balkaria upheld that decision on appeal.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law see Turluyeva v. Russia, no. 63638/09, §§ 56-63, 20 June 2013.