The case originated in two applications (nos. 34297/02 and 39574/02) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Ukrainian nationals, Ms Valentyna Mykolayivna Derkach and Mr Mykola Ivanovych Palek (“the applicants”), on 22 August 2002 and 11 October 2002 respectively.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents – Mrs V. Lutkovska, succeeded by Mrs Z. Bortnovska.
On 11 June 2003 the Court decided to communicate the applications to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the applications at the same time as their admissibility.
Ms Valentyna Mykolayivna Derkach, is a Ukrainian national, who was born in 1962. Mr Mykola Ivanovych Palek, is also a Ukrainian national, who was born in 1957. Both applicants reside in the town of , .
In 2001-2002 the applicants instituted separate sets of proceedings in the domestic local courts seeking the recovery of salary arrears and other payments against their former employer-the State-owned “Atomspetsbud” company which carried out construction work in , more precisely in the zone subject to compulsory evacuation.
By a decision of the Vyshgorodsky District Court of Kiev Region of 5 March 2002, Ms Valentyna Derkach was awarded UAH 9,133 (the equivalent of 1,405.08 euros [“EUR”]) in salary arrears and compensation. The decision came into force. On 22 April 2002 the Slavutsky District Department of the State Bailiffs' Service initiated enforcement proceedings.
By a decision of the Vyshgorodsky District Court of Kiev Region of 15 May 2002, Mr Mykola Palek was awarded UAH 15,476 (the equivalent of EUR 2,380.92) in salary arrears and compensation. The decision came into force. On 8 August 2002 the Bailiffs' Service instituted enforcement proceedings.
On 29 June 2002 the Ministry of Energy decided to wind-up the debtor company, given its unprofitability. On 18 July 2002 a liquidation commission was established.
In December 2002 the writs of execution in both cases were forwarded to the liquidation commission.
The judgments remain unenforced, in particular due to the fact that the debtor's property could not be attached to enforce the judgments. Attachment would have required a special authorisation of the Ministry for Emergencies due to the location of the debtor's property in the  area, contaminated by radiation. Authorisation was not granted.
The relevant extract of the Constitution of Ukraine reads as follows:
Article 124
“... Judicial decisions are adopted by the courts in the name of  and are mandatory for execution throughout the entire .”
The relevant extracts of the Civil Code read as follows:
Article 32
“A legal entity shall be liable for its obligations to the extent of the property owned by it (attached to it), unless legislation provides otherwise.
The founder of the legal entity or the owner of its property shall not be liable for its obligations, and the legal entity shall not be liable for the obligations of the owner or the founder, unless legislation or the statutory documents of the legal entity provide otherwise.
A legal entity which is financed by the owner, and which has property attached to it on the basis of the operative management ..., shall be liable for its obligations to the extent of the funds in its possession. In the event of a lack of funds, the owner of the property shall be liable for the obligations of the entity.”
Article 33
“The State shall not be liable for the obligations of State organisations which possess legal personality, and those organisations shall not be liable for the obligations of the State.
The conditions and procedure for providing funds to cover the debts of institutions and other State organisations which are funded by the State budget, if such debts could not be covered by their own budget, shall be established by the legislation of the USSR and the Ukrainian SSR.”
Article 38
“The liquidation of State organisations which possess legal personality shall be conducted by the body which created them.”
The relevant extracts of the new Civil Code read as follows
Article 81
“... 2. Legal entities shall be divided into private-law legal entities and public-law legal entities, depending on the procedure governing their creation.
Private-law legal entities shall be established on the basis of statutory documents, in accordance with Article 87 of this Code.
Public-law legal entities shall be established by decision of the President of Ukraine, an empowered State body, an empowered body of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea or a body of local self-government.
This Code provides a procedure for the establishment of the organisational and legal forms, and the legal status of private-aw entities.
The procedure for the creation and legal status of public-law entities shall be laid down by the Constitution of Ukraine and the law.”
Article 96
“1. A legal entity shall itself be liable for its obligations.
A legal entity shall be liable for its obligations to the extent of all of its property.
The participant (founder) of a legal entity shall not be liable for the obligations of that entity, and the legal entity shall not be liable for the obligations of its participant (founder), unless the statutory documents or legislation provide otherwise ...”
Article 167
“1. In civil relations, the State shall act on an equal basis with other participants in such relations.
The State may create legal entities under public law (State enterprises, educational institutions, etc.) in the circumstances and according to the procedure established by the law.
The State may create legal entities under private law (entrepreneurial associations, etc.), to participate in their activities ... unless the law stipulates otherwise.”
Article 176
“1. The State ...shall not be liable for the obligations of the legal entities established by them, unless the law provides otherwise.
Legal entities established by the State ... shall not be liable for the obligations of the State ...”
The relevant extracts of the Law read as follows:
Article 2
“Enterprises of the following type can operate in : ...
- a State enterprise, founded on State property, including a public enterprise ...”
Article 10
“... 3. The property, owned by the State and attached to a State enterprise (with the exception of a public enterprise), belongs to the enterprise with the right to its full economic control.
In exercising its right of full economic control, the State enterprise owns, uses and disposes of the above property at its discretion, performing any actions in relation to it which are not contrary to the legislation in force or the statute of the enterprise.
The property owned by the State and attached to a public enterprise belongs to it with the right of operational control.
In exercising its right to operational control, the public enterprise possesses and uses the above property.
The public enterprise shall be entitled to dispose of the property in its capital fund, owned by the State and given to the enterprise with the right to operational control, only with the permission of the body authorised to manage the relevant State property. The particularities of the disposal of the other property of the public enterprise shall be defined in its statute.”
Article 37
“1. The State-owned enterprise that shall not be subject to privatisation under the legislation of  can be transformed into a public enterprise by the decision of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine.
The decision on transformation of the State-owned enterprise into a public enterprise shall be taken under one of the following conditions:
- the enterprise conducts manufacturing or other activities, that, under the legislation, can be performed only by the State-owned enterprise;
- the principal consumer of the production of the enterprise (more than 50 %) is the State;
- the enterprise is subject to natural monopolies.
The liquidation and reorganisation of the public enterprise shall be performed upon the decision of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine in accordance with the legislation of .”
Article 39
“3. The public enterprise shall be liable for its obligations by its funds and other property which it possesses, except for capital assets. In case of insufficiency of such funds and property, its owner shall be liable for its obligations.”
Article 6 of the Law provides that the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine determines the planning, the material and technical maintenance, the scope of financial contributions, as well as the salaries of employees of all companies involved in work on the elimination of the consequences of the  catastrophe, regardless of the companies' status and ownership.
Article 12 of the Law prohibits the withdrawal of construction materials, equipment and other goods from the alienation zone and zone of compulsory evacuation without special permission from the Ministry for Emergencies. It equally requires the permission of that Ministry to carry out any economic activity, including construction, in the zone.
Law of 21 April 1999 “on Enforcement Proceedings”
Law of 24 March 1998 “on the State Bailiffs' Service”
The Decree provides that Ministries and other executive bodies are authorised to adopt decisions concerning the creation, reorganisation, and liquidation of enterprises, institutions, and organisations founded on State property. The Decree further provides that the Ministries shall not interfere directly in the activities of State-owned enterprises.
The Decree provides for the transfer of a number of enterprises, including the “State Construction and Commerce Company “Atomspetsbud”, to the management of the Ministry of Energy due to changes in the Government's structure.