The case originated in an application (no. 45190/07) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a British national, Mr Terrence Jeans (“the applicant”), on 19 September 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr T. Vukičević, a lawyer practising in . The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs Š. Stažnik.
On 3 September 2009 the President of the First Section decided to communicate to the Croatian Government the complaint concerning the length of the criminal proceedings and the lack of an effective remedy in that respect. In accordance with Protocol No. 14, the application was allocated to a Committee.
Since the applicant is a British national, the Government of the  had been given leave by the President to submit their written comments on the case. The Government did not exercise their right to intervene in the case (Article 36 § 1of the Convention and Rule 44).
The applicant was born in 1944 and lives in Rowner Gosport .
On 3 June 1997 the Split State Attorney's Office (Općinsko državno odvjetništvo) indicted A.B., D.D., G.A. and E.R. before the Split County Court (Županijski sud u Splitu) for participation in an affray (sudjelovanje u tučnjavi) and D.Š. for the murder of the applicant's son on 8 September 1996. The applicant participated in the proceedings as the injured party (oštećenik).
On 19 July 2000 the Split County Court delivered a judgment finding the first four accused guilty while acquitting D.Š. It also instructed the applicant to pursue his claim for non-pecuniary damage against the four accused in separate civil proceedings.
Following an appeal by the State Attorney, on 5 December 2002 the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske) reversed the lower-instance judgment in the part concerning the first four accused by acquitting them, as their prosecution had become time-barred. It also quashed the judgment in the part concerning D.Š. and remitted the case.
In the resumed proceedings, at the hearing held on 27 November 2003, the applicant stated that he had already instituted civil proceedings for damages concerning the death of his son (see paragraph 15 below).
However, on 10 February 2006 the applicant made a civil claim (imovinskopravni zahtjev) in the criminal proceedings, seeking compensation of non-pecuniary damage in the amount of 300,000 Croatian kunas (HRK).
In the resumed proceedings the court held five of fourteen scheduled hearings, whereas the others were adjourned due to the inability of domestic authorities to locate a witness and the non-attendance of the defendant's lawyer and experts.
On 10 July 2007 the  delivered a judgment acquitting D.Š. and instructing the applicant to pursue his compensation claim against the accused in separate civil proceedings that he had already instituted.
Following an appeal by the State Attorney, on 22 January 2008 the Supreme Court again quashed the lower-instance judgment and remitted the case.
The proceedings are still pending before the Split County Court.
On 21 July 2003 the applicant brought a civil action in the Kaštel Lukšić Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Kaštel Lukšiću) against D.Š., seeking non-pecuniary damages in connection with the death of his son.
On 7 June 2004 the Municipal Court, at the request of the parties, stayed the proceedings pending the outcome of the above-mentioned criminal proceedings.
On 22 March 2004 the applicant brought a civil action in the Split Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Splitu) against the State, also seeking non-pecuniary damages in connection with the death of his son. On 26 April 2004 the Municipal Court ruled in favour of the applicant since the defendant had failed to respond to his civil action (presuda zbog ogluhe).
Following the defendant's request, on 9 July 2004 the Municipal Court restored the proceedings to the status quo ante (povrat u prijašnje stanje).
On 21 September 2004 at the applicant's request, the Municipal Court stayed the proceedings pending the outcome of the above-mentioned criminal proceedings.
On 13 February 2006 the applicant lodged a request for the protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time (zahtjev za zaštitu prava na suđenje u razumnom roku) with the Supreme Court complaining about the length of the above-mentioned criminal proceedings. He argued that due to the length of the criminal proceedings, it was very likely that proceedings against D.Š. could become time-barred, as it was the case against the other four accused.
On 29 June 2006 the Supreme Court dismissed his request, finding that the proceedings complained of did not concern “the determination of the applicant's civil rights and obligations” or “any criminal charge against him”.
On 5 September 2006 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint against that decision, arguing that on 10 February 2006 he had submitted a civil claim for damages in the above-mentioned criminal proceedings and that therefore it could not be said that those proceedings had not concerned “the determination of his civil rights and obligations” as the Supreme Court reasoned.
On 17 December 2008 the  dismissed the applicant's constitutional complaint and served its decision on his representative on 23 January 2009. It noted that by initially deciding to pursue his civil claim for damages in the separate civil proceedings, the applicant had lost his right to do so in the above-mentioned criminal proceedings. Therefore, the criminal proceedings indeed did not concern “the determination of his civil rights and obligations” as the Supreme Court had correctly held.
The relevant part of the 1999 Constitutional Act on the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Croatia (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 99/1999 of 29 September 1999 – “the Constitutional Court Act”), as amended by the 2002 Amendments (Ustavni zakon o izmjenama i dopunama Ustavnog zakona o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 29/2002 of 22 March 2002), which entered into force on 15 March 2002, reads as follows:
Section 63
“(1)  The Constitutional Court shall examine a constitutional complaint whether or not all legal remedies have been exhausted if the competent court fails to decide a claim concerning the individual's rights and obligations or a criminal charge against him or her within a reasonable time ...
(2)  If a constitutional complaint ... under paragraph 1 of this section is upheld, the  shall set a time-limit within which the competent court must decide the case on the merits.
(3)  In a decision issued under paragraph 2 of this section, the  shall assess appropriate compensation for the applicant for the violation of his or her constitutional rights ... The compensation shall be paid out of the State budget within three months from the date a request for payment is lodged.”
The relevant part of the Courts Act (Zakon o sudovima, Official Gazette nos. 150/05, 16/07 and 113/08), which entered into force on 29 December 2005, reads as follows:
PROTECTION OF THE RIGHT TO A HEARING WITHIN A REASONABLE TIME
Section 27
“(1)  A party to court proceedings who considers that the competent court failed to decide within a reasonable time on his or her rights or obligations or a criminal charge against him or her, may lodge a request for the protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time with the immediately higher court.
(2)  If the request concerns proceedings pending before the High Commercial Court of the Republic of Croatia, the High Court for Administrative Offences of the Republic of Croatia or the Administrative Court of the Republic of Croatia, the request shall be decided by the Supreme Court of the .
(3)  The proceedings for deciding the request referred to in paragraph 1 of this section shall be urgent. The rules of non-contentious procedure shall apply mutatis mutandis in those proceedings and, in principle, no hearing shall be held.”
Section 28
“(1)  If the court referred to in section 27 of this Act finds the request well founded, it shall set a time-limit within which the court before which the proceedings are pending must decide on a right or obligation of, or a criminal charge against, the person who lodged the request, and shall award him or her appropriate compensation for the violation of his or her right to a hearing within a reasonable time.
(2)  The compensation shall be paid out of the State budget within three months from the date the party's request for payment is lodged.
(3)  An appeal, to be lodged within fifteen days with the Supreme Court, lies against a decision on the request for the protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time. No appeal lies against the Supreme Court's decision but one may lodge a constitutional complaint.”
The relevant provisions of the Code on Criminal Procedure (Zakon o kaznenom postupku - Official Gazette nos.110/1997, 27/1998, 58/1999. 112/1999, 58/2002, 62/2003, 178/2004 and 115/06) provide as follows:
Article 127
“(1)  A claim for redress caused by a criminal offence shall be examined in the criminal proceedings upon a request by authorised persons, provided that this does not cause significant delays of the proceedings.
...”
Article 128
“  A claim for redress in criminal proceedings may lodge a person entitled to do so in civil proceedings.”
The relevant provisions of the Civil Procedure Act (Zakon o parničom postupku, The Official Gazette, nos. 53/91, 91/92, 112/99, 88/01 and 117/03) provide as follows:
Section 12
“(3)  A civil court is bound by a final judgment given in criminal proceedings finding the accused guilty in so far as it concerns the existence of the criminal offence and criminal liability of the accused.”
Section 213
“...court shall stay the proceedings:
When it decides not to rule on a preliminary issue itself.
...
  The court may stay the proceedings if the decision on the merits depends on ... whether a criminal offence has been committed ..., who committed it and whether that person may be held [criminally] liable...”
Section 215
“(2)  Where a court has stayed the proceedings on the grounds in paragraph 1, or paragraph 2 of section 213, the proceedings shall resume when the [concurrent] proceedings before a court or other competent authority end with a final decision, or when the court finds that the reasons for awaiting their outcome no longer exist.
(3)  In all other cases the proceedings shall be resumed at the request of a party as soon as the reasons for their stay cease to exist.”
According to the Supreme Court's case law, a victim of a criminal offence (injured party) may complain about the length of criminal proceedings as of the date of filing of her or his claim for redress in those proceedings. The relevant part of the Supreme Court's judgment no. Kzp-21/08-6 of 20 May 2008 (Vrhovni Sud Republike Hrvatske), reads as follows:
“The injured party in criminal proceedings becomes entitled to file a request for the protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time as of the date of filing a claim for redress in the criminal proceedings, because it is only from that time, that his or her civil rights are being determined ....”