The case originated in an application (no. 9737/06) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Armenian national, Ms Emilia Melikyan (“the applicant”), on 9 March 2006.
The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that she was unable to challenge the legality of a Government decree before the domestic courts.
On 7 January 2009 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1949 and lives in .
From 1986 to 2005 the applicant worked at Paren Scientific Production and Planning State Closed Joint-Stock Company (hereafter “the Company”).
On 27 July 2001 a law was adopted defining the programme of privatisation of State property for the period from 2001 to 2003, which listed the Company as one of many State companies subject to privatisation.
On 5 February 2004 the employees of the Company applied to the Government with a request that the Company’s property be privatised through a direct sale to them. This request was admitted and was being examined by the Government at the time of preparation of the draft Government decree concerning the privatisation of the Company’s shares.
On 10 June 2004 the Government adopted a decree (hereafter, the Decree), paragraph 1.2 of which set out that the Company’s shares were to be privatised through a tender procedure. The Decree was submitted to the President of Armenia for approval.
By a letter of 7 July 2004 the Department for Management of State Property (hereafter the “DMSP”) informed the Company’s employees that the relevant tender procedure was open to them.
On an unspecified date, before the approval of the Decree by the President, a number of amendments were introduced, including amendments to paragraph 1.2.
On 8 October 2004 the President of Armenia approved the Decree, whose amended paragraph 1.2 stipulated that the Company’s shares were to be privatised through a direct sale to a third person, A.K.
On 1 December 2004 the Company’s employees, including the applicant, lodged jointly several claims with the Kentron and NorkMarash District Court of Yerevan against the Government and the DMSP seeking, inter alia, prohibition of the application of certain provisions of the Decree and recognition of their pre-emptive right to acquire the Company’s shares. On the same date the claims were admitted for examination.
In the proceedings before the District Court, the plaintiffs lodged an additional claim, contesting the legality of the Decree and seeking partially to annul it. In particular, they claimed that the Decree had been adopted in violation of Sections 27 § 2, 38 § 2 and 68 §§ 4 and 7 of the Law on Legal Acts, Section 10 § 1 of the State Property Privatisation Act (hereafter “the Act”), and Articles 1, 5 and 8 of the Constitution. They also filed a motion requesting the court not to apply Article 160 of the Code of Civil Procedure (CCP) to their claim for annulment, arguing that this provision violated their right of access to court, was unconstitutional and was incompatible with the requirements of Article 6 of the Convention. They also filed another motion requesting the court, in the alternative, to initiate constitutional review proceedings to examine the constitutionality of that provision. According to the applicant, the District Court never addressed those motions.
On 25 January 2005 the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan decided to dismiss all the claims as unsubstantiated except for the claim for annulment, in respect of which the District Court decided under Article 109 of the CCP to terminate the proceedings on the ground that it was not subject to examination by the courts of general jurisdiction. In doing so, the District Court referred to Article 15 § 2 of the Civil Code and paragraph 2 of Article 160 § 1 of the CCP.
On 8 February 2005 the applicant lodged an appeal.
On 6 June 2005 the applicant filed motions with the Civil Court of Appeal similar to those filed before the District Court.
On 22 June 2005 the applicant also requested the Court of Appeal to order the DMSP to provide the originals or certified copies of certain documents relating to the preparation of the Decree. The request was granted but the Government apparently failed to comply with it.
On 28 June 2005 the Court of Appeal examined all the claims, including the claim for annulment, and decided to dismiss them as unsubstantiated. In doing so, the Court of Appeal concluded that the Government of Armenia, as the owner of the Company, acted within its powers by disposing of it in a lawful manner, through adoption of the Decree subsequently ratified by the President.
On 13 July 2005 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law.
On 9 September 2005 the applicant filed a motion similar to those filed before the lower courts.
On the same date the Court of Cassation quashed the judgment of the Court of Appeal in its part relating to the claim for annulment and decided to terminate the proceedings in that part on the same grounds as the District Court.
On 16 November 2006 the  found paragraph 2 of Article 160 § 1 of the CCP to be unconstitutional and declared it invalid.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution, prior to the amendments introduced on 27 November 2005, read as follows:
Article 38
“Everyone has the right to defend his rights and freedoms by any means not prohibited by law.
Everyone has the right to judicial protection of his rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution and laws.”
Article 39
“Everyone has the right to a public hearing of his case by an independent and impartial court within a reasonable time in conditions of equality and with respect for all fair trial requirements in order to have his violated rights restored, as well as the validity of the charge against him determined. ...”
Article 100
“The Constitutional Court, in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law, shall: (1) decide on the conformity of laws, the resolutions of the National Assembly, the decrees and directives of the President of [Armenia] and the decrees of the Government with the Constitution; ...”
Article 101
“Applications to the Constitutional Court can be submitted by: (1) the President of [Armenia]; (2) at least one third of the deputies of the National Assembly; (3) candidates for the office of the President of [Armenia] and for the National Assembly in connection with disputes related to election results; [and] (4) the Government...”
The above Articles 38, 39 and 101, as amended on 27 November 2005 with effect from 6 December 2005, read as follows:
Article 18
“Everyone has the right to an effective remedy to have his rights and freedoms protected by the judicial and other public authorities.
Everyone has the right to defend his rights and freedoms by any means not prohibited by law. ...”
Article 19
“Everyone has the right to a public hearing of his case by an independent and impartial court within a reasonable time in conditions of equality and with respect for all fair trial requirements in order to have his violated rights restored, as well as the validity of the charge against him determined. ...”
Article 101
“Applications to the Constitutional Court can be submitted, in a procedure prescribed by the Constitution and the Constitutional Court Act, by: (1) the President of [Armenia] ...; (2) the National Assembly ...; (3) at least one third of the deputies of the National Assembly ...; (4) the Government ...; (5) the bodies of local self-government ...; (6) any person in respect of a particular case, if there has been a final judicial act and all the judicial remedies have been exhausted and when the dispute concerns the constitutionality of a legal provision applied to that person by such act; (7) the courts and the General Prosecutor on questions of constitutionality of legal provisions relevant to a particular case dealt with by them; (8) the Ombudsman ...; [and] (9) candidates for the office of the President of [Armenia] and for the National Assembly... . The  examines cases only on the basis of a relevant application.”
The relevant provisions of the Civil Code read as follows:
Article 14: Means of protecting civil rights
“Civil rights shall be protected: ... (6) by annulling acts of public authorities or local self-government bodies; ...”
Article 15: Annulling unlawful acts of public authorities or local self-government bodies
“1.  The acts of public authorities or local self-government bodies which are incompatible with laws or other legal acts and which violate the civil rights and lawful interests of a citizen or a legal person may be annulled by a court...”
The Constitutional Court of  shall, under Article 100 of the Constitution of Armenia, decide on the compatibility of laws, the resolutions of the National Assembly of Armenia, the decrees and directives of the President of Armenia, and the decrees of the Government of Armenia with the Constitution.”
Article 163: The notion and substance of the right to ownership
“2.  The owner has the right to carry out at his discretion any action in respect of the property belonging to him, including alienating his property to the ownership of other persons, transferring to such persons the rights to use, possess and dispose of the property, pledging or otherwise disposing of it, provided that such action does not contradict the law or violate the rights and statutory interests of other persons.”
Article 171: Privatisation of State property (denationalisation)
“The State may transfer the property it owns to the ownership of citizens or legal entities in accordance with the procedure as provided for by the laws on privatisation (denationalisation) of State property.”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, as in force at the material time, read as follows:
Article 109: Grounds for terminating the proceedings
“The court shall terminate the proceedings, if ... [inter alia] the dispute is not subject to be examined by the courts...”
Article 159: Grounds for annulling unlawful acts of public authorities, local selfgovernment bodies and their officials or for contesting their actions (inaction)
“Unlawful acts of public authorities, local self-government bodies and their officials can be annulled or their actions (inaction) can be contested (hereafter, annulling the unlawful act) if the act in question contradicts the law and if there is evidence that the applicant’s rights and (or) freedoms guaranteed by the Armenian Constitution and laws have been violated. ...”
Article 160: An application seeking to annul unlawful acts of public authorities, local self-government bodies and their officials
“1.  An application seeking to annul unlawful acts of public authorities, local selfgovernment bodies and their officials shall be submitted to a court dealing with civil cases or the , pursuant to their jurisdiction over cases.
The court cannot examine applications seeking to annul those acts, the determination of whose conformity with the Constitution of Armenia falls within the exclusive jurisdiction of the .
The application may concern the unlawful act itself or any part of it. ...”
The relevant provisions of the Law, as in force at the material time, read as follows:
Section 27: Elaboration of draft legal acts
“2.  At the beginning of activities for the elaboration of a draft law or another regulatory legal act which is significant for its scale or importance, the body elaborating the draft may prepare its concept paper. The concept paper shall include the description of the relations subject to regulation and the objectives of the future legal act, shall state the main provisions, analyse the anticipated consequences of implementation of the norms being elaborated, and may present the preliminary structure of the legal act.”
Section 38: Day of adoption of a legal act
“2.  The reference number of a legal act shall be established by the body adopting the legal act, only in Arabic numerals. The sequence of numbers shall restart from 1 January of each year. Agency regulatory legal acts must be numbered only in whole numerals.”
Section 68: Fulfilment of the requirements of legal acts
“4.  If the fulfilment of a requirement of a norm provided for in a legal act may be achieved only by the adoption of another legal act provided for by that legal act, or its fulfilment is directly conditional upon the adoption of another legal act, the legal act shall be operative in respect of that norm upon the entry into force of the other appropriate legal act.
State and local self-government bodies or their officials shall be obliged to assist, within the scope of their powers, persons in the exercise of their rights and fulfilment of their responsibilities, to take appropriate measures provided for by the legislation of the Republic of Armenia to restore their violated rights, as well as to eliminate the obstacles to the exercise of the rights and fulfilment of responsibilities of persons, if the exercise of those rights or fulfilment of those responsibilities is not in conflict with the interests of the state security and public safety, public order, public health and morals, or if it will not result in an infringement of the rights and freedoms, honour and good reputation of others.”
The relevant provisions of the Act, as in force at the material time, read as follows:
Section 3: The notion and objects of privatisation
“1.  ...In accordance with the procedure provided for by the present Act, the Government of Armenia shall issue a decree on privatisation of State property (except for movable property allocated to a public institution).”
Section 10: The right of members of staff to participate in the privatisation of companies (enterprises) and “small” privatisation units
“1.  The members of staff of the companies (enterprises) or “small” privatisation units being privatised shall have equal rights in buying the property of the companies (enterprises) or “small” privatisation units in question. ...”
Section 14: Procedures for privatising State property
“1.  State property shall be privatised through the following basic procedures: ... (c) tender process; [and] (d) direct sale...
The decision on the procedure through which State property is to be privatised shall be taken by the Government of Armenia, in accordance with a procedure prescribed by this Act. ...”
Section 18: Privatisation of State property through direct sale
“1.  State property shall be privatised through direct sale to: the staff of the company; the leaseholder of the State property; the holder (holders) of the company’s share not owned by the State; or the potential buyer of a given property, if [the buyer] is known in advance.
...An application submitted by the staff of a given company to the competent public authority may serve as a ground for privatising the State property included in the privatisation programme through direct sale to the staff.”
On 13 September 2001 the Government approved the Concept Paper on privatisation of scientific research and planning/design organisations, which were divided into three categories. The third category included organisations carrying out model design work and involved in experimental manufacturing, such as the Company, whose privatisation was found to be expedient. It was stated that such organisations were to be privatised through direct sale to their staff and the approach to be applied was that the privatisation should not merely pursue the aim of purchase and sale of State property.
The Constitutional Court found paragraph 2 of Article 160 § 1 of the CCP incompatible with Articles 18 and 19 of the Constitution, as amended on 27 November 2005, and invalid because it failed to guarantee balance of power, created a serious gap in terms of judicial control of legal acts and endangered the implementation of an individual’s right to judicial protection of his rights and freedoms as guaranteed by paragraph 1 of Article 18 of the Constitution. In doing so, the Constitutional Court held that there existed a judicial practice in accordance with which paragraph 2 of Article 160 § 1 of the CCP was applied by the domestic courts to deny court examination of claims contesting the legality of a number of legal acts including decrees of the President and the Government.