The case originated in an application (no. 50101/12) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Ms Ivanka Bikić (“the applicant”), on 24 July 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr D. Margaretić, a lawyer practising in Zagreb. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the refusal of her request to purchase the flat she occupied amounted to a violation of her right to peaceful enjoyment of her possessions.
On 4 March 2013 the complaint concerning the applicant’s right to peaceful enjoyment of her possessions was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Zagreb.
In the former Yugoslav socialist regime all employees contributed to housing funds. The funds thus obtained were used, inter alia, to build blocks of flats. The flats were distributed to employees, who acquired protected tenancies in respect of them and other already existing socially owned flats. Each publicly owned company drew up a list of persons to be granted specially protected tenancies. When a person on such a list was granted a specially protected tenancy, his or her housing needs were considered to have been met and his or her name would be removed from the list.
The applicant was employed by a socially owned company, S. All employees of S. paid contributions to a housing fund in the amount of 3% of their monthly salaries.
On 31 October 1988 company S. granted the applicant a specially protected tenancy of a flat measuring 65.08 square metres in the Zagreb suburbs, with the right to occupy it together with her husband and two daughters. However, since that decision was not yet final, company S. entered into an agreement with the applicant on 7 December 1988 giving her the right to move into the flat with her family and to care for that flat. The applicant moved into the flat and has been living there ever since.
The decision to grant the applicant a specially protected tenancy was challenged by three other employees and quashed by the Zagreb Basic Court of Associated Labour (Osnovni sud udruženog rada u Zagrebu).
On 27 March 1990 the housing committee of company S. drew up a priority list for the distribution of flats. The applicant was the first on the list. On 23 April 1990 the company’s workers’ council approved the priority list. On the basis of that list she was entitled to have a decision allocating a flat to her issued. On 27 April 1992 the flats of the company S. were transferred for management to the Zagreb Municipality.
On 9 and 15 May 1990, respectively, two other employees of company S. brought an action before the competent court, seeking to have the priority list declared null and void. Competence in the matter was subsequently transferred to the Zagreb Municipal Court, which on 3 February 1999 dismissed the claims on the merits since there was no possibility under the relevant law to bring such an action at all. A civil action could be brought to challenge the decision on allocation of a flat but not to challenge a priority list.
On 23 June 2004 the Zagreb County Court amended the judgment of 3 February 1999 so as to declare the actions inadmissible on the same grounds, namely that the priority list could not be challenged before a court of law.
Meanwhile, on 3 June 1991 Parliament had enacted the Protected Tenancies (Sale to Occupier) Act (Zakon o prodaji stanova na kojima postoji stanarsko pravo), which abolished the specially protected tenancies and regulated the sale of socially owned flats previously let under a specially protected tenancy.
On 29 November 1995 the applicant asked the Zagreb Municipality as the owner of the flat to conclude a contract for the sale of the flat with herself as the buyer. The Zagreb Municipality did not take any decision within the prescribed time-limit of sixty days.
On an unspecified date in 2005 the applicant re-submitted to the Zagreb Municipality her request to purchase the flat she occupied. The request was refused on 6 July 2005 because she had not been granted a specially protected tenancy in respect of that flat.
On 26 September 2005 the applicant brought a civil action against the City of Zagreb, which in the meantime had become the owner of the flat she occupied, seeking a judgment in lieu of the contract of sale of the flat in question.
The claim was dismissed by the Zagreb Municipal Court on 18 June 2007 on the grounds that the applicant had not acquired a protected tenancy of the flat in question, since the priority list did not constitute a decision on the granting of protected tenancies within the meaning of the Housing Act.
The judgment was upheld by the Zagreb County Court on 8 April 2008. The court held that the applicant did not have a final decision on allocation of the flat to her.
In a subsequent constitutional complaint lodged by the applicant, she complained that her right to equality before the law, her right to an appeal as well as her right to a fair trial had been violated. She argued that she had been the first on a priority list drawn up by company S. for the distribution of flats.  The only reasons she had not been formally granted a specially protected tenancy of the flat she had been occupying were the challenge of the priority list by her co-workers and the delay in the civil proceedings before the Zagreb Municipal Court. However, once those proceedings had ended, all of the conditions for recognition of her specially protected tenancy of the flat at issue had been met. The one-year validity of the priority list was to be counted from the date of its being confirmed, which in the applicant’s case had occurred when the national courts had dismissed all the objections concerning that list. By not recognising her right to a specially protected tenancy, the national authorities had deprived her of the possibility to purchase the flat she occupied under favourable conditions. She also relied on some other decisions of the Constitutional Court whereby it had granted protection to persons in situations comparable to her own.
On 11 May 2012 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s constitutional complaint on the grounds that the findings of the lower courts that she had not acquired a specially protected tenancy of the flat at issue had been correct. It further held that the decisions the applicant had relied on concerned persons who had had specially protected tenancies which they had subsequently lost.
The relevant part of the Housing Act (Zakon o stambenim odnosima, Official Gazette nos. 51/1985, 42/1986, 22/1992 and 70/1993) reads:
“A specially protected tenancy is acquired on the date of moving into the flat on the basis of a final decision allocating the flat or on another valid legal basis, unless otherwise provided for by this Act.”
The Transformation of Socially Owned Companies Act (Zakon o pretvorbi društvenih poduzeća, Official Gazette nos. 19/1991, with subsequent amendments), which entered into force on 1 May 1991, provided that all “socially owned companies” had to transform into commercial companies, in particular into either limited liability companies or joint stock companies. Section 47 provided that socially owned flats which had been managed by socially owned companies were to be managed by housing and communal services funds, and that the funds had all the rights of the provider of the flats except the right to sell.
The Croatian Privatisation Fund Act (Zakon o hrvatskom fondu za privatizaciju, enacted on 4 November 1992, Official Gazette nos. 84/1992, 70/1993, 76/1993, 19/1994, 52/1994, 87/1996) established a fund of the same name to manage and privatise the assets which had become State property under the Transformation of Socially Owned Companies Act.
The Specially Protected Tenancies (Sale to Occupier) Act (Zakon o prodaji stanova na kojima postoji stanarsko pravo, Official Gazette nos. 27/1991, 33/1992, 43/1992, 69/1992, 25/1993, 26/1993, 48/1993, 2/1994, 44/1994, 47/1994, 58/1995, 11/1996, 11/1997 and 68/1998) regulates the conditions for the sale of flats let under specially protected tenancies. In general, the Act entitles the holder of a specially protected tenancy of a socially owned flat to purchase it under favourable conditions of sale.
The relevant provisions of the Act provide as follows:
“(1) Every holder of a specially protected tenancy (hereinafter ‘the tenant’) may submit a written application to purchase a flat to the ... owner (‘the seller’) ... and the seller shall be obliged to sell the flat.
(2) The application under paragraph 1 of this section is to be submitted by 31 December 1995 and the tenant shall request that a contract of sale (hereinafter “the contract”) be concluded within six months of the date on which he or she submitted the application to purchase the flat.”
“The seller is obliged to conclude a contract with the tenant within sixty days of the date on which a request for concluding the contract was made.
If, following the request of the tenant, the seller does not conclude the contract within the time-limit under the first paragraph of this section, the buyer has the right to institute court proceedings asking that a judgment in lieu of the contract of sale be adopted.”
The Lease of Flats Act (Zakon o najmu stanova, Official Gazette no. 91/1996 of 28 October 1996), which entered into force on 5 November 1996, abolished the specially protected tenancy as such (section 30(1)). Section 42 provided that persons who had acquired the right to purchase a flat under the Specially Protected Tenancies (Sale to Occupier) Act but who could not realise that right within the prescribed time-limit for reasons prescribed [by law], retained that right as lessees until the expiry of the time-limits fixed by the Lease of Flats Act. Section 52(1) provided that proceedings instituted under the Housing Act should be concluded under the provisions of that Act.
The Privatisation Act (Zakon o privatizaciji, enacted on 1 March 1996, Official Gazette nos. 21/1996, 65/1999 and 68/2001) regulated, inter alia, the sale of stocks, shares, assets and rights and the transfer without payment of stocks and shares previously acquired by the Croatian Privatisation Fund on the basis of the Transformation of Socially Owned Companies Act. Section 14 provided that prior to the privatisation of a legal entity owned by the State, the value of the capital stock had to be assessed. The Government could decide not to include the value of flats owned by such entities in the capital. Flats which had not been sold under the Specially Protected Tenancies (Sale to Occupier) Act were to be transferred into State ownership unless otherwise decided by the Government.
On 19 June 1997 a decree on the abolition of housing funds was passed. Section 3 provided that the real estate which had until then been managed by housing funds was to be taken over by local authorities, such as municipalities, which had the same rights and obligations over the real estate as the housing funds.
The relevant part of the Courts Act (Zakon o sudovima, Official Gazette nos. 28/2013, 33/2015 and 82/2015) reads as follows:
“The Supreme Court of the Republic of Croatia:
ensures the uniform application of laws and the equality of all in the application [of laws].
...”
In its decisions nos. Rev 1799/1997-2 of 9 February 2000, Rev  483/01-2 of 18 December 2001 and Rev-x 513/11-2 of 13 July 2011, the Supreme Court held as follows:
The decision of the Constitutional Court no. U-III-1925/2005 of 19 December 2007, insofar as relevant, reads as follows:
“... each individual act of a competent body (bodies of State administration, courts or legal entities with public authority) which decides on the rights or obligations of citizens shall be adopted in accordance with the Constitution and statutory provisions, but also in accordance with the applicable purpose, which purpose follows from the Constitution.
The very purpose of the Specially Protected Tenancies (Sale to Occupier) Act, as regards socially owned flats on which there were specially protected tenancies, is to clearly define persons with entitlement to former socially owned property and ensure that they are, in the first place, persons who have been using these flats lawfully. That Act has been amended several times in a manner which clearly indicates its purpose, namely that, taking into consideration objective social circumstances and difficulties of a legal and factual nature, it facilitates the legal position of those entitled to the rights under that Act in the process of acquiring ownership on flats. ...”
The decision of the Constitutional Court no. U-III-2466/2005 of 9 January 2008 concerns a case in which all requirements under section 59 of the Housing Act for acquiring a specially protected tenancy had not been fulfilled. That decision, insofar as relevant, reads as follows:
“The Constitutional Court considers unacceptable such legal practice which raises doubts as to which facts and circumstances and in which manner are decisive for adjudication of such legal issues in cases where that problem is addressed from the standpoint of the validity of the Housing Act whereas the purpose and aim of new regulation of housing matters, the existence of transitional provisions which concern the incomplete procedures for allocation of flats and the ‘pending’ rights of former tenants, in particular given that they are not responsible for the actual factual and legal situation, are all neglected.
...
The scope and effects of the principle [of equality before the law] in a concrete case are not to be defined by mere mechanical application of the relevant provisions of the Housing Act, but by taking into consideration the utmost values of the constitutional order of the Republic of Croatia such as social justice, respect for human rights and inviolability of property. These values serve as the basis for the interpretation of the Constitution and its individual provisions and, as such, are above statutory provisions ....”