The case originated in an application (no. 32003/13) against the Republic of Latvia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Latvian national, Mr Sergejs Sļadzevskis (“the applicant”), on 5 May 2013.
The Latvian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Līce.
On 16 January 2014 notice of the complaint concerning the length of the proceedings under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention was given to the Government, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1970 and lives in London.
The applicant and V.S. married on 22 June 1994. Their son N.S. was born on 25 January 1995, and their daughter E.S. on 20 December 2002.
The applicant has resided in London since early 2005 at least. N.S. has resided with him since March 2006.
On 20 December 2006 there was an incident which the Latvian authorities perceived to be an attempt by the applicant to forcibly remove E.S. from Latvia and take her to the United Kingdom. Following this incident the applicant’s right to care for E.S. was temporarily suspended, and E.S. remained in the care of V.S.
On 11 March 2005 the applicant filed an application for divorce with the Riga Regional Court. The proceedings were initiated on 13 April 2005 after he had filed an addendum eliminating deficiencies and asking the court to rule that both children should reside with him. The applicant also requested monthly child support payments from V.S.
On 24 August 2005 V.S. filed a counterclaim, requesting sole parental custody of both children, monthly child support payments from the applicant, and determination of the applicant’s contact rights in respect of the children.
Subsequently, both parties filed addendums and clarifications concerning the division of their property, the determination of contact rights, and child support payments.
On 12 May 2008 the Riga Regional Court delivered its judgment, declaring the marriage dissolved and granting the applicant and V.S. shared parental custody of N.S., and V.S. sole parental custody of E.S. The court rejected: the applicant’s application for determination of his contact rights in respect of E.S., V.S.’s application for contact rights in respect of N.S., and the applicant’s request for child support payments. Both parties appealed.
Of the ten hearings scheduled to take place at the Riga Regional Court, two were adjourned because the applicant was ill and one was adjourned because V.S. was ill, which resulted in a delay of approximately nine months. Another two hearings were adjourned at the applicant’s request. In particular, he explained that he and N.S. were residing in London, where N.S. was attending school. As the applicant could not leave N.S. on his own, he asked the Riga Regional Court to adjourn the hearings. N.S. was eleven years old at the time of the first request, and twelve at the time of the second. This resulted in a delay of approximately one year. Another hearing was adjourned in order to obtain an opinion from the Rīga City Bāriņtiesa, a guardianship and curatorship institution established by the municipality (hereinafter – Bāriņtiesa) (see paragraph 14 below).
On 15 April 2005 the Riga Regional Court asked the Bāriņtiesa to provide an opinion on custody and contact rights. On several occasions the Bāriņtiesa informed the Riga Regional Court that it was unable to carry out such an assessment, as the applicant did not attend scheduled meetings and failed to cooperate. The applicant also failed to ensure that N.S. attended a meeting with the authority. On 8 February 2007 the Bāriņtiesa delivered its first opinion, concluding that V.S. should have sole parental custody of both children, while the applicant should have only contact rights. However, on 5 March 2008 it issued another opinion on custody and contact rights. In that opinion, the custody authority concluded that the applicant and V.S. should have shared parental custody of N.S., and V.S. should have sole parental custody of E.S.; furthermore, the applicant should receive recommendations from a psychologist in order to have contact with E.S.
During the proceedings before the appellate court the Bāriņtiesa also requested judicial assistance from the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service in the United Kingdom. However, the Bāriņtiesa was informed on 27 September 2011 that that service had been unable to contact the applicant, as he had not responded to invitations to interviews, and it had not been possible to meet the applicant and N.S. at their place of residence.
The Civil Division of the Supreme Court received the case from the Riga Regional Court on 24 July 2008; however, the appellate proceedings were initiated on 2 July 2009 and simultaneously the first appellate court hearing was scheduled to take place on 1 June 2010.
The applicant did not attend the hearing on 1 June 2010; nevertheless, the Civil Division of the Supreme Court examined the case and scheduled the next hearing for 15 June 2010, when the judgment would be pronounced.
On 10 June 2010 the applicant informed the Civil Division of the Supreme Court that he had not been present at the hearing on 1 June 2010 because he had not received the relevant court summons, thus he had not been informed about it. Amongst other things, he gave his address in the United Kingdom and, without providing any further explanation, referred to the domestic law provision regulating the delivery of court documents to a litigant residing abroad. However, to this Court, he explained that he could not attend that hearing because his flight had been delayed. The fact that the applicant had a plane ticket for 1 June 2010 to travel from London to Riga is confirmed by the documents submitted to the Court.
On 15 June 2010 the Civil Division of the Supreme Court announced that it was unable to reach a decision and pronounce judgment without the applicant’s participation, thus it scheduled the next court hearing for 16 September 2010. However, on that date it established that the applicant was living in the United Kingdom, therefore it asked the Latvian Ministry of Justice to send court summons to his address there. Even though the applicant could not be reached at his address in London, he did appear before the court at the next hearing on 27 April 2011, during which he explained that he should be contacted using a contact address in Latvia which he had previously indicated.
The applicant again failed to attend the following hearing on 6 December 2011. He had informed the Civil Division of the Supreme Court that he had learned about it too late and could not arrange to travel to Latvia from the United Kingdom, emphasising his poor financial state. Nevertheless, the Civil Division of the Supreme Court did not find his absence justified, and examined the case.
The Civil Division of the Supreme Court delivered its judgment on 20 December 2011. It declared the marriage dissolved and ruled that V.S. should have sole parental custody of E.S. The court dismissed the applicant’s application for contact rights in respect of E.S. on the basis of the incident of 20 December 2006 (see paragraph 8 above). It also indicated that the applicant was not prevented from submitting a new application for the determination of his contact rights in respect of E.S. The Civil Division of the Supreme Court also found that the parties had not appealed against the Riga Regional Court’s judgment in so far as it had ruled that the applicant and V.S. should have shared parental custody of N.S. The court granted V.S.’s application for contact rights in respect of N.S., and lastly stated in the judgment that the applicant had intentionally been delaying the proceedings.
With regard to the divorce, the judgment became enforceable on 7 February 2012. The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law in relation to the remaining claims.
In a preparatory meeting on 24 January 2013 the Senate of the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law as not raising any relevant legal issues.
Between 20 August 2007 and 14 September 2011 the domestic courts examined seven applications and complaints from both parties regarding the securing of their respective claims and the determination of interim contact rights pending the final judgment. The ancillary proceedings resulted in seven court hearings, and the domestic courts adopted eight decisions. As the applicant failed to cooperate with a psychologist who was working with E.S., he was consistently denied contact rights in respect of her.
Article 92 of the Constitution of Latvia (Satversme) provides that everyone has the right to defend his or her rights and lawful interests in a fair court, and that everyone whose rights are violated without justification shall have a right to commensurate compensation.
Section 1635 of the Civil Law provides that any wrongful act which has caused harm shall give the victim the right to claim just satisfaction from the perpetrator, in so far as he or she may be held liable for that act.