The case originated in four applications (nos. 22636/13, 24034/13, 24334/13 and 24528/13) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four Uzbekistani nationals, Mr Avazbek Mukhammad Ugli Nizamov, Mr Khakim Tursunovich Dzhalalbayev, Mr Rakhmatullo Abudullayevich Mukhamedkhodzhayev and Mr Olim Tursunovich Dzhalalbayev (“the applicants”), on 3, 9 (the second and third applicants) and 10 April 2013 respectively.
The applicants were represented by Ms R. Magomedova, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants alleged that, if returned to Uzbekistan, they would be exposed to a risk of being subjected to torture and inhuman or degrading treatment.
On 4, 11, 12 and 16 April 2013 the Acting President of the First Section to which the cases were allocated decided to apply Rule 39 of the Rules of the Court, indicating to the Government that the applicants should not be removed or extradited to Uzbekistan until further notice, and granted priority treatment to the applications under Rule 41 of the Rules of the Court.
On 23 May 2013 the applications were communicated to the Government.
The first applicant, Mr Avazbek Mukhammad Ugli Nizamov, was born in 1992. The second applicant, Mr Khakim Tursunovich Dzhalalbayev, was born in 1983. The third applicant, Mr Rakhmatullo Abudullayevich Mukhamedkhodzhayev, was born in 1989. The fourth applicant, Mr Olim Tursunovich Dzhalalbayev, was born in 1979. The applicants are currently detained in Moscow.
In 2011-12 the applicants moved from Uzbekistan to Russia to seek employment.
On 15 October 2012 an investigator with the Uzbek Ministry of the Interior indicted the applicants on the charges of participation in an extremist religious group known as the Islamic Movement of Turkestan and attempting to overthrow the State’s constitutional order in Uzbekistan and ordered their arrest. Their names were put on the list of wanted persons.
On 15 November 2012 the applicants were arrested at Vnukovo airport in Moscow.
On 17 November 2012 the Solntsevskiy District Court of Moscow authorised the applicants’ detention pending extradition. On 13 December 2012 the District Court further extended their detention until 15 June 2013.
Between 26 March and 1 April 2013 the General Prosecutor of the Russian Federation refused the Uzbek authorities’ request for the applicants’ extradition citing, as a ground for his decision, Article 464 § 1 (6) of the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure which banned extradition in respect of persons charged with an offence not punishable under the Russian criminal law. The parties did not submit copies of the relevant decisions.
Between 27 March and 4 April 2013 the Acting Moscow Prosecutor for Supervision of Legal Compliance for Air and Water Transport ordered the applicants’ release.
The applicants were immediately re-arrested as illegal aliens. The Babushkinskiy District Court of Moscow examined the applicants’ cases, imposed an administrative fine of 2,000 Russian roubles on each of them and ordered their expulsion to Uzbekistan. The court noted that the applicants had failed to leave Russia upon the expiration of the permissible three-month period of residence without a permit. It further noted that the applicants’ request for asylum had been refused and that they had not applied for “legalisation” of their stay in Russia.
The District Court delivered the relevant decisions on 28 March, 3, 5 and 9 April 2013 respectively.
The applicants appealed. They argued, inter alia, that their removal to Uzbekistan would be contrary to Article 3 of the Convention and that they would run a risk of being subjected to torture and inhuman and degrading treatment if forcefully returned to Uzbekistan to be tried for the offences they were charged with.
Between 4 and 16 April 2013 the Court indicated to the Government, under Rule 39 of the Rules of the Court, that the applicants’ removal/expulsion to Uzbekistan should be suspended until further notice.
On 14 May 2013 the Moscow City Court dismissed the applicants’ appeals and upheld the expulsion orders. The court found the applicants liable for their failure, as foreign nationals, to leave Russia upon the expiry of the maximum permissible period of temporary residence in the country. It further noted that the applicants were refused refugee status even though it considered their asylum application to be irrelevant for the purpose of the proceedings. Lastly, referring to the interim measure indicated by the Court to the Government, the City Court suspended the execution of the expulsion orders until further notice.
It appears that the applicants are held in custody to date.
On 28 December 2012 the first applicant lodged an application seeking asylum in Russia claiming that, if returned to Uzbekistan, he would be subjected to unlawful criminal prosecution on fabricated charges. In the follow-up interview with the migration authorities, the first applicant explained that (1) he had come to Russia to seek employment; (2) he had not been persecuted prior to leaving Uzbekistan; (3) he had not received any direct threats in Uzbekistan; (4) he had not been affiliated with any party or non-governmental organization; and (5) he had been unaware of the criminal proceedings instituted against him in Uzbekistan until his arrest on 15 November 2012.
On unspecified dates the second, third and fourth applicants lodged similar applications.
On 21 February 2013 the Moscow Federal Migration Service refused to grant refugee status to the second applicant. The parties did not submit a copy of the relevant decision. Nor did they inform the Court whether the second applicant appealed against the decision of 21 February 2013.
On 25 February 2013 the Moscow Federal Migration Service dismissed the first applicant’s application. The relevant decision stated as follows:
“[The first applicant] did not apply for asylum within one day of his arrival in Russia ... .
According to the information submitted by the Federal Migration Service of Russia, ‘the internal political situation in Uzbekistan is characterised by relative stability. The authorities control it through law-enforcement bodies and traditional institutions of local self-government.
Uzbek foreign policy is sufficiently active. The Republic is recognised by 150 States. It has established diplomatic relations with 88 of them. It has more than 40 embassies and consulates abroad. One of the priorities of Uzbek foreign policy is international cooperation for the purposes of preserving stability and peace at the regional and global levels.
Uzbekistan is a member of major international organisations. It has ratified all international human rights conventions, the provisions of which have been incorporated into the national legislation.
...
As of 1 January 2008, the President’s Decree on the abolition of the death penalty has been in force in Uzbekistan. ... Currently the most severe sentence in Uzbekistan is life imprisonment.
...
Uzbekistan has ratified all six major UN human rights treaties. It regularly submits periodic compliance reports to UN bodies. As a whole, the country’s parliament has ratified more than 60 international human rights treaties. ...’
According to the materials in the case-file, ... [the first applicant] does not wish to return to [Uzbekistan] for fear of being prosecuted on the charges brought against him in the Republic of Uzbekistan.
It should be noted that the offences he is charged with are punishable under the Russian criminal law and the prescription period for criminal liability for such offences has not expired under the Russian criminal law.
Having instituted criminal proceedings against [the first applicant], the law enforcement authorities of the Republic of Uzbekistan do not intend to prosecute him on account of his belonging to a particular social group, his nationality, religion or political opinion.
Upon arrival in Russia in July 2011, [the first applicant] did not seek refugee status in the Russian Federation. He lodged such an application only after his arrest and placement in [custody].
Regard being had to the above, it follows that [the first applicant] is not running a risk of being subjected to persecution in the Republic of Uzbekistan [on account of race, religion, nationality, belonging to a social group or political opinion] and does not qualify to be recognised as a refugee ... .
The reasons, as stated by [the first applicant], for his refusal to return to the Republic of Uzbekistan do not justify his fear of being subjected to persecution on account of faith, nationality, ethnicity, belonging to a social group or political opinion.”
On 26 April 2013 the Federal Migration Service of the Russian Federation upheld the decision of 26 April 2013. It appears that the first applicant did not challenge the said decisions in court.
On 29 March and 9 April 2013 the Moscow Federal Migration Service dismissed the fourth and third applicants’ applications for asylum. It reiterated verbatim the reasoning of the decision of 25 February 2013. It appears that no appeal was lodged against the said decisions.
The relevant provisions of domestic law and practice are set out in the judgment of Umirov v. Russia (no. 17455/11, §§ 41-85, 18 September 2012).
In January 2013 Human Rights Watch released its annual World Report for 2013. The chapter entitled “Uzbekistan”, in so far as relevant, reads:
“Uzbekistan’s human rights record remains atrocious, with no meaningful improvements in 2012. Torture is endemic in the criminal justice system. Authorities intensified their crackdown on civil society activists, opposition members, and journalists, and continued to persecute religious believers who worship outside strict state controls.
...
Torture remains rampant and continues to occur with near-total impunity. Detainees’ rights are violated at each stage of investigations and trials, despite habeas corpus amendments passed in 2008. The government has failed to meaningfully implement recommendations to combat torture made by the UN special rapporteur in 2003 and other international bodies. Suspects are not permitted access to lawyers, a critical safeguard against torture in pre-trial detention. Police coerce confessions from detainees using torture, including beatings with batons and plastic bottles, hanging by the wrists and ankles, rape, and sexual humiliation. Authorities routinely refuse to investigate allegations of abuse ... Human Rights Watch continues to receive regular and credible reports of torture, including suspicious deaths in custody in pre-trial and post-conviction detention.
Although Uzbekistan’s Constitution ensures freedom of religion, authorities continued their multi-year campaign of arbitrary detention, arrest, and torture of Muslims who practice their faith outside state controls. Over 200 were arrested or convicted in 2012 on charges related to religious extremism.”
The chapter on Uzbekistan in the Amnesty International 2013 annual report, released in May of the same year, reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
Torture and other ill-treatment of detainees and prisoners by security forces and prison personnel continued to be routine. Scores of reports of torture and other illtreatment emerged during the year, especially from men and women suspected or convicted of belonging to Islamic movements and Islamist groups and parties or other religious groups, banned in Uzbekistan. As in previous years, the authorities failed to conduct prompt, thorough, and impartial investigations into such reports and into complaints lodged with the Prosecutor General’s Office.
...
The authorities continued to seek the extradition of suspected members of Islamic movements and Islamist groups and parties banned in Uzbekistan in the name of security and the fight against terrorism. They also requested the extradition of political opponents, government critics and wealthy individuals out of favour with the regime. Many of these extradition requests were based on fabricated or unreliable evidence. The government offered diplomatic assurances to sending states to secure the returns, pledging free access to detention centres for independent monitors and diplomats. In practice, they did not honour these guarantees. Those forcibly returned to Uzbekistan faced incommunicado detention, torture and other ill-treatment and, after unfair trials, long prison sentences in cruel, inhuman and degrading conditions. The authorities were also accused of attempting assassinations of political opponents living abroad.”
In their 2013 report “Return to Torture: Extradition, Forcible Returns and Removals to Central Asia”, Amnesty International stated as follows:
“Over the past two decades thousands of people across the region have alleged that they have been arbitrarily detained and tortured or ill-treated in custody in order to extract a forced confession or money from relatives. In this period, piecemeal reforms have been introduced in most Central Asia countries with the aim of strengthening the accountability of law enforcement agencies and improving the protection available in the criminal justice system. Nowhere, however, have they had any significant success in eliminating the practices of torture and other ill-treatment that are often used in relation to people suspected of ordinary crimes, and routinely used in relation to political opponents and individuals suspected of involvement in extremism and terrorism-related activities or in banned religious groups.
...
... Detainees are often tortured and ill-treated while being held incommunicado for initial interrogations. Those detained in closed detention facilities run by National Security Services on charges related to national security or ‘religious extremism’ are at particular risk of torture and other ill-treatment.”
For a summary of the relevant reports by the UN institutions and international NGOs on Uzbekistan during the period between 2002 and 2011, see Zokhidov v. Russia, no. 67286/10, §§ 107-13, 5 February 2013).