The case originated in an application (no. 12879/09) against the Republic of Latvia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Latvian national, Mr Mārtiņš Ēcis (“the applicant”), on 12 December 2008.
The applicant, who was granted legal aid, was represented by Mr A. Alliks, a lawyer practising in Rīga. The Latvian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Līce.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he was discriminated against on the grounds of his sex with respect to the applicable prison regime that had led to a refusal to attend his father’s funeral. He complained of breach of Article 14 of the Convention, in essence, read in conjunction with Article 8 of the Convention.
On 25 March 2015 the complaint concerning alleged discrimination was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1981 and lives in the Ventspils district.
On 6 December 2001 the applicant was convicted of kidnapping, aggravated murder and aggravated extortion and sentenced to twenty years’ imprisonment. This judgment was upheld at two levels of appeal and took effect in 2002.
In accordance with section 504(1) of the Sentence Enforcement Code (Latvijas Sodu izpildes kodekss), the applicant was placed at the maximumsecurity level in a closed prison.
On an unspecified date the applicant was transferred to the mediumsecurity level of that closed prison.
According to the applicant, in 2008 he realised that there was a difference in the respective treatment of male and female inmates with regard to the execution of custodial sentences. Male inmates who had been convicted of serious crimes started serving their sentences in closed prisons, while female inmates who had been convicted of the same crimes started serving their sentence in partly-closed prisons. As the applicant considered that this had a notable impact on restrictions of various prisoners’ rights, he lodged complaints about this issue with several State institutions.
On 30 September 2008 the applicant was informed that his father had died. On 2 October 2008 he requested permission to leave prison in order to attend his father’s funeral. On the same day the prison director replied that he had no authority to allow the request, as the applicant was serving his sentence at the medium-security level of a closed prison. Under the Sentence Enforcement Code only prisoners serving their sentence at the medium- or minimum- security level in partly-closed prisons were eligible for such leave.
In the years 2012-2015 the applicant was granted one prisonleave day per year. The case file contains no information as to the type of prison and security level in which the applicant served his sentence during this time.
On 11 September 2015 the applicant was conditionally released.
On 1 July 2008 the Ministry of Justice examined the applicant’s complaint about the difference in treatment between convicted men and women. It referred to sections 504(1) and 505(1) of the Sentence Enforcement Code and observed that the legislature had chosen to create different legal frameworks in respect of sentence execution for men and women. The Ministry of Justice concluded that there was no discrimination on the grounds of sex because the rights of both male and female inmates were restricted, and both sexes were deprived of their liberty.
On 25 October 2010 the Ombudsperson concluded the examination of the applicant’s complaint about the refusal to allow him to attend his father’s funeral. He observed that closed prisons hosted male convicts who had been sentenced to deprivation of liberty for having committed serious or especially serious crimes, as well as convicts who had been moved from partly-closed prisons for grave or systematic breaches of the regime under which they had been held. In closed prisons convicts were subjected to tightened security and maximum surveillance. It followed that the persons placed in those prisons were particularly dangerous to the society. Hence, the restriction imposed on the applicant was proportionate and necessary in a democratic society.
On 9 July 2008 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint, arguing that section 504(1) of the Sentence Enforcement Code was discriminatory on the grounds of sex, in breach of Article 91 of the Constitution. As women convicted of the same crimes started serving their sentence in partly-closed prisons, they were entitled to more and longer visits, more phone calls and could progress to more lenient security levels more rapidly. In addition, women could be granted leave from prison for up to seven days per year, whereas no such right was provided for men.
On 29 July 2008 the Constitutional Court, relying on section 20(6) of the Law on the Constitutional Court, declined to institute proceedings. It stated that the legal reasoning included in the complaint was evidently insufficient for the claim to be allowed (acīmredzami nepietiekams prasījuma apmierināšanai). In particular, the applicant had failed to specify why the difference in treatment between men and women should not be acceptable.
On 7 August 2008 the applicant lodged a second constitutional complaint, adding that men and women who were convicted of serious and especially serious crimes were in the same circumstances in that they were both imprisoned. Yet, despite the prohibition of discrimination requiring men and women to be treated equally, their rights were restricted to a different extent. The applicant also pointed out that within the context of discrimination the burden of proof was shifted – namely, after a person had demonstrated a difference in treatment, it fell for the respondent to show that this difference had not amounted to discrimination.
On 5 September 2008 the Constitutional Court again declined to institute proceedings. With respect to the first sentence of Article 91 of the Constitution, which addressed the principle of equality, the Constitutional Court pointed out that the following criteria had to be examined – the existence of comparable groups, a difference in treatment between those groups, and a lack of objective and reasonable justification for that difference in treatment. As the legal reasoning advanced by the applicant was based on the assumption that men and women who had committed similarly grave crimes were in comparable situations, the Constitutional Court considered this reasoning evidently insufficient for the claim to be allowed. With respect to the prohibition of discrimination enshrined in the second sentence of Article 91 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court pointed out that the applicant had failed to specify the human right in conjunction with which the discrimination complaint had been made. Thus, in relation to this part of the application, legal reasoning had not been provided (nav sniegts juridiskais pamatojums) and the formal requirements of a constitutional complaint had not been met. In so far as relevant, the Constitutional Court relied on sections 20(5)(3) and 20(6) of the Law on the Constitutional Court.
In a third constitutional complaint of 20 October 2008, the applicant added that on 2 October 2008 he had been refused permission to leave prison to attend his father’s funeral. He had thereby been discriminated against on the basis of sex, as women in his situation would have been able to attend the funeral. In support of his discrimination-related complaint the applicant referred to the right to private life, right to family life, and freedom of expression.
On 21 November 2008 the Constitutional Court declined to institute proceedings, invoking section 20(6) of the Law on the Constitutional Court. It noted that the application contained no reasoning as to why men and women who had been convicted of serious and especially serious crimes and given prison sentences would need to be subjected to the same rules of sentence enforcement – namely, how men and women were in comparable situations. On those grounds, the legal reasoning included in the constitutional complaint was held to be evidently insufficient for the claim to be allowed.
The relevant provision of the Constitution of the Republic of Latvia (Satversme), reads:
Section 503 at the material time provided that both closed and partlyclosed prisons had three security levels (regimes under which sentences were to be served) – maximum, medium and minimum. Under section 501, both at the material time and at the time of adoption of this judgment, all prisoners who are to serve their sentence in closed or partly-closed prisons start serving their sentence at the maximum-security level of the respective prison. They are all subjected to the “progressive sentence execution” system, under which prisoners can be transferred to more lenient prison regimes following an individual assessment, but only after having served a certain pre-set proportion of their sentence under the stricter regimes.
Section 504(1) sets out two groups of convicts who serve their sentence in closed prisons: men sentenced to deprivation of liberty for the commission of serious or especially serious crimes and convicts who have been transferred from partly-closed prisons owing to gross or systematic regime violations. Prisoners placed in closed prisons have to serve no less than one fourth of the adjudged sentence at the maximum-security level. Following this time they may be transferred to the medium-security level, where they have to serve no less than another fourth of the adjudged sentence before becoming eligible for a transfer to the minimum security level. From the minimum security level prisoners may be transferred to a partly-closed prison or conditionally released before the completion of the sentence.
Section 505(1) lists ten different groups of convicts who serve their sentence in partly-closed prisons, including women serving sentences for intentionally committed crimes. At the relevant time this provision provided that when beginning a sentence a convicted person had to serve no less than one fifth of the adjudged sentence at the maximum-security level. Subsequently, he or she had to serve no less than a further fifth at the medium-security level but the remaining part could be served at the minimum security level. From the minimum security level a convicted person could be transferred to an open prison or conditionally released before the completion of the sentence.
Prisoners serving their sentence in closed prisons, regardless of the applicable prison regime, as well as prisoners serving their sentence in partly-closed prisons at the maximum-security level, were not eligible for prison leave. With respect to prisoners held at the medium- and minimumsecurity level in partly-closed prisons, section 505 stated that they had the right, with the permission of their prison governor, to temporarily leave the prison for up to seven days a year, or up to five days on account of the death or life-threatening illness of a close relative.
Section 7(1) of the Criminal Law (Krimināllikums) provides that on the basis of their degree of severity criminal offences are divided into misdemeanours, less serious crimes, serious crimes and especially serious crimes.
At the relevant time section 7(4) provided that serious crimes were intentional offences for which the punishment provided in the Criminal Law was deprivation of liberty for a period of between five and ten years. Section 7(5) stated that especially serious crimes were intentional offences for which the punishment was deprivation of liberty for more than ten years, life imprisonment or the death penalty.
Section 17(1)(11) of the Law on the Constitutional Court provides that any person who considers that his or her fundamental rights have been breached has the right to submit an application to the Constitutional Court.
Section 18(1) lists the elements that have to be included in an application to the Constitutional Court. “Legal reasoning” is listed as one of such elements.
Section 192 of the Law on the Constitutional Court provides:
“(1) Any person who considers that a legal provision that is not in compliance with a provision of a superior legal force has infringed his or her fundamental rights under the Constitution may lodge a constitutional complaint (an application) with the Constitutional Court.
...
(6) In addition to the elements required under section 18(1) of the present Law, a constitutional complaint (an application) must contain reasoning concerning:
(i) the violation of the applicant’s fundamental rights, [as] provided in the Constitution, and;
(ii) the exhaustion of all ordinary remedies or the fact that no such remedies exist. ...”
Section 20 at the relevant time provided:
“(1) An application shall be examined and the decision to institute proceedings or to decline to institute proceedings shall be taken by a panel comprising three judges.
...
(5) In examining applications, the panel shall have the right to decline to institute proceedings if: ...
3) the application does not comply with the requirements specified in section 18 or sections 19-192 of this Law;
...
(6) When examining a constitutional complaint (an application) the panel may also decline to institute proceedings when the legal reasoning included in the complaint is evidently insufficient [to justify] allowing the claim.”
In the judgment of 22 February 2002 (case no. 2001-06-03) the Constitutional Court held:
 “2.2. In accordance with section 192(1) of the Law on the Constitutional Court a constitutional complaint may be lodged by a person who “considers” [that a legal provision has infringed his or her fundamental rights]. The law gives prominence to the view of the person, and not that of the court, about the violation of the fundamental rights. The law requires the person to be of the view that the fundamental rights granted to him or her under the Constitution have been breached. However, this requirement has to be seen together with section 192(6) of the Law on the Constitutional Court, which requires this view to be substantiated. Hence, in order to institute proceedings on the basis of the constitutional complaint it has to be established that the application contains sufficient legal reasoning substantiating this “view”; nonetheless, the Panel of the Constitutional Court is not required to carry out a full assessment of this “view”. The Panel of the Constitutional Court has a right to decline to institute proceedings only if the “legal reasoning substantiating the view” is evidently insufficient for the claim to be allowed; however, it has the obligation to do so only when the legal reasoning has not been provided at all.
...
The purpose of section 20(6) of the Law on the Constitutional Court is to save the Constitutional Court the “idle work” of dealing with manifestly unsubstantiated complaints. In situations when some legal reasoning is included but there are doubts as to whether it is not evidently insufficient for allowing the claim, the said provision has to be interpreted in accordance with its purpose.”
The set of norms and principles established within the United Nations concerning the treatment and protection of detainees is summarised in Khoroshenko v. Russia ([GC], no. 41418/04, §§ 69-75, ECHR 2015). International standards on the protection of women prisoners are described in Khamtokhu and Aksenchik v. Russia ([GC], nos. 60367/08 and 961/11, §§ 27-31, 24 January, 2017).
In addition, the relevant parts of the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, as revised by the General Assembly on 17 December 2015 (“the Nelson Mandela Rules”), provide:
“I. Rules of general application
Basic principles
...
Rule 2
The present rules shall be applied impartially. There shall be no discrimination on the grounds of race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or any other status. The religious beliefs and moral precepts of prisoners shall be respected.
In order for the principle of non-discrimination to be put into practice, prison administrations shall take account of the individual needs of prisoners, in particular the most vulnerable categories in prison settings. Measures to protect and promote the rights of prisoners with special needs are required and shall not be regarded as discriminatory.
...
Separation of categories
Rule 11
The different categories of prisoners shall be kept in separate institutions or parts of institutions, taking account of their sex, age, criminal record, the legal reason for their detention and the necessities of their treatment; thus:
(a) Men and women shall so far as possible be detained in separate institutions; in an institution which receives both men and women, the whole of the premises allocated to women shall be entirely separate;
...
Notifications
...
Rule 70
The prison administration shall inform a prisoner at once of the serious illness or death of a near relative or any significant other. Whenever circumstances allow, the prisoner should be authorized to go, either under escort or alone, to the bedside of a near relative or significant other who is critically ill, or to attend the funeral of a near relative or significant other.
...
Rules applicable to special categories
Prisoners under sentence
Guiding principles
...
Rule 89
The fulfilment of these [guiding] principles requires individualization of treatment and for this purpose a flexible system of classifying prisoners in groups. It is therefore desirable that such groups should be distributed in separate prisons suitable for the treatment of each group.
These prisons do not need to provide the same degree of security for every group. It is desirable to provide varying degrees of security according to the needs of different groups. ...”
The UN Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Noncustodial Measures for Women Offenders, adopted by the General Assembly on 21 December 2010 (“the Bangkok Rules”), supplement the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners by addressing the distinctive needs of women prisoners. The relevant parts of the Bangkok Rules provide:
“I. Rules of general application
Basic principle
[Supplements rule 2 of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules)]
Rule 1
In order for the principle of non-discrimination, embodied in rule 6 of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners to be put into practice, account shall be taken of the distinctive needs of women prisoners in the application of the Rules. Providing for such needs in order to accomplish substantial gender equality shall not be regarded as discriminatory.
...
Rules applicable to special categories
Prisoners under sentence
Classification and individualization
[Supplements rules 93 and 94 of the Nelson Mandela Rules]
...
Rule 41
The gender-sensitive risk assessment and classification of prisoners shall:
(a) Take into account the generally lower risk posed by women prisoners to others, as well as the particularly harmful effects that high security measures and increased levels of isolation can have on women prisoners;
...
Social relations and aftercare
[Supplements rules 106 to 108 of the Nelson Mandela Rules]
...
Rule 45
Prison authorities shall utilize options such as home leave, open prisons, halfway houses and community-based programmes and services to the maximum possible extent for women prisoners, to ease their transition from prison to liberty, to reduce stigma and to re-establish their contact with their families at the earliest possible stage.”
On 11 January 2006 the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted Recommendation Rec(2006)2 to member States on the European Prison Rules (which replaced Recommendation No. R (87) 3 on the European Prison Rules), which took into account the developments in penal policy, sentencing practice and the overall management of prisons in Europe. The relevant parts of the amended European Prison Rules read as follows:
“Part I
Basic principles
All persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated with respect for their human rights.
Persons deprived of their liberty retain all rights that are not lawfully taken away by the decision sentencing them or remanding them in custody.
Restrictions placed on persons deprived of their liberty shall be the minimum necessary and proportionate to the legitimate objective for which they are imposed.
...
Scope and application
...
These rules shall be applied impartially, without discrimination on any ground such as sex, race, colour, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, association with a national minority, property, birth or other status.
...
Part II
Conditions of imprisonment
Allocation and accommodation
...
10 Accommodation of all prisoners shall be in conditions with the least restrictive security arrangements compatible with the risk of their escaping or harming themselves or others.
...
Contact with the outside world
...
5 Prison authorities shall assist prisoners in maintaining adequate contact with the outside world and provide them with the appropriate welfare support to do so.
6 Any information received of the death or serious illness of any near relative shall be promptly communicated to the prisoner.
7 Whenever circumstances allow, the prisoner should be authorised to leave prison either under escort or alone in order to visit a sick relative, attend a funeral or for other humanitarian reasons.
...
Women
1 In addition to the specific provisions in these rules dealing with women prisoners, the authorities shall pay particular attention to the requirements of women such as their physical, vocational, social and psychological needs when making decisions that affect any aspect of their detention.
...
Part IV
Good order
...
Security
1 The security measures applied to individual prisoners shall be the minimum necessary to achieve their secure custody.
...
3 As soon as possible after admission, prisoners shall be assessed to determine:
the risk that they would present to the community if they were to escape;
the risk that they will try to escape either on their own or with external assistance.
4 Each prisoner shall then be held in security conditions appropriate to these levels of risk.
5 The level of security necessary shall be reviewed at regular intervals throughout a person’s imprisonment.
...
Part VIII
Objective of the regime for sentenced prisoners
2 Imprisonment is by the deprivation of liberty a punishment in itself and therefore the regime for sentenced prisoners shall not aggravate the suffering inherent in imprisonment.
Implementation of the regime for sentenced prisoners
...
6 There shall be a system of prison leave as an integral part of the overall regime for sentenced prisoners.”
The relevant parts of the Commentary on Recommendation Rec(2006)2 of the Committee of Ministers to member States on the European Prison Rules read:
“Rule 24.5 places a positive duty on the prison authorities to facilitate links with the outside world. One way in which this can be done is to consider allowing all prisoners leave from prison in terms of Rule 24.7 for humanitarian purposes. The ECtHR has held that this must be done for the funeral of a close relative, where there is no risk of the prisoner absconding (Ploski v. Poland, No. 26761/95, judgment of 12/11/2002). Humanitarian reasons for leave may include family matters such as the birth of a child.”
The relevant parts of Recommendation No. R (82) 16 of the Committee of Ministers to member States on prison leave, adopted on 24 September 1982, read:
“The Committee of Ministers ...
Considering that prison leave contributes towards making prisons more humane and improving the conditions of detention;
Considering that prison leave is one of the means of facilitating the social reintegration of the prisoner;
...
Recommends the governments of member states:
to grant prison leave to the greatest extent possible on medical, educational, occupational, family and other social grounds;
to take into consideration for the granting of leave:
- the nature and seriousness of the offence, the length of the sentence passed and the period of detention already completed,
- the personality and behaviour of the prisoner and the risk, if any, he may present to society,
- the prisoner’s family and social situation, which may have changed during his detention,
- the purpose of leave, its duration and its terms and conditions;
to grant prison leave as soon and as frequently as possible having regard to the aforementioned factors;
to grant prison leave not only to prisoners in open prisons but also to prisoners in closed prisons, provided that it is not incompatible with public safety;
...
to inform the prisoner, to the greatest extent possible, of the reasons for a refusal of prison leave; ...”
The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (hereinafter “the CPT”) following a visit to Latvia that took place from 5 to 15 September 2011 published a report to the Latvian Government, dated 27 August 2013. The relevant parts of that report read:
“47. Before setting out the delegation’s findings regarding the establishments visited, the CPT would like to raise one issue of a more general nature concerning the regime applied to prisoners.
The Latvian Code of Execution of Sentences provides that all prisoners in closed and semi-closed prisons shall be subject to the progressive sentence execution regime, irrespective of the duration of the sentence imposed. Prisoners held in closed prisons serve their sentences in three consecutive regime levels: low, medium and high. The law requires that such prisoners serve at least a quarter of their sentence on the low regime level and demonstrate good behaviour in order to qualify for the medium level. After having served at least a quarter of their sentence on the medium regime level, they may be further transferred to the high regime level ... It is noteworthy that prisoners on the low regime level inter alia have generally limited work opportunities and fewer possibilities for maintaining contact with the outside world ...
The CPT recalls that “imprisonment is by the deprivation of liberty a punishment in itself and therefore the regime for sentenced prisoners shall not aggravate the suffering inherent in imprisonment.” Moreover, although it is for the judicial authority to determine the appropriate length of sentence for a given offence, prison authorities should be responsible for determining security and regime requirements, on the basis of professionally agreed criteria and individual assessments of prisoners. In this context, it is difficult to justify a prisoner being required to serve a minimum part of the prison sentence in a specific regime level (low or medium). In the CPT’s view, progression from one regime level to another should be based on the prisoner’s attitude, behaviour, participation in activities (educational, vocational, or workrelated), and in general adherence to reasonable pre-established targets set out in a sentence plan. For this purpose, regular individual reviews should be carried out.
The CPT invites the Latvian authorities to review the relevant legislation and practice in the light of the above remarks.” [emphasis and footnotes omitted]
Following the next visit to Latvia that took place from 12 to 22 April 2016 the CPT in its report to the Latvian Government, dated 29 June 2017, referred back to the findings it had made during the visit of 2011. It reiterated its reservations about the “progressive sentence execution” system and emphasised that the progression from one regime level to another should be determined by prison authorities, based on professionally agreed criteria and individual assessments.
It is clear in the present case that the applicant’s request to attend his father’s funeral was not subject to an individual assessment on the merits before being refused. Given the case-law of the Court on Article 8 of the Convention in relation to requests for prison leave, we would have voted in favour of a violation of this article had that complaint been before the Chamber on the merits.
However, because of the manner in which the applicant litigated his complaint at national level, we are compelled to examine it, as the majority did, only with reference to Article 14 of the Convention, in conjunction with Article 8. For the reasons outlined below, we find ourselves unable to join the majority in finding a violation of those two articles of the Convention combined.
The Convention does not guarantee prisoners an unconditional right to leave to attend the funeral of a relative. What Article 8 requires domestic authorities to do is to assess each individual request for leave on its merits. Prisoners thus have a right to a process and the Court’s review will be focussed on that process and on whether relevant and sufficient reasons were provided to support any refusal.
Leave to attend a funeral can be refused for compelling reasons, with the Court recognising the wide margin of appreciation enjoyed by States in this regard, as well as the financial and logistical difficulties which arranging for a prisoner to be escorted may entail. The highly circumscribed nature of the right to prison leave under Article 8 is logical given the purpose of detention – which is precisely to deprive someone of their liberty. It is also recognition that national authorities, whose duty it is to consider, within the limits of their jurisdiction, the interests of society as a whole, enjoy broad discretion when they are asked to make rulings on sensitive matters such as penal policy.
Where the possibility of escorted leave was afforded by domestic law, the Court has criticised the domestic authorities’ failure to even consider it. In its assessment of the proportionality of the refusal of leave by domestic authorities, the Court has considered the violent nature of the crime committed by the detainee, when he or she was eligible for release, whether or not family relations have otherwise been respected and communication made possible in some other form, the need to defend the public order and protect the security of the general public, the examination by the authorities of different possible solutions in order to accommodate the prisoner’s request and the margin of appreciation just referred to.
The Latvian Sentence Enforcement Code provides that:
- Closed and partly-closed prisons operate three security regimes  maximum, medium and minimum – under which prison sentences are served.
- All prisoners convicted of “serious or especially serious crimes” start serving their sentences in closed or partly-closed prisons at the maximum-security level.
- The Latvian progressive sentence execution system means that prisoners can be transferred to more lenient prison regimes following an individual assessment but this can only occur after a set proportion of their sentence has been served under the stricter regime.
- Men convicted of serious or especially serious crimes and prisoners transferred from partly-closed prisons owing to gross or systematic regime violations are detained in closed prisons.
- Ten different groups of prisoners serve their sentences in partlyclosed prisons, including women convicted of “intentionally committed crimes” and men convicted of serious or especially serious crimes if they had not attained the age of eighteen years when the crime was committed.
- Prisoners serving their sentences in closed prisons, regardless of the applicable security regime, as well as prisoners serving their sentence in partly-closed prisons at the maximum-security level, are not eligible for prison leave.
- Prisoners, including women who had already served a proportion of their sentence at the maximum security level in a partly-closed prison, can apply for temporary leave on account of the death or life-threatening illness of a close relative.
This legislation excludes an individual assessment of requests for leave by male prisoners held in closed prisons and by female prisoners held in partly-closed prisons at the maximum security level. As a result, when the applicant applied for leave to attend the funeral of his father his request was refused by the prison governor due to the fact that he was serving his sentence in a closed prison albeit, at that stage, under the medium security regime.
It is clear that the exclusion of any assessment on the merits of the applicant’s request for leave falls foul of Article 8 of the Convention as interpreted by the Court in the case-law outlined above. Hence, we would have had no difficulty finding a violation of that provision in a case such as the applicant’s.
However, the applicant did not challenge the individual administrative decision refusing him leave despite the fact that he could have complained to the Prison Administration and thereafter to the administrative courts. Nor, crucially, did he complain about the lack of an individual assessment of his request before the Latvian Constitutional Court.
To understand the applicant’s complaint and one of the reasons for our dissent, it is important to pay attention to the manner in which it was brought before the Latvian Constitutional Court and compare that to how it has been formulated subsequently by the majority in the judgment.
Having been convicted of serious crimes in 2001 the applicant claims to have realised in 2008 that there was a difference in the treatment in Latvia of male and female prisoners with regard to the execution of their sentences. While men convicted of serious crimes were always placed in closed prisons, female prisoners who had been convicted of similar crimes were placed in partly-closed prisons. Since this affected the rights of male prisoners, the applicant lodged several and different complaints with the Ministry of Justice, the Ombudsman and the Constitutional Court. Before the latter the applicant claimed that section 504 (1) of the Sentence Enforcement Code was discriminatory on grounds of gender contrary to the relevant provision of the Latvian Constitution. Prior to the death of the applicant’s father – the event which led to his request for prison leave – the applicant had introduced two constitutional complaints challenging the Latvian legislation on this general ground. Both complaints were deemed inadmissible due to, in the first instance, the applicant’s failure to properly substantiate the reasons for his complaint (§ 15 of the majority judgment) and, in the second instance, the insufficiency of the legal reasoning presented on the question of comparability combined with the failure to specify the human right in conjunction with which the discrimination complained of had been made (§§ 17-18 of the majority judgment).
The rejection of these two complaints, which predated the request for funeral leave, is clearly not relevant for the purposes of determining whether the applicant had exhausted domestic remedies. However, they do highlight the essential and general nature of the applicant’s domestic discrimination complaint and demonstrate a pitfall which the majority has advertently or inadvertently not avoided.
The applicant, at domestic level and before the Court, thus complained about the allegedly discriminatory nature of the applicable Latvian prison regime writ large. However, the only complaint which this Court could consider on the merits was the specific complaint as formulated in the domestic proceedings and before this Court, namely that when refused permission to attend his father’s funeral “he had [...] been discriminated against on the basis of sex, as women in his situation would have been able to attend the funeral.”
The applicant pointed to this aspect of the discriminatory nature of the Latvian Sentence Enforcement Code before the Constitutional Court in his third complaint. The latter, on the basis of the relevant provisions of the Law on the Constitutional Court, rejected it on the grounds that the legal reasoning in the complaint was insufficient. The majority concludes, and we can accept, that in his third complaint the applicant raised “expressly and in substance” the discrimination complaint which he subsequently brought before this Court.
The applicant had argued that, but for his gender, he would have been authorised to attend his father’s funeral. In considering the applicant’s complaint on the merits, the majority reformulated the discriminatory treatment of which he complained. It no longer considered the difference in treatment as defined by the applicant, namely refusal of leave, and turned its attention instead to the denial of an individual assessment of his request for such leave. We consider this a significant change, which renders the complaint different for the purposes of an Article 14 analysis. While the comparator group remains the same, namely women convicted of “intentionally committed crimes”, the difference in treatment is not the same. Being granted permission to leave and being allowed access to a procedure involving an individual assessment are not one and the same thing. The Latvian Constitutional Court not having been given the opportunity to address the complaint reformulated by the majority, we consider it inadmissible.
The exhaustion point in the present case is an important one, as this is the first time the Court addresses the specific procedure used in the present case before the Latvian Constitutional Court. The Court has previously examined non-exhaustion pleas in relation to constitutional complaints in Latvia. In those cases, it held that it is not the Court’s “task to take the place of the Constitutional Court and to review its conclusion in relation to the quality of the applicant’s complaint”. In the present case the majority has distinguished between the two grounds on which a Latvian constitutional complaint can be declined: a) failure to comply with formal requirements and b) insufficient reasoning (see § 51 of the majority judgment). As a result, in future cases the Court will differentiate between the two grounds on which the Latvian Constitutional Court declines complaints, reviewing the conclusion of the domestic court in one case but not in the other. In view of the shifting nature of the complaint in the present case, the domestic implications of this are unclear.
Article 14 does not prohibit every difference in treatment in the exercise of rights and freedoms: “competent national authorities are frequently confronted with situations and problems which, on account of the differences inherent therein, call for different legal solutions; moreover certain legal inequalities tend only to correct factual inequalities.” Thus, in order for an issue to arise under Article 14, “there must be a difference in the treatment of persons in analogous, or relevantly similar, situations.” If that is the case, the difference in treatment in question shall be considered discriminatory if it has no objective and reasonable justification; in other words, if it does not pursue a legitimate aim or if there is not a reasonable relationship or proportionality between the means employed and the aim sought to be realized.
As indicated previously, the difference in treatment alleged by the applicant both before the domestic Constitutional Court and our Court was that he was not able to attend his father’s funeral. He argued that had he been a female prisoner he would have been granted permission to attend the funeral. This, however, is simply not correct. Even if the applicant had been a female prisoner he would not have enjoyed an automatic and unconditional right to attend a relative’s funeral. Those belonging to the comparator group indicated by the applicant, namely women convicted of “intentionally committed crimes”, would merely have been entitled to an individual assessment of their request because of the prison regime to which they were subject pursuant to Latvian law. In addition, they would only have been entitled to such an assessment once they were no longer detained at the maximum security level. However, the outcome of such an assessment is not clear and it is in no way certain that the requests of female prisoners in the comparator group would necessarily have been granted. As members of the suggested comparator group have no automatic right to leave, the difference in treatment alleged by the applicant has not been established and no violation of Article 14 combined with Article 8 can be found.
In cases where discrimination is alleged it is of crucial importance to adopt and then apply a sufficiently well elaborated and rigorous analytical framework. We are concerned about the implications of the majority finding a violation of Article 14 given the reasoning employed and the circumstances of the case.
The first, critical question in an Article 14 analysis is whether two persons or groups of persons are in an analogous or relevantly similar situation. As indicated above, it is only where this condition is fulfilled that an issue arises under Article 14. In § 121 of its judgment in Fabian v. Hungary, the Grand Chamber indicated that:
“a difference in treatment may raise an issue from the point of view of the prohibition of discrimination as provided for in Article 14 of the Convention only if the persons subjected to different treatment are in a relevantly similar situation, taking into account the elements that characterise their circumstances in the particular context. The Court notes that the elements which characterise different situations, and determine their comparability, must be assessed in the light of the subject-matter and purpose of the measure which makes the distinction in question”.
In the present case, the majority’s analysis constantly flits between the individual decision refusing leave (see paragraphs 43, 54, 87 – 88, 90 - 91) and the Latvian sentencing and prison regimes, which the applicant alleges are discriminatory at a general level (see paragraphs 41, 52, 54, 80, 85 – 87, 89 - 91). However, the broadening of the complaint and the finding of a violation risk ruling out gender as a factor in risk assessment in the prison context, whether at a regulatory or individual assessment level, despite clear evidence that men and women present different security risks. In their admirable pursuit of substantive equality, the reasoning in the judgment ignores research which points to the fact that:
“Screening processes tend to take too little account of specific issues affecting a large proportion of female prisoners [...] and of the actual security risk women present, all of which should influence their placement within the prison system. Consequently, women are routinely over-classified in terms of the requisite level of security, and insufficient programmes and services appropriate for their needs are provided”.
The majority concludes a) that the complaint relates to the manner in which the applicable prison regime affects restrictions on prisoners’ rights, “in particular”, with regard to the right to prison leave; b) that, as such, the complaint concerns an issue of equal relevance to all prisoners and c) that the applicant can claim to be in an analogous position to that of female prisoners convicted of the same or comparable offences (see §§ 80-81 of the majority judgment). Reliance is placed on the Grand Chamber judgment in Khamtokhu and Aksenchik in which the complaint under Article 14 in conjunction with Article 5 related to “the sentencing of offenders who have been found guilty of particularly serious crimes punishable with imprisonment for life”. Whereas the applicants in that case were given life sentences, female offenders convicted of the same or comparable offences would not have been so sentenced due to a statutory prohibition. The Court in Khamtokhu and Aksenchik did not examine the question of comparability in any detail and simply held that the applicants, male prisoners, were in an analogous situation to all other offenders who had been convicted of the same or comparable offences. This is a seductive but not entirely convincing approach and, when followed, it requires the Court to ensure that the next two stages of the discrimination assessment – justification and proportionality – are done with great rigour.
On the subject of justification and proportionality, the majority in the present case accepts that States enjoy a wide margin of appreciation in relation to questions of prisoners and penal policy and appears to accept that certain differences in the prison regimes applicable to male and female prisoners are acceptable and may be necessary in order for substantive gender equality to be ensured (see §§ 83 and 85 of the majority judgment). However, the refusal of leave to male prisoners in closed prisons generally and to the applicant in particular is considered disproportionate because it was determined by the prison regime in which he had been placed and by no other consideration. While the respondent government pointed to differences between male and female prisoners – with the latter generally convicted of less serious and violent crimes, proven to be less violent in prison and posing lower security risks – the majority both criticises the absence of data supporting these arguments and indicates that data would not in any event have sufficed as such a generalised approach would conflict with the need for an individual assessment (see §§ 89–90 of the majority judgment).
As indicated previously, as a result of the flawed exhaustion of domestic remedies, the majority switches between, on the one hand, the only and specific complaint in relation to which the applicant could be said to have exhausted domestic remedies – the complaint that he was not permitted to attend the funeral on discriminatory grounds – and, on the other, the absence of an individualised assessment of his request for prison leave and the much broader question of the justification and proportionality of a general prison regime which differentiates between male and female prisoners. This becomes particularly clear in § 90 of the majority judgment, where the analysis strays well beyond the question of prison leave to the CPT’s criticism of the Latvian progressive sentence execution regime. However, the assessment which the Court must undertake in relation to an individual decision and a general legislative choice is qualitatively different.
In order to determine the proportionality of a general measure, the Court will primarily assess the legislative choices underlying it. Had the legislature when adopting its general measure sought to weigh the competing interests or assess the proportionality of any restrictions placed? Yet the chamber did not question the respondent government in this regard and nowhere in the majority judgment did it seek to present, explain or test the legislative choices lying behind the Latvian Sentence Enforcement Code which it had decided to tackle in quite a broad manner. Attempts by the respondent government to explain and justify its differentiated prison regime, the differences between male and female prisoners and the different nature of the crimes committed by men and women are all dismissed rather cursorily. While the quality of the data presented by the respondent Government may not have been exemplary, it is surprising in a discrimination context to dismiss such data as being in any event insufficient.
Indeed it is difficult to read the majority judgment without questioning whether it sits easily with the acceptance in prior Article 14 cases of positive discrimination in prisons and in domestic penal policy as a possibly justified and proportionate means to accommodate the differences between male and female prisoners and their particular needs. In Khamtokhu and Aksenchik, for example, the Court pointed to the statistical data provided by the respondent government showing a considerable difference between the total number of male and female prison inmates and stated:
“it is not for the Court to reassess the evaluation made by the domestic authorities of the data in their possession or of the penological rationale which such data purports to demonstrate. In the particular circumstances of the case, the available data [...] provide(s) a sufficient basis for the Court to conclude that there exists a public interest underlying the exemption of female offenders from life imprisonment by way of a general rule”.
Rule 1 of the Bangkok Rules states that in order for the principle of non-discrimination to be put into practice, account shall be taken of the distinctive needs of women prisoners in the application of those rules. Providing for such needs in order to accomplish substantial gender equality shall not be regarded as discriminatory. The reference to substantive equality in § 86 of the majority judgment is to be welcomed. However, it sits uneasily with elements of the discrimination analysis which then follow.
We do not mean to suggest that refusing prisoners – male or female – an individual assessment on the merits of a request for prison leave is Convention compatible. It is not. However, since the judges in the majority were not in a position to concentrate on that straightforward Article 8 question and since they did not limit themselves to the complaint which the applicant had actually exhausted, they extended their review to the Latvian Sentence Enforcement Code more generally, to differences in the treatment of male and female prisoners more generally (with the treatment of leave requests just one issue) and indeed to the progressive sentence execution system under which all prisoners are required to spend a predetermined minimum amount of time at both maximum and medium security levels. This was a mistake given that, as the majority recognises, it is not the task of this Court to examine domestic legislation in the abstract.
Conclusions
Had the applicant raised a complaint before the domestic courts about the lack of individual assessment of his request to attend the funeral of his father, this Court could have focused the present case on Article 8, finding a violation and thereby ensuring that detainees in Latvian prisons would be entitled to such individualised assessments of leave requests. A targeted finding of this nature would thereafter have required a targeted adjustment of Latvian penal legislation and practice. If the Latvian prison regime and Sentence Enforcement Code are vitiated by other problems, these could and should be raised in appropriate proceedings before the domestic courts in full compliance with the principle of exhaustion.