The case originated in three applications (nos. 28357/11, 31549/11 and 39295/11) against Bosnia and Herzegovina lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr Sulejman Avdić, Mr Vlado Adamović and Mr Drago Kovačević (“the applicants”), on 6 April, 10 May and 20 May 2011, respectively.
Mr Avdić was represented by Ms S. Nikolić and Mr V. Nikolić, lawyers practising in Sarajevo. Mr Adamović was represented by Mr N. Grzić, a lawyer also practising in Sarajevo. Mr Kovačević, who was granted legal aid, was represented by Mr G. Marić, a lawyer practising in Banja Luka. The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina (“the Government”) were represented by their Deputy Agent, Ms Z. Ibrahimović.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that they had been denied access to court.
On 11 September 2012 the applications were communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the applications at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicants are citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. They were born in 1949, 1959 and 1962, respectively, and live in Sarajevo (Mr Avdić and Mr Adamović) and in Banja Luka (Mr Kovačević).
On 10 April 2006 the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina (“the State Court”) rejected a claim lodged by the applicant in a labour dispute against the fiscal administration. On 27 February and 1 October 2007 that judgment was confirmed by a trial chamber of the State Court and an appeals chamber of the State Court, respectively.
On 27 November 2007 the applicant lodged a constitutional appeal.
On 9 July 2010 the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina (“the Constitutional Court”), in a formation of eight judges, rejected the applicant’s appeal as a majority of five judges could not agree on any of the proposals. The court’s reasoning included all the views expressed at the session on the issues raised in the case. By virtue of Article VI § 4 of the Constitution (see paragraph 17 below), the decision was final.
On 14 January 2008 the first instance disciplinary panel of the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council removed the applicant from the post of State Court judge for causing damage to the reputation of the judiciary.
On 16 April, 29 May and 27 November 2008 that decision was confirmed by the second instance disciplinary panel, the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council and the State Court, respectively. On 8 July 2009 an appeals chamber of the State Court rejected an appeal on points of law lodged by the applicant.
On 2 October 2009 the applicant lodged a constitutional appeal.
On 25 September 2010 the Constitutional Court, in a formation of eight judges, rejected the applicant’s appeal as a majority of five judges could not agree on any of the proposals. The court’s reasoning included all the views expressed at the session on the issues raised in the case. By virtue of Article VI § 4 of the Constitution, the decision was final.
After an unsuccessful attempt to resolve his employment-law claim before the administrative commission set up under the employment legislation, on 30 October 2003 the applicant initiated proceedings against his former employer seeking reinstatement and payment of outstanding salaries, together with all work-related benefits.
On 20 October 2006, following remittal, the Bosanska Krupa Municipal Court partially acceded to his claim. On 17 April 2007 and 14 July 2008 that judgment was upheld by the Bihać Cantonal Court and the Supreme Court of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, respectively.
On 9 September 2008 the applicant lodged a constitutional appeal complaining about the length and the outcome of the impugned proceedings as well as alleged discrimination.
On 21 January 2011 the Constitutional Court, in a formation of seven judges, found that the applicant’s right to a hearing within a reasonable time had been violated, but rejected the rest of his appeal as a majority of five judges could not agree on any of the proposals. The court’s reasoning as regards the rejected part of the appeal contained all the views expressed at the session on the issues raised. By virtue of Article VI § 4 of the Constitution, that decision was final.
The Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina (Annex 4 to the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina) entered into force on 14 December 1995. The Constitutional Court was set up pursuant to Article VI of the Constitution, which, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“1. Composition
 The Constitutional Court shall have nine members.
(a) Four members shall be selected by the House of Representatives of the Federation, and two members by the Assembly of the Republika Srpska. The remaining three members shall be selected by the President of the European Court of Human Rights after consultation with the Presidency.
...
Procedures
(a) A majority of all members of the Court shall constitute a quorum.
(b) The Court shall adopt its own rules of court by a majority of all members. It shall hold public proceedings and shall issue reasons for its decisions, which shall be published.
Jurisdiction
The Constitutional Court shall uphold this Constitution.
...
b) The Constitutional Court shall also have appellate jurisdiction over issues under this Constitution arising out of a judgment of any other court in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
...
Decisions
 Decisions of the Constitutional Court shall be final and binding.”
Rule 40(2) of the Rules of the Constitutional Court (Official Gazette of Bosnia and Herzegovina nos. 60/05, 76/05, 64/08 and 51/09) provides that the plenary court shall take decisions by a majority of all its members. A judge may not abstain from voting (Rule 41).
Rule 40(3), which was introduced on 30 May 2009, reads as follows:
 "Exceptionally, when less than a total number of nine judges participate in a decision-making procedure at the plenary session for the reasons referred to in Rule 93(1) [exemption of a judge] or Rule 99(6) [temporary suspension from office pending the outcome of criminal proceedings] of these Rules, as well as in the event that all of the judges have not been appointed or there is an incapacity of one of the judges to exercise his/her office due to illness for a longer period, unless a minimum of five judges vote identically on a draft decision on an appeal it shall be considered that the decision is taken to reject it.
The reasoning of that decision shall contain all the views presented at the session on the issues raised in the appeal.”