The case originated in an application (no. 30906/06) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Rustem Rifgatovich Gazizov (“the applicant”), on 4 July 2006.
The applicant was represented by Ms Y. Gazizova, a lawyer practising in Naberezhnyye Chelny. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr M. Galperin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 16 March 2017 the complaints concerning the applicant’s absence from criminal proceedings and the failure to serve the other parties’ written submissions on him, as well as the complaint concerning his delayed notification of the first-instance hearing in civil proceedings were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1978 and lives in Naberezhnyye Chelny.
The applicant was a police officer. On 1 November 2004 he was arrested on suspicion of having extracted a bribe.
On 10 November 2005 the Supreme Court of the Tatarstan Republic convicted the applicant and sentenced him to imprisonment. He stayed under the obligation not to leave his place of residence in Naberezhnyye Chelny until the conviction became final. He could leave his place of residence only upon the summons from the investigator or the court.
Several parties to the criminal proceedings, including the applicant, appealed against the conviction. The case was forwarded to the Russian Supreme Court in Moscow, 1,000 km away from Naberezhnyye Chelny. The applicant never received any summons to the appeal hearing due to the Supreme Court’s mistake in the postal code. Neither did he receive copies of the statements of appeal filed by the prosecutor, by the co-accused, G., and the latter’s lawyer.
On 28 February 2006 the conviction was upheld by the Russian Supreme Court. The prosecutor and G.’s lawyer attended the appeal hearing. Neither the applicant nor his lawyer was present.
In 2011 the applicant lodged a compensation claim for non-pecuniary damages caused by poor conditions of detention. In the text of his claim the applicant explicitly asked the court to consider the claim in his absence. On 14 April 2011 the Bugulminskiy Town Court of the Tatarstan Republic dismissed his claim. The applicant received the notification of the time and date of the hearing after the hearing had actually taken place.
The first-instance judgment was upheld on 4 July 2011 by the Supreme Court of the Tatarstan Republic. The applicant had been notified of that hearing on 29 June 2011.
For the legal provisions, in force at the material time, regarding the criminal proceedings before an appeal court see Kozlitin v. Russia (no. 17092/04, §§ 24-29, 14 November 2013).
For the legal provisions, in force at the material time, regarding civil proceedings see Gankin and Others v. Russia (nos. 2430/06 and 3 others, §§ 29-32, 31 May 2016).