The case originated in an application (no. 25032/11) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Ivan Grygorovych Gudz (“the applicant”), on 4 April 2011.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their then Agent, Ms Natalia Sevostianova, of the Ministry of Justice.
On 15 November 2013 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1949 and lives in Chervonograd.
On 29 June 2010 the applicant’s mother K. was found in her house with grave bodily injuries. On 1 July 2010 she succumbed to those injuries while undergoing treatment in a hospital.
On 7 November 2010 the police instituted a criminal investigation into her death.
On 16 November 2010 the police questioned K.’s neighbours and relatives who stated that the applicant had frequently beaten her. A. and B. stated that shortly before her death, K. had told them that on 29 June 2010 she had been beaten by the applicant.
On 16 November 2010 the police instituted criminal proceedings against the applicant on suspicion of having beaten his mother which resulted in her death. On the same date the applicant was arrested for seventy-two hours. According to the applicant, the arrest record mentioned that he was arrested in order to “prevent him from fleeing or obstructing the course of investigation”. It also mentioned that witnesses had indicated that the applicant had beaten his mother. A copy of the arrest record is not available to the Court.
On 19 November 2010 the Sokal Court¸ referring to Article 165-2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, extended the applicant’s detention until 26 November 2010 on the ground that the police needed time to collect information about his personality and health condition. The court did not explain why the said information had not been collected between 16 and 19 November 2010.
On 26 November 2010 the same court ordered the applicant’s detention on remand until 26 January 2011 on the grounds that he was charged with a serious offence and that, if at liberty, he might continue his criminal activities, abscond and obstruct justice. The court did not provide any further details in this respect.
On 26 November 2010 the pre-trial investigation was completed and the case was sent to the Sokal Court for trial.
On 24 December 2010 the Sokal Court held a preliminary hearing during which the applicant lodged a request for release. He argued that there was no evidence that he might hinder investigation or evade justice, that he had a permanent place of residence and poor health. On the same date the court rejected this request and ordered the applicant to remain in detention stating that there was no reason to change his preventive measure. The court did not fix a time-limit for the applicant’s continuing detention.
On 17 March and 10 July 2011, respectively, the applicant lodged two more requests for release advancing the same arguments as in his previous request. In the request of 17 March 2011 he also argued that his wife had financial means to pay his bail. The Sokal Court rejected the request of 17 March 2011 on the day when it was lodged and the request of 10 July 2011 on 12 July 2011. The court stated, without providing further details or referring to concrete facts, that if at liberty the applicant could continue his criminal activities and abscond.
According to the applicant, on 22 March 2011 the Lviv Regional Court of Appeal refused to consider his appeal against the decision of 17 March 2011. A copy of the court of appeal’s decision is not available to the Court.
On 30 January 2012 the Sokal Court granted the applicant’s further request for release. He was released on the same day.
As of 26 March 2014 the criminal case against the applicant remained pending before the Sokal Court. The parties did not inform the Court about any further developments.
The relevant provisions of the Code read as follows:
“An investigating body shall be entitled to arrest a person suspected of a criminal offence for which a penalty in the form of deprivation of liberty may be imposed only on one of the following grounds:
if the person is discovered whilst or immediately after committing an offence;
if eyewitnesses, including victims, directly identify this person as having committed the offence;
if clear traces of the offence are found on the body of the suspect or on the clothing he is wearing or which is kept at his home.
For each case of detention of a criminal suspect, the investigating body shall be required to draw up a record mentioning the grounds, the motives, the day, time, year and month, the place of detention, the explanation given by the person detained and the time when it was recorded that the suspect was informed of his right to consult defence counsel in person before he is questioned, in accordance with the procedure provided for in paragraph 2 of Article 21 of the present Code. The record of detention shall be signed by the person who drew it up and by the detainee.
A copy of the record with a list of his rights and obligations shall be immediately handed to the detainee and shall be sent to the prosecutor. At the request of the prosecutor, the material which served as a ground for detention shall be sent to him as well ...
Within seventy-two hours of the arrest the investigating body shall:
(1)  release the detainee if the suspicion that he committed the crime has not been confirmed, if the term of detention established by law has expired, or if the arrest has been effected in violation of the requirements of paragraphs 1 and 2 of the present Article;
(2)  release the detainee and select a non-custodial preventive measure;
(3)  bring the detainee before a judge with a request for a custodial preventive measure to be imposed on him or her.
If the detention is appealed against to a court, the detainee’s appeal shall be immediately sent by the head of the detention facility to the court. The judge shall consider the appeal together with any request by the investigating body for the preventive measure. If the appeal is received after the preventive measure has been applied, the judge shall examine it within three days of receiving it. If the request has not been received, or if the appeal has been received after the term of seventy-two hours of detention, the appeal shall be considered by the judge within five days of receiving it.
The appeal shall be considered in accordance with the requirements of Article 165-2 of this Code. Following its examination, the judge shall give a ruling, either declaring the detention lawful or allowing the appeal and finding the detention to be unlawful.
The judge’s ruling may be appealed against within seven days of the date of its adoption by the prosecutor, the person concerned, or his or her defence counsel or legal representative. Lodging such an appeal does not suspend the execution of the court’s ruling.
Detention of a criminal suspect shall not last for more than seventy-two hours.
If, within the terms established by law, the ruling of the judge on the application of a custodial preventive measure or on the release of the detainee has not arrived at the pre-trial detention facility, the head of the pre-trial detention facility shall release the person concerned, drawing up a record to that effect, and shall inform the official or body that carried out the arrest accordingly.”
“... In the event that the investigating body or investigator considers that there are grounds for selecting a custodial preventive measure, with the prosecutor’s consent he shall lodge an application with the court. The prosecutor is entitled to lodge an application to the same effect. In determining this issue, the prosecutor shall be obliged to familiarise himself with all the material evidence in the case that would justify placing the person in custody, and to establish that the evidence was obtained in a lawful manner and is sufficient for charging the person.
The application shall be considered within seventy-two hours of the time at which the suspect or accused is detained ...
Upon receiving the application, the judge shall examine the material in the criminal case file submitted by the investigating bodies or the investigator. A prosecutor shall question the suspect or accused and, if necessary, hear evidence from the person who is the subject of the proceedings, obtain the opinion of the previous prosecutor or defence counsel, if the latter appeared before the court, and issue an order:
(1)  refusing to select a custodial preventive measure if there are no grounds for doing so;
(2)  selecting a custodial preventive measure.
The court shall be entitled to select a non-custodial preventive measure for the suspect or accused if the investigator or prosecutor refuses to apply a custodial preventive measure.
The judge’s order may be appealed against to the court of appeal by the prosecutor, suspect, accused or his or her defence counsel or legal representative, within three days of the date on which it was made. The lodging of an appeal shall not suspend the execution of the judge’s order.
If the selection of the preventive measure for the detained person requires further examination of information about that person, or if other circumstances relevant to the decision on this matter need to be established, the judge may issue a decision to continue the detention for up to ten days, and, at the request of the suspect or accused, for up to fifteen days. Where such a need arises in respect of a person who has not been apprehended, the judge may postpone the hearing for up to ten days and take measures which would ensure that person’s cooperation or issue a decision to detain a suspect or an accused for that period of time.”