The case originated in an application (no. 39701/14) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, T.G. (“the applicant”), on 18 May 2014.
The applicant was represented by Mr Z. Stanković, a lawyer practising in Sisak. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant complained under Articles 6 and 8 of the Convention that his firearms licence had not been renewed on the basis of police reports that had not been fully disclosed to him or his lawyer.
On 3 July 2014 the above complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
It was also decided to grant the applicant anonymity under Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1974.
In February 2011, after holding a firearms licence and a hunting permit for about ten years, the applicant asked the S. Police Department (hereinafter: “the police”) to renew his firearms licence for hunting purposes. He did not live in Croatia but went hunting when he spent holidays there.
When submitting his request the applicant relied on a certificate of the Ministry of Health (Ministartsvo zdravstva Republike Hrvatske) attesting that he was healthy and thus capable of carrying firearms.
Following the applicant’s request the police carried out a background check. A report of 22 February 2011, available in the file, contains a finding of the police that the applicant had often been under the influence of alcohol when visiting Croatia.
On 18 August 2011 the applicant was summoned by the police to give a statement concerning the intention of a weapons commission not to renew his firearms licence. The applicant denied any alcohol abuse and stated that he had been a hunter for several years and that, if necessary, he could undergo any test concerning his health and the alleged drinking problem.
In a further written statement dated 19 August 2011 the applicant contended that hunting was his hobby and that his membership of a hunting association was related to his social status. He denied any allegations of alcohol abuse and argued that there were no justified reasons for a refusal to renew his firearms licence.
On 23 August 2011 the applicant made the same objections through a lawyer. He stressed that his request for renewal of the firearms licence could not be refused merely because somebody had allegedly said that he was a drinker.
On the same day the police dismissed the applicant’s request for renewal of his firearms licence and ordered him to hand over his weapons on the grounds that a police inquiry had shown that he had a problem of alcohol abuse.
The applicant challenged this decision before the Ministry of the Interior (Ministarstvo unutarnjih poslova Republike Hrvatske, hereinafter “the Ministry”), arguing that he had been falsely accused by some neighbours and that there was no evidence of any drinking problem. He also stressed that hunting allowed him to see his friends, and that those who had made the allegations against him did not really know him.
On 11 October 2011 the Ministry ordered the police to produce a new assessment of the background check on the applicant, on the grounds that the report of 22 February 2011 (see paragraph 9 above) had not been substantiated with the relevant evidence.
On 9 November 2011 the police produced a new report on the background check on the applicant. The report, which was available in the file, provided further details on the applicant’s alleged alcohol abuse, which had been confirmed by his neighbours in Croatia. The report explained that all the relevant details concerning the sources of this information were classified as confidential information.
On 12 December 2011 the Ministry dismissed the applicant’s complaints, on the grounds that the documents from the case file suggested that he had a problem of alcohol abuse.
On 6 February 2012 the applicant lodged an administrative action in the Administrative Court challenging the Ministry’s decision. He contended that the refusal to renew his firearms licence had been based on mere insinuations, and that there had been no relevant evidence to support the findings of the police. In particular, he contended that he had never been registered as a person with a problem of alcohol abuse and he had never been convicted of an offence related to the abuse of alcohol. In his view, the police based its conclusion only on the basis of gossips of his neighbours in Croatia.
On 14 April 2012 the applicant asked the police to disclose the relevant reports containing the allegations against him, in particular the identity of those who had seen him under the influence of alcohol and the date and place when that had happened. On 1 March 2012 he received a reply that the information which he requested could not be disclosed since it was confidential (see paragraph 16 above), as provided under the relevant domestic law (see paragraphs 31-32 below).
On 26 April 2012 the Administrative Court held a hearing at which it heard the parties’ arguments. The applicant’s representative stressed that the police had failed to produce any credible evidence justifying the refusal to renew the applicant’s firearms licence. He also considered that it was not clear on which grounds the police had dismissed the applicant’s request. The Ministry’s representative explained that further details of the applicant’s background check, in particular the names of individuals from whom the relevant information had been obtained, were confidential as provided under the Confidentiality of Information Act.
As the parties did not have any further proposals for the examination of evidence, the Administrative Court concluded the proceedings and scheduled a hearing for the delivery of the judgment for 4 May 2012.
On 27 April 2012 the Administrative Court found that the judgment could not be delivered, as a further assessment of the relevant circumstances of the case was needed. It scheduled a hearing for 17 May 2012, and ordered the Ministry to provide the confidential case file containing the details of the information on the applicant’s background check. It explained that the file at issue would be inspected by the judges and would not become part of the Administrative Court’s case file.
At a hearing on 17 May 2012 the Administrative Court examined the confidential file of the police without the presence of the parties. Afterwards, in the resumed hearing in the parties’ presence, the applicant’s representative reiterated his arguments that the applicant did not have a drinking problem. He did not seek examination of further evidence.
On 23 May 2012 the Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s administrative action and upheld the decisions of the administrative bodies refusing to renew the applicant’s firearms licence. It explained that it was satisfied from the examination of the confidential reports that the reasons for the police’s refusal to renew the applicant’s firearms licence were well founded. It also held that the medical certificate attesting that the applicant was healthy and capable of carrying firearms did not call these findings into question, as that was only one element in the assessment of an individual’s suitability to be granted a firearms licence. The relevant part of the Administrative Court’s decision reads:
“By examining the classified file of the defendant the court ... established that the police officer’s conduct, while searching for and collecting information from citizens, ... was in accordance with the By-law on the conduct of the police in the procedure for issuing a licence for the procurement of weapons to a natural person ... and, based on data and information collected from interviewed citizens, found that the plaintiff is prone to common and excessive alcohol abuse, which indicates a possibility of weapons abuse.
...
Consequently, the plaintiff’s claim that the defendant wrongly applied the substantive law, is unfounded, while the plaintiff’s objection that the medical certificate is sufficient evidence showing that the defendant wrongly determined the facts of the case was not accepted by this court because the medical fitness for possessing and carrying weapons which is established through a certificate of medical fitness is only a special requirement for the weapons acquisition permit to natural persons within the meaning of section 10 paragraph 3(1) of the Weapons Act, while the defendant acting in accordance with the [above-cited] By-law ... established that the plaintiff does not meet the requirement of section Article 10(5) of the Weapons Act, as one of the general requirements which natural persons need to meet in order to be issued a firearms licence.”
The applicant challenged this decision before the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske), complaining that he had been denied access to the evidence containing allegations against him and that therefore he had been left without any opportunity to challenge those allegations. He also argued that his right to respect for his private life had been breached by the unjustified refusal to extend his firearms licence, which prevented him from hunting. In this connection he explained that he had been a hunter for over ten years, and that hunting was his way of maintaining contact with his friends.
In support of his constitutional complaint the applicant submitted a list of signatures of his neighbours attesting that he did not have a problem of alcohol abuse. He also submitted a medical certificate indicating that he had no problem of alcohol abuse.
On 6 February 2014 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s constitutional complaint as unfounded. It explained that it was primarily the function of the relevant authorities to examine the facts and apply the relevant law and that it was not its function to deal with alleged errors of law or fact, in so far as they had not infringed human rights and freedoms guaranteed under the Constitution. The Constitutional Court held that since the applicant had had access to the police reports on his background check, which contained details for dismissing his request (see Bakırcı the reports referred to in paragraphs 9 and 16 above), the fact that further details on which those report had been based, including personal details about individuals who had provided information to the police, had not been disclosed to him did not infringe any of his rights.
The decision of the Constitutional Court was served on the applicant’s representative on 18 February 2014.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette, nos. 56/1990, 135/1997, 8/1998, 113/2000, 124/2000, 28/2001, 41/2001, 55/2001, 76/2010, 85/2010 and 5/2014) read as follows:
“In the determination of his rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law.”
“Everyone has the right to respect for and legal protection of his or her private and family life, dignity, reputation and honour.”
“The right of ownership shall be guaranteed ...“
The relevant provisions of the Weapons Act (Zakon o oružju, Official Gazette, nos. 63/2007 and 146/2008) provide as follows:
“(1) The competent body shall issue a licence for the procurement [of a weapon] to a natural person if he or she meets the general and special conditions.
(2) The general conditions ... are:
...
5) absence of other circumstances which suggest that weapons could be abused, and especially: frequent and excessive abuse of alcohol, ...
(3) The special conditions are:
1) that the medical examination confirmed that the individual is medically fit to hold and carry a weapon ...”
By-law on the conduct of the police in the procedure for issuing a licence for the procurement of weapons to a natural person (Pravilnik o načinu postupanja policijskih službenika u postupku za izdavanje odobrenja za nabavu oružja fizičkoj osobi, Official Gazette, no. 33/2008)
“This Ordinance governs the conduct of police officers during the search for and collection of data and information from citizens in order to determine the existence of requirements under section 10 paragraph 2 (5) of the Weapons Act ...”
“During a field check, a police officer shall in a discreet manner search for and collect data and information from citizens who are acquainted with the applicant, as well as from all other citizens who could provide information necessary for the determination of the existence of requirements under section l0 paragraph 2 (5) of the Weapons Act ...
In cases where an enquiry under paragraph 1 of this section discloses information on the absence of requirements for issuing a licence for the procurement of weapons (circumstances which suggest that weapons could be abused, and especially: frequent and excessive abuse of alcohol ...) the police officer [conducting an inquiry] shall check this information [by questioning] at least two citizens he or she considers to be capable of objectively presenting their knowledge on the applicant.”
“[On the performed inquiry] the police officer [conducting the inquiry] shall produce a report from which it will be clear whether the circumstances under section 10 paragraph 2 (5) of the Weapons Act have been established, thus from which it is clear that the conditions for issuing a [weapons licence] under the Weapons Act have not been met. This report, which must not contain data on the sources of the information collected, shall be forwarded to the competent authority [deciding upon a request for a weapons licence].
In addition to the report referred to in paragraph 1 of this section, the police officer shall produce a report on the field check performed, containing information from the report and information on the citizens from whom he or she has sought and collected data and information. This report will be made in a single copy, classified with the confidentiality degree “RESTRICTED” and filed in the field check case file.
The police officer shall be obliged to safeguard as official data all personal data of citizens from whom he or she has sought or collected data and information contained in the report referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, as well as the content of data and information obtained from them, and shall not be allowed to communicate them to the applicant ... or to other unauthorised persons.”
The handling of confidential information is regulated by the Confidentiality of Information Act (Zakon o tajnosti podataka, Official Gazette, no. 79/2007). Section 9 provides that the classification “restricted” shall be used to classify data the unauthorised disclosure of which would be damaging to the functioning and the performance of the tasks of State authorities.
In principle, access to confidential information is limited to holders of the requisite security clearance (section 18). Judges are authorised to have access to confidential information if they hold a security clearance or by signing a statement of confidentiality. On the basis of that statement they are obliged to keep confidential all data obtained by such access to confidential information (sections 19-28 of the Act).
According to the Access to Information Act (Zakon o pravu na pristup informacijama, Official Gazette, nos. 172/2003, 144/2010, 37/2011 and 77/11), applicable at the time, all public authorities were obliged to restrict access to classified information. Exceptionally, they were allowed to disclose classified information upon a request if disclosure was in the public interest, necessary for achieving the intended purpose under the law, and proportionate (section 8 paragraphs 1-4). However, section 1(3) provided that the Access to Information Act was not applicable to cases where access to information from judicial or administrative proceedings was regulated by special legislation.
The applicable Administrative Disputes Act (Zakon o upravnim sporovima, Official Gazette no. 20/2010) provides:
“(1) The court freely assesses the evidence and establishes facts.
(2) The court takes into account the facts established during the proceedings [that led to the] adoption of the impugned decision, by which it is not bound, as well as facts that it established on its own.
(3) The parties may propose which facts are to be established and evidence by which they can be established, but the court is not bound by such proposals.
(4) Evidence includes documents, the hearing of the parties, witness testimonies, expert reports, on-site investigations and other means.
(5) The court adduces evidence in accordance with the rules governing the adducing of evidence in civil proceedings.”
“(1) [By means of bringing] an action and responding to that action the parties are obliged to present all the facts on which they base their claims, propose evidence necessary for establishing them, and express their opinion on the submissions of facts and proposals of evidence undertaken by the other parties.”
“(2) The president of the panel or a single judge establishes the presence of all the persons summoned [to the hearing], and in the event of their absence, establishes whether they were duly summoned and whether they justified their absence.
(3) When a party or another participant in the dispute fails to attend the hearing without a justified reason, the hearing may be held in his or her absence.”
“(1) The court adjudicates the claim ... by means of a judgment.
...
(3) The court renders a judgment in accordance with its own belief and on the basis of an examination of all the legal and factual issues.
(4) A judgment may be based solely on the facts and evidence on which the parties were able to express their opinion.”
“(1) The court shall dismiss a claim if it finds it unfounded.”
“(1) If the court finds an individual decision of the relevant body unlawful, it shall by means of a judgment uphold the claim, annul the impugned decision and adjudicate on the matter on its own, unless it is unable to do so due to the nature of the matter, or if the defendant has resolved the matter [at its own discretion].”
“(4) In its reasoning [in respect of a judgment], a court shall state the parties’ claims, the submitted facts and proposed evidence, the facts it has established, the reasons and time of their establishment, and in the event that they were established on the basis of evidence, which evidence the court adduced and how that evidence was assessed. The court shall state in particular which provisions it applied when adjudicating on the dispute and shall express its opinion regarding the parties’ proposals and objections regarding which it did not express its opinion during the dispute.”
The relevant parts of the Council Directive 91/477/EEC of 18 June 1991 on control of the acquisition and possession of weapons, amended by the Directive 2008/51/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 May 2008, provide:
“Without prejudice to Article 3, Member States shall permit the acquisition and possession of firearms only by persons who have good cause and who:
(a) are at least 18 years of age, except in relation to the acquisition, other than through purchase, and possession of firearms for hunting and target shooting, provided that in that case persons of less than 18 years of age have parental permission, or are under parental guidance or the guidance of an adult with a valid firearms or hunting licence, or are within a licensed or otherwise approved training centre;
(b) are not likely to be a danger to themselves, to public order or to public safety. Having been convicted of a violent intentional crime shall be considered as indicative of such danger. Member States may withdraw authorisation for possession of a firearm if any of the conditions on the basis of which it was granted are no longer satisfied.”