The case originated in an application (no. 34640/02) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Azerbaijani national, Mrs Leyli Pasha qizi Rahmanova (Leyli Paşa qızı Rəhmanova – “the applicant”), on 5 September 2002.
The applicant was represented by Mr N. Abdullayev, a lawyer practising in . The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr C. Asgarov.
The applicant alleged that the quashing of the final judicial decision in her favour by way of the procedure of additional cassation had violated her rights under Articles 6 § 1 and 13 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
By a decision of 1 September 2005 the Court declared the application admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1938 and lives in .
She owned a three-room apartment in . In 1991, after getting married, the applicant’s son and his wife (G.R.) moved into the applicant’s apartment. After some time, the applicant’s relations with G.R. started to deteriorate. For this reason, the family decided to divide the apartment, with two rooms taken by the applicant and the remaining one room by her son and G.R.
In 1995 they decided to sell the apartment, divide the proceeds and live separately thereafter. After the sale of the apartment, the applicant used her part of the proceeds to purchase herself a new, smaller apartment, where she began to live alone. Her son and G.R. used their part of the proceeds to pay off their debts and resided temporarily in various places.
According to the applicant, in 1996 her son asked her to temporarily register him and his family in her new apartment as co-residents. He explained that without proper residence documents he was unable to get a job. The applicant allowed her son and G.R. to register temporarily, for a term of one year, as co-residents in her apartment. However, according to the applicant, pursuant to their agreement, her son and G.R. never moved in and never lived in the apartment. Later, the applicant successfully applied for their removal from the relevant registration records.
In 2001 the applicant’s son and G.R. divorced. They had two children who appear to have stayed in G.R.’s custody.
In 2000 G.R. filed a lawsuit, claiming the right to reside in the applicant’s apartment with her children and requesting the court to order their re-registration in the apartment as the applicant’s co-residents. On 24 July 2000 the Narimanov District Court upheld G.R.’s claim and recognised her and her children’s residence rights to the apartment.
Upon an appeal by the applicant, on 29 August 2000 the Baku City Court (the court of cassation under the old civil procedure laws effective at that time) quashed the district court’s judgment, finding that it had not assessed all the relevant facts of the case. The case was remitted for re-trial at the first instance.
After re-trial, on 8 December 2000 the Narimanov District Court ruled in the applicant’s favour and dismissed G.R.’s claims. It found that G.R. had failed to produce sufficient evidence supporting her claims to the apartment.
On 27 March 2001 the Court of Appeal, in the absence of the applicant, set aside the district court’s second judgment and ruled in G.R.’s favour. Contrary to the applicant’s arguments, it determined that G.R. had permanent registration in the disputed apartment and, therefore, had residence rights.
Upon the applicant’s appeal in cassation, on 4 July 2001 the Supreme Court quashed the Court of Appeal’s judgment. It found that the Court of Appeal had breached the procedural rules by hearing the case in the applicant’s absence. Furthermore, it found that the Court of Appeal had failed to consider certain crucial facts, including the fact that G.R. had allegedly never resided in the disputed apartment. The case was remitted back to the Court of Appeal for re-examination.
On 11 October 2001 the Court of Appeal found that G.R.’s registration in the disputed apartment had been temporary, that she had never lived there and never engaged in joint household activities with the applicant. Thus, relying on the relevant provisions of the Housing Code, the court held that G.R. had never acquired residence rights to the apartment. Accordingly, it dismissed G.R.’s appeal and upheld the district court’s ruling of 8 December 2000 in favour of the applicant.
On 11 January 2002 the Supreme Court upheld the Court of Appeal’s judgment. The Supreme Court’s decision became final and enforceable upon its delivery.
Having disagreed with the outcome of the proceedings in the domestic courts, G.R. filed an additional cassation appeal asking for a review of the Supreme Court’s final decision by the Plenum of the Supreme Court (“the Plenum”). By a letter of 14 May 2002, the President of the Supreme Court rejected G.R.’s request, finding no grounds for reopening the proceedings in the Plenum and confirming the correctness of the Supreme Court’s decision.
However, contrary to the rejection letter of 14 May 2002 and under circumstances unknown to the applicant, on 19 July 2002 the case was actually referred to and reviewed by the Plenum. At that time, more than six months had passed from the Supreme Court’s decision of 11 January 2002.
The Plenum noted that the main argument for the lower courts’ decisions in the applicant’s favour had been that G.R. and her children had never lived in the apartment. It deemed that, under domestic law, this fact was an insufficient basis for adjudging the case in the applicant’s favour. The Plenum further found that the lower courts had misapplied the domestic law and failed to establish the facts necessary for applying the appropriate legal provisions. It held that, instead, it would be proper to apply Articles 60 and 87 of the Housing Code, as well as the decision of the Constitutional Court of 12 March 1999 on the interpretation of Article 60 of the Housing Code. In accordance with these provisions, the Plenum found that the facts of the case did not establish grounds for G.R.’s loss of residence rights to the apartment.
In conclusion, the Plenum “varied” the Supreme Court’s decision of 11 January 2002 and ordered that G.R. and her children be allowed to move into the applicant’s apartment.
On 8 January 2005 the applicant sold the apartment to G.R. The sale contract was certified by a notary public. According to the contract, the purchase price was 140,000,000 Azerbaijani manats. On 24 February 2005 G.R. obtained an ownership certificate to the apartment as its sole owner.
It appears that the applicant moved out of the apartment after the sale and established residence elsewhere.
In October 2006 the applicant challenged the validity of the sale contract of 8 January 2005 in the domestic courts. She relied on two arguments. First, she argued that she had not known that she was signing a contract concerning the sale of the apartment, because G.R. had lied to her about the nature of the contract. Second, the applicant argued that the contract had been drafted in the new Latin alphabet, which she allegedly did not know how to read.
Following a series of appeals, on 20 November 2007 the Supreme Court upheld the lower courts’ ruling dismissing the applicant’s claim. It held that the claim was unsubstantiated as there was sufficient evidence in the case file proving that the sale contract was valid and that she had sold and moved out of the apartment voluntarily. It found that the contract had been duly concluded in the presence of a notary public. The court further noted that, shortly after the sale, the applicant applied for the removal of her name from the apartment’s registration documents and that, from 4 April 2005, she had been registered as a resident of another apartment pursuant to her own application. It further noted the existence of documentary evidence showing that, after the sale, G.R. and her children were registered as residents in the disputed apartment and that G.R. paid all the communal charges for the apartment.
The Law on Courts and Judges of 1997 provides as follows:
Article 77.   The Supreme Court
“[T]he Supreme Court shall be the highest judicial authority with regard to civil ..., criminal, administrative and other disputes falling within the jurisdiction of the general and specialised courts.
The Supreme Court [is] a court of cassation instance ...”
Article 79.  The Plenum of the Supreme Court and its competence
“The Plenum of the Supreme Court shall be composed of the President, Vice Presidents and judges of the Supreme Court, the President of the , the President of the Court of Appeal and the President of the Supreme Court of the . ...
The Plenum of the Supreme Court ... shall, in the manner established by law, review cases under the procedure of additional cassation ..., on submission of the President of the Supreme Court, or pursuant to a protest by the Chief Prosecutor or appeal by the defendant ...”
Article 83.  The competence of the President of the Supreme Court
“The President of the Supreme Court ... shall, in cases and under the procedure provided by law, submit cassation-instance decisions for the review of the Plenum of the Supreme Court ...”
The Code of Civil Procedure of the  of 2000 provides as follows:
Article 419.  The decision of the cassation-instance court
“419.4.  The decision [of the cassation-instance court] shall enter into force from the moment of its delivery.”
Article 422.  Review of cassation-instance decisions
“Decisions of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan ... may be reviewed by the Plenum of the Supreme Court of the  under the procedure of additional cassation upon a submission, appeal or protest.”
Article 423.  The right to file a submission, appeal or protest
“A submission concerning a decision of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan ... may be made by the President of the Supreme Court on the basis of an application by persons non-parties to the case whose interests are affected by the judicial acts. An appeal may be filed by a party to the case represented by an advocate. [A protest may be filed by the Chief Prosecutor in certain specified circumstances.]”
Article 424.  The grounds for review by the Plenum of the Supreme Court
“424.1.  The Plenum considers cases exclusively on the points of law.
2.  The grounds for quashing decisions of the cassation-instance court are the following:
2.1.  the decision of the cassation-instance court is based on a legal norm declared unconstitutional by the ;
2.2.  the cassation-instance court’s ruling infringes the rights of persons who were not a party to the proceedings;
2.3.  there is no substantive basis for the reasons referred to in the decision of the cassation-instance court;
2.4.  the resolutive part of the decision of the cassation-instance court does not correspond to its descriptive and reasoning parts.”
Article 426.  Referral of a submission, appeal or protest [to the Plenum]
“426.1.  If appropriate grounds exist, the President [of the Supreme Court] shall refer the submission, appeal or protest, together with the case file, to the Plenum of the Supreme Court.
2.  The submission, appeal or protest shall be filed within two months after the date of delivery of the [relevant] decision of the Supreme Court. ...”
Article 429.  The competence of the Plenum of the Supreme Court
“429.0.  Upon review of a case under the procedure of additional cassation, the Plenum of the Supreme Court has the competence to: ...
0.1.  uphold the decision of the cassation-instance court and dismiss the submission, appeal or protest;
0.2.  vary the decision of the cassation-instance court;
0.3.  quash, in full or in part, the decision of the cassation-instance court, as well as the related decision of the appellate court, and remit the case for re-examination by the appellate court; ...”
In its decision On review of the conformity of the decision of the Plenum of the Supreme Court of 1 February 2002 to the Constitution and laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan, based on the complaint by A.H. Zalov, dated 21 May 2004, the Constitutional Court expressed its position concerning the competence of the Plenum of the Supreme Court to vary the final decisions of the Supreme Court under the procedure of additional cassation.
The  acknowledged that, according to Article 429.0.2 of the CCP, the Plenum of the Supreme Court was empowered to vary (that is, introduce amendments to) the decision of the cassationinstance court. However, amendments made in such a manner could comprise only matters that were not related to the merits of the case. The Plenum of the Supreme Court could vary the cassation-instance court’s decision only if the factual circumstances of the case had been fully established by the lower courts, and if there was no need for a new inquiry into the circumstances of the case, re-assessment of evidence or examination of additional evidence. Since the cassation-instance court could not examine the case on points of fact, it followed that the Plenum of the Supreme Court could not vary the cassation-instance court’s decision relying upon the factual circumstances of the case either.
The  further held that, unlike the first-instance and appellate courts, the courts of cassation and additional cassation did not have competence to deliver a judgment on the merits. If, during the additional-cassation review, the Plenum of the Supreme Court found that the circumstances of the case had not been clearly established during the original proceedings and that it was necessary to admit and assess additional evidence, the Plenum had to quash the erroneous decision of the Supreme Court, as well as the related judgment of the Court of Appeal, and remit the case for re-examination in the Court of Appeal. Accordingly, if it discovered judicial errors in the Supreme Court’s decision, the Plenum of the Supreme Court had no competence to rule on the merits, thus substituting its own judgment for the judgment of the lower courts, but was obligated to remit the case to the appropriate judicial instance.
Additional cassation proceedings in the Plenum of the Supreme Court can be initiated at the discretion of the President of the Supreme Court, and may be done so following a motion (an additional cassation appeal) by a party to the proceedings. The Plenum itself does not take a decision on the reopening of the proceedings and admissibility of additional cassation appeals.
An additional cassation appeal is first submitted to the President of the Supreme Court. The President, at his or her sole discretion and without holding any formal judicial hearing, decides if there are any grounds to reopen the case and transmit the appeal to the Plenum. If the President decides that the proceedings should be reopened, he or she then transmits the additional cassation appeal, together with the case file, for the insubstance review of the Plenum at its next sitting. Meanwhile, if necessary, the President may issue an order suspending the execution of the final judgment pending the review of the case by the Plenum.
If the President deems that there are no grounds for additional cassation review, he or she sends a rejection letter to the applicant, briefly describing the reasons for the refusal to reopen the proceedings and to transmit the appeal to the Plenum.