The case originated in an application (no. 48783/07) against the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Macedonian national, Ms Snežana Gerovska Popčevska (“the applicant”), on 1 November 2007.
The applicant was represented by Ms A. Pop-Trajkova Vangeli, a lawyer practising in Skopje. The Macedonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr K. Bogdanov.
Mirjana Lazarova Trajkovska, the judge elected in respect of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, was unable to sit in the case (Rule 28). On 26 August 2014 the President of the Chamber decided to appoint Ksenija Turković to sit as an ad hoc judge (Rule 29).
The applicant complained, inter alia, that she had been dismissed from the office of judge in proceedings that did not meet the standards of Article 6 of the Convention. In particular, she alleged that her case had not been considered by an “independent and impartial tribunal”.
On 18 February 2013 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to apply Rule 41 of the Rules of Court and grant priority treatment to the application.
The applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Skopje.
On 3 April 2006 the State Anti-Corruption Commission, chaired at the time by M.M., who subsequently (July 2006) became the Minister of Justice, asked the State Judicial Council (“the SJC”) to review (предлог за проверка) a civil case (no. IV P.br. 2904/01) which the applicant had adjudicated at first instance as president of a three-judge panel. The case concerned compensation proceedings against the State.
On 19 April 2006 the Civil Division of the Supreme Court convened to draw up an opinion stating that there were grounds for instituting professional misconduct proceedings in respect of the applicant regarding civil case no. IV P.br. 2904/01. According to the record of that meeting, the opinion had been requested by Judge D.I., who was the President of the Supreme Court at that time. The record did not list the members of the Civil Division of the Supreme Court that adopted the opinion. According to the applicant, Judge D.I. was a member of the Civil Division that adopted the opinion.
On 26 April 2006 the SJC asked the plenary of the Supreme Court, under section 21 of the State Judicial Council Act of 1992 (“the 1992 Act”, see paragraph 24 below), to draw up a report on the issue of whether the applicant’s dismissal from the office of judge would be justified.
On the same date the SJC, composed in accordance with Article 104 of the Constitution (see paragraph 22 below), instituted (поведува постапка) professional misconduct proceedings in respect of the applicant due to misapplication of procedural and substantive law in civil case no. IV P.br. 2904/01. It referred to the request submitted by the State AntiCorruption Commission and further relied, inter alia, on the opinion of the Civil Division of the Supreme Court. The applicant responded in writing.
In December 2006 eight members of the SJC (all judges) were appointed in accordance with Amendment XXVIII of the Constitution (see paragraph 23 below). V.G., a member of the SJC, was nominated as the complainant (овластен предлагач), as set out in section 55 of the State Judicial Council Act of 2006 (“the 2006 Act”, see paragraph 25 below), in the applicant’s case.
On 25 December 2006 the plenary of the Supreme Court, chaired by Judge D.I., drew up an opinion regarding the applicant’s case. The relevant part of the opinion, signed by Judge D.I., reads as follows:
“The plenary of the Supreme Court ... unanimously endorses the complete [text of] the opinion of the Civil Division and finds that there are grounds for dismissing (the applicant) for professional misconduct.”
On 26 February 2007 a hearing was held before the SJC Commission for determination of professional misconduct by a judge (Комисија за утврдување нестручно и несовесно вршење на судиската функција, hereinafter “the Commission”), set up under section 58 of the 2006 Act (see paragraph 25 below). V.G. was not a member of the Commission. Both the applicant, who was represented by legal counsel, and V.G. submitted their arguments verbally. The Commission also took into account the opinions of the Civil Division and the plenary of the Supreme Court. On 28 February 2007 it drew up a report, which it communicated to the SJC.
On 14 March 2007 the plenary of the SJC, which included only ten of its members, namely eight judges elected by their peers, as well as the then Minister of Justice and Judge D.I., who were ex officio members of the SJC (see Amendment XXVIII to the Constitution, paragraph 23 below), dismissed the applicant from the office of judge for professional misconduct. The SJC found that she had wrongly applied procedural and material law in civil case no. IV P.br. 2904/01, which she had decided out of the established order in which cases should have been dealt with. The dismissal decision referred to the request submitted by the State AntiCorruption Commission and further was based on evidence adduced at the hearing before the Commission, including the opinions of the Civil Division and the plenary of the Supreme Court.
The applicant challenged that decision at second instance, namely before an appeal panel formed within the Supreme Court (“the Appeal Panel”). Such panels were set up on an ad hoc basis in each separate case. As specified in section 60 of the 2006 Act (see paragraph 25 below), the Appeal Panel was composed of nine judges, of whom three were Supreme Court judges, four Appeal Court judges and two judges from the court of the applicant. On 8 May 2007 the Appeal Panel dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the SJC’s decision. The Appeal Panel included Judge L.Š., who had adjudicated in another case allegedly related to case no. IV P.br. 2904/01. According to the applicant, her request for the withdrawal of Judge L.Š., a copy of which was not produced, was to no avail.
On 19 December 2007 the Constitutional Court rejected (отфрла) a constitutional appeal in which the applicant claimed that her dismissal had violated her freedom of conscience, freedom of thought and freedom of public expression. As regards the dismissal, the Constitutional Court found that it had no jurisdiction to review the lawfulness of the SJC’s decision. As to whether the applicant’s dismissal affected her freedom of expression, the court held that a distinction had to be made between exercising the office of judge and that particular freedom. It ruled that the office of judge entailed the right and duty to adjudicate in accordance with the law, and that that right and duty did not form part of the rights and freedoms on which it had competence to decide under the Constitution (У.бр.145/2007).
The applicant submitted copies of several articles published between April and December 2006 in the daily newspapers Vreme and Dnevnik.
An article published on 20 April 2006 quoted a report by the Supreme Court stating that the law had been wrongly applied in civil case no. IV P.br. 2904/01.
An article of 27 December 2006 stated that the Supreme Court had confirmed that the applicant should be dismissed from office. It reported Judge D.I. as saying that the SJC in its new composition should follow their recommendations. In this connection, the article quoted Judge D.I. as saying:
“We only gave a reminder that responsibility should be established (треба да се сноси одговорност).”
An article of 28 December 2008 stated:
“D.I., the President of the [Supreme] Court, asked (the SJC) to dismiss (the applicant) for professional misconduct.”
An article dated 11 January 2007 published in the daily newspaper Dnevnik quoted Judge D.I. as saying, inter alia:
“We will submit an opinion as to whether (the applicant) should be dismissed once the responsibility of other institutions has been established. For the Supreme Court, that there has been professional misconduct [on the part of the applicant] is beyond any doubt (не е спорна нестручноста и несовесноста на судијката во случајов). The Civil Division has already established that.”
The relevant provisions of the 1991 Constitution read as follows:
“The State Judicial Council is composed of seven members. The Parliament elects the members of the Council. The members of the Council are elected from among outstanding members of the legal profession for a term of six years with the possibility of being re-elected once ...”
“The State Judicial Council:
- proposes to the Parliamentary Assembly the names of judges for election and decides on proposals for the removal of a judge from office in cases set out in the Constitution ...”
In December 2005 Parliament adopted several Amendments to the Constitution. Amendment XXVIII and Amendment XIX replaced Articles 104 and 105, respectively. The relevant provisions read as follows:
“1.  ... a judge can be dismissed from office:
- for a serious violation of disciplinary rules which renders him or her unsuitable to exercise the office of judge; and
- for exercising the office of judge in an unprofessional and unconscientious manner, under conditions stipulated by law.”
“... The State Judicial Council is composed of fifteen members. The President of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia and the Minister of Justice are ex officio members of the Council. Eight members of the Council are elected by judges from among their peers ... Three members of the Council are elected by Parliament ... Two members are proposed by the President of the Republic and elected by the Parliament ...”
“The State Judicial Council of the Republic of Macedonia:
- elects and dismisses judges and lay judges ...”
The relevant provisions of the 1992 Act read as follows:
“b) Determination of professional misconduct in the exercise of a judge’s office
Before it rules on a request for determination of professional misconduct by a judge, the State Judicial Council shall obtain an opinion by the court of the judge concerned and by the plenary of the Supreme Court as to whether the request for his or her dismissal is justified ...”
The relevant provisions of the 2006 Act read as follows:
“A judge can be dismissed for unprofessional and unconscientious exercise of the office of judge under conditions specified by law.”
“Disciplinary proceedings may be instituted by a member of the SJC, the president of the court of a judge whose dismissal is being sought, or the president of the higher court or plenary of the Supreme Court ...
Disciplinary proceedings are urgent and confidential. The public are excluded in the interests of the reputation and dignity of the judge concerned.
The SJC sets up a Disciplinary Commission composed of five of its members.
A judge against whom proceedings have been instituted may respond to the request for disciplinary proceedings in writing or orally within eight days of the date of service of that request.
A judge against whom proceedings have been instituted has the right to a legal representative.
When it receives a request, the Disciplinary Commission collects information and draws up a report, which it submits to the SJC to establish whether the request is justified. On the basis of that report the SJC may initiate or stay disciplinary proceedings.
...
The SJC adopts Rules regarding the proceedings (see paragraph 74 below).”
“Proceedings for determination of professional misconduct by a judge shall be carried out under section 55 by a Commission for of professional misconduct (“the Commission”).
The SJC sets up (the Commission) composed of five of its members.
...
On the basis of a report drawn up under section 55(6) of the Act and the hearing held before the SJC, the latter may:
- stay the proceedings; and
- dismiss a judge for professional misconduct.”
“The judge concerned may challenge the SJC’s dismissal or disciplinary decision before a second-instance panel set up within the Supreme Court (‘the Appeal Panel’)...
The Appeal Panel is composed of nine members, of whom three are Supreme Court judges, four Appeal Court judges and two judges of the court of the judge against whom proceedings have been conducted.
The President of the Supreme Court may not be a member of the Appeal Panel.”
According to section 1 of the 2011 State Judicial Council Act the Minister of Justice participates in the work of the SJC without voting right.
Pursuant to section 6 of this Act, the Minister of Justice enjoys all rights, duties and responsibilities as the members of the SJC who have voting right, except to take part in the decisions of the SJC and to inspect the work of a judge.
Section 400 of the 2005 Civil Proceedings Act provides for the possibility of reopening proceedings in respect of which the Court has found a violation of the Convention. In such reopened proceedings the domestic courts are required to comply with the provisions of the final judgment of the Court.
In February 2015 Parliament enacted new legislation providing for the creation of a Council for establishing facts and instituting proceedings to determine the responsibility of a judge (“the Council”). The new body’s role is to establish relevant facts in proceedings regulated under the Act and decide whether to apply for professional misconduct proceedings in respect of a judge (sections 2 and 49). It is composed of nine members (retired judges, prosecutors and lawyers, section 6) elected by all judges by direct and secret ballot (section 16). It can, inter alia, request the SJC to institute proceedings in order to determine the responsibility of a judge or president of a court (section 32). The Act became operational three months after its entry into force (section 53).
The relevant provisions of the Rules governing professional misconduct proceedings in respect of a judge read as follows:
“Professional misconduct proceedings in respect of a judge may be instituted by a member of the SJC, the president of the court [of a judge whose dismissal is being sought], the president of the higher court or plenary of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia [‘the complainant’].
A request for professional misconduct proceedings shall contain a description of the grounds for instituting professional misconduct proceedings.
The request shall be accompanied by supporting evidence.”
“The SJC decides whether a request for professional misconduct proceedings is timely, complete and admissible.
...
The SJC sets up a Commission for determination of professional misconduct (Комисија за утврдување нестручно и несовесно вршење на судиската функција) composed of five of its members.”
“The Commission communicates the request to the judge concerned.
The judge may respond in writing or give a verbal statement within eight days of the request being served on him or her.
The judge against whom the request is submitted has the right to a legal representative whom he or she invites to the hearing.
Together with the observations in reply to the request, the judge concerned submits all evidence in support of his or her response ...”
“The Commission seeks information and gathers evidence relevant for [the case].”
“On the basis of information and evidence gathered, the Commission submits a report to the SJC stating whether the request is justified.”
“The SJC examines the request and the Commission’s proposal and decides whether to institute or stay professional misconduct proceedings.
The SJC takes (this) decision by a majority vote of all its members ...”
“The decision specified in section 11 of the Rules is served on the complainant (подносител на барањето), the judge [whose dismissal is sought], and the president of that judge’s court and the case file is forwarded to the Commission.”
“When the SJC institutes professional misconduct proceedings, it may temporarily suspend the judge concerned.”
“The Commission schedules a hearing within thirty days of the institution of professional misconduct proceedings.
All members of the Commission attend the hearing.
The chairman of the Commission presides over the hearing.”
“The complainant and the judge concerned are summoned to a hearing.
If they have been duly summoned and fail to attend without providing any justification, the hearing is held in their absence.”
“All evidence presented by the complainant and the judge concerned and evidence obtained by the Commission is heard at the hearing.
The judge concerned may argue in relation to all evidence adduced at the hearing.”
“The record of the hearing is signed by the complainant, the judge concerned or his or her representative, the members of the Commission and the minute writer.”
“The Commission draws up a report for the SJC within fifteen days of the hearing with a proposal for (one of the) following decisions:
-  that the proceedings be stayed or
-  that the judge be dismissed for professional misconduct.”
“On the basis of the (Commission’s) report and after the hearing, the SJC may:
-  stay the proceedings; or
-  dismiss the judge for professional misconduct.”
“The SJC takes the (dismissal) decision by a two-thirds majority vote of all its members.
...
A transcript of the decision is served on the judge, his or her representative, the complainant and the president of the court of the judge concerned or the president of the immediate higher court.”
The judge concerned may challenge the SJC’s dismissal decision before a second-instance panel set up within the Supreme Court (‘the Appeal Panel’) ...”
The relevant provisions of the Rules of the Supreme Court read as follows:
“The following judicial divisions are set up within the Supreme Court:
Criminal division
Civil division
Case-law division.”
“The court carries out its work as specified by the Constitution and the Courts Act through:
- chambers;
- session of divisions;
- joint session of divisions;
- plenary session.”
“Proceedings and decisions in cases concerning personal, family, labour, property and other civil relationships between legal and physical persons fall within the competence of judges of the civil division.”
“The division is composed of all judges who deal with cases that fall within the competence of that division, as well as (law clerks) ...”
The relevant part of the Progress Report reads as follows:
“4.23.  Chapter 23: Judiciary and fundamental rights
... the role of the Minister of Justice within the State Judicial Council and the Council of Public Prosecutors raises serious concerns about the interference of the executive power and political control in the work of the judiciary. Controversial dismissals and undue interference by the Minister of Justice indicate that the current system is not in compliance with European standards ...”
The relevant part of the Opinion read as follow:
“41. In order to minimise the influence of the executive, the mandatory membership of the Minister of Justice in the State Judicial Council could be changed to a right to be present at the sessions of the Judicial Council or membership without voting rights.”
The relevant provisions of the Opinion read as follows:
“8.  The Council for the Judiciary is intended to safeguard both the independence of the judicial system and the independence of individual judges. The existence of independent and impartial courts is a structural requirement of a state governed by the rule of law.
C. 2. Discipline
The question of a judge’s responsibility was examined by the CCJE in Opinion No.3 (2002). The recent experiences of some States show the need to protect judges from the temptation to broaden the scope of their responsibility in purely jurisdictional matters. The role of the Council for the Judiciary is to show that a judge cannot bear the same responsibilities as a member of another profession: he/she performs a public function and cannot refuse to adjudicate on disputes. Furthermore, if the judge is exposed to legal and disciplinary sanctions against his/her decisions, neither judicial independence nor the democratic balance of powers can be maintained. The Council for the Judiciary should, therefore, unequivocally condemn political projects designed to limit the judges’ freedom of decision-making. This does not diminish judges’ duty to respect the law.
A judge who neglects his/her cases through indolence or who is blatantly incompetent when dealing with them should face disciplinary sanctions. Even in such cases, as indicated by CCJE Opinion No.3(2002), it is important that judges enjoy the protection of a disciplinary proceeding guaranteeing the respect of the principle of independence of the judiciary and carried out before a body free from any political influence, on the basis of clearly defined disciplinary faults: a Head of State, Minister of Justice or any other representative of political authorities cannot take part in the disciplinary body.
The Council for the Judiciary is entrusted with ethical issues; it may furthermore address court users’ complaints. In order to avoid conflicts of interest, disciplinary procedures in first instance, when not addressed within the jurisdiction of a disciplinary court, should preferably be dealt with by a disciplinary commission composed of a substantial representation of judges elected by their peers, different from the members of the Council for the Judiciary, with provision of an appeal before a superior court.”
The relevant provisions of the Magna Carta of Judges read as follows:
“6.  Disciplinary proceedings shall take place before an independent body with the possibility of recourse before a court.”
“13.  To ensure independence of judges, each State shall create a Council for the Judiciary or another specific body, itself independent from legislative and executive powers, endowed with broad competences for all questions concerning their status as well as the organisation, the functioning and the image of judicial institutions. The Council shall be composed either of judges exclusively or of a substantial majority of judges elected by their peers. The Council for the Judiciary shall be accountable for its activities and decisions.”