The case originated in an application (no. 48741/11) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Yevgeniy Anatolyevich Bychkov (“the applicant”), on 20 July 2011.
The applicant was represented before the Court by Mr S. Batyuk who had been his representative in the domestic proceedings. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 8 March 2017 the Government were given notice of the application.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1989. At the material time he was a student at the Taganrog branch campus of the Russian New University (РосНОУ), a private higher-education institution.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 24 June 2009 the applicant, together with twenty students from his class, complained to the director of the Taganrog campus and to the central administration about the conduct of Mr A., a lecturer in computer science:
“Pursuant to paragraph 5.2 of the contract [for the provision of educational services], a student has the right to make comments or suggestions relating to the education. When students make comments, lecturers respond with threats against the student or the entire class. This happened at the computer science lecture on 16 June 2009. The lecturer A[.] told [the student] Z[.] in front of the class: ‘Because I see you for the first time, I will not let you take the exam. You need not come to the exam,
you won’t pass it’. After the class reacted with indignation, he said: ‘You are such bold talkers; we shall see what you will have to say at the exam’.
The educational process leaves much to be desired; lecturers do not address appropriately the students’ concerns relating to the subject being studied; they do not provide assistance to students preparing for practical exercises; they are rude and intimidating; they mark the exams chiefly by reference to how often the student attended their lectures in the previous term, even though it is a distance learning programme and out-of-town students cannot attend. The lecturer in computer science Mr A[.] is a prime example [of such conduct].
It has become known from a trustworthy source that the university administration is doing everything possible to expel the entire ES308/1 class, of which the failing outcome of the exam in computer science is proof. Also, the conduct of the lecturer in computer science Mr A[.] during the exam was less than adequate. He would mark the student’s response before hearing him out or claim that the student’s reply to additional questions was wrong even when it was correct; as a result, the entire class failed the exam with the exception of the student K[.] who did not come to the exam. It has also become known from a trustworthy source that A[.] takes bribes for passing marks which may also be interpreted as meaning that he extorts money.”
The students did not receive a reply to their letter. Mr A. brought a claim for defamation in which he designated the applicant and another student Mr P. as co-defendants.
On 21 January 2010 the Neklinovskiy District Court in the Rostov Region dismissed the claim. It had taken oral evidence from eight students, co-signatories to the letter, who had corroborated its contents. The District Court held that the incidents described in the letter had indeed taken place and that students could reasonably interpret A.’s conduct as threatening. The students had lawfully exercised their right to complain to the university administration which had been required to make a decision and to give a reply. The last sentence in the letter did not accuse A. of corruption but communicated the information which needed to be checked. On 12 April 2010 the Rostov Regional Court quashed the judgment on procedural grounds, finding in particular that the District Court should have determined whether all co-signatories should have joined the proceedings as codefendants.
On 9 September 2010 the District Court again dismissed the claim against all twenty signatories of the letter. It took further oral evidence from students Mr P. and Ms K. Mr P. told the court that he had failed the exam in computer science. Mr A. had mistakenly entered his fail mark next to the applicant’s name. When P. had drawn his attention to the error, A. had replied that it did not matter because the applicant “would get a fail mark anyway”. Ms K. stated in particular that the students had complained orally to the university rector who had refused to intervene. The District Court held that the facts had been established and the students had exercised their legitimate right to make complaints. On 15 November 2010 the Regional Court quashed the judgment and instructed the District Court to verify whether or not the information in the letter had been truthful.
On 21 February 2011 the District Court granted A.’s claim against twelve students; in respect of the eight others, counsel for A. had withdrawn the claims. The District Court held that the allegations had not been shown to be true and that the oral evidence from students had no probative value since they had signed the letter and had a vested interest in the outcome of the proceedings. Moreover, they had not addressed the allegations of corruption to the police or law-enforcement authorities. Each student was ordered to pay 1,000 Russian roubles (RUB) to A. in respect of nonpecuniary damage. The applicant and Ms K. – who had respectively printed and posted the letter – were ordered to pay RUB 1,500 each (38 euros). On 19 May 2011 the Regional Court upheld the judgment on appeal.