The case originated in an application (no. 29878/09) against the Kingdom of Sweden lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by eighteen Swedish nationals, Ms Karin Andersson, Mr  Per Bernhardtson, Ms Gunilla Bring, Mr Ulf Bäcklund, Mr Berndt Eriksson, Ms Carina Granberg, Ms Agneta Holmström, Mr Gustaf Härestål, Mr Björn Höjer, Ms Inga-Britt Höjer, Mr Christer Johansson, Mr Curt Lindgren, Mr Håkan Olsson, Mr Roger Olsson, Mr Göran Osterman, Mr   Lars Sjöstedt, Mr Christer Skoog and Mr Olle Stenlund (“the applicants”), on 4 June 2009.
The applicants were represented by Mr J. Ebbesson, a professor of environmental law, and Mr B. Rosengren, a lawyer, both practising in Stockholm. The Swedish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr A. Rönquist, of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that they had been denied effective access to court in relation to decisions taken on the construction of a railway, in violation of their rights under Articles 6 and 8 of the Convention.
On 21 May 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicants own property close to Umeå, in the vicinity of a Natura 2000 area, the European network of nature protection areas established under the EU Habitats Directive of 1992 (see further below at paragraph 33). Most of them live there (permanently or on a part-time basis).
On 15 October 1999, the National Rail Administration (Banverket; hereinafter “the NRA”) applied to the Government for permission, under the Environmental Code (Miljöbalken), to construct a 10 km long railway section in a river area in the north of Sweden (constituting the final section of a railway called “Botniabanan”, the total length of which is 190 km). The NRA presented some alternative railway stretches, all located in a specified “corridor”, but recommended the one named “alternative east”. The proposed railway construction concerned certain areas which were or were going to be part of Natura 2000.
It appears that six of the present applicants own houses or land within the mentioned “corridor”: Ms Carina Granberg, Ms Agneta Holmström, Mr Gustaf Härestål, Mr Björn Höjer, Ms Inga-Britt Höjer, and Mr Christer Skoog. Ownership of Mr Skoog’s property was transferred to Ms Granberg on 7 January 2011. The properties of the other twelve applicants – houses and land in their ownership or owned houses located on non-freehold sites – are situated outside the “corridor”. The distance from their properties to the “corridor” or the specific stretch of the railway fixed in later proceedings vary; the houses appear to be situated 300 – 2500 metres away whereas the closest piece of land is located about 50 metres from the “corridor”.
On 12 June 2003 the Government, after having heard the European Commission, granted the application and allowed the construction of the railway in the proposed “corridor” under the condition, inter alia, that the NRA adopt a railway plan before 1 July 2009 and also a specific plan for the realisation of the necessary environmental compensation measures in the Natura 2000 areas. The plan on compensation measures had to be presented to the Government before the railway plan was adopted. The Government stated, inter alia, that the activity could be permitted, despite its harmful effect on the environment in a Natura 2000 area, if there were no alternative solutions and the railway had to be constructed for reasons of public interest.
A number of individual property owners, including three of the applicants in the present case – Ms Bring, Mr Bäcklund and Mr Osterman – petitioned the Supreme Administrative Court (Regeringsrätten) for a judicial review of the case and requested that the Government’s decision be quashed. The property owners claimed that the decision contradicted Swedish law as well as applicable European Union law, including the Habitats Directive. It was argued, firstly, that the decision contravened the general rule in the Environmental Code on the site to be chosen for activities and installations that may affect human health or the environment. This aspect allegedly had a direct and clear bearing on their civil rights. Secondly, they asserted that the Government’s decision violated Swedish regulations on nature conservation by failing to consider relevant alternative sites for the railway.
On 1 December 2004 the Supreme Administrative Court dismissed the petitions for a judicial review because it was not possible to determine who should be considered an interested party at that stage of the railway planning. The exact route of the railway would not be established until the railway plan had been drawn up. Until then, it could not be assessed with any certainty who would be affected to the extent that they were entitled to bring an action or what account should be taken of their interests. Further stating that the parties affected to a sufficient extent by the future railway would be able to obtain a judicial review of the later decision to adopt the railway plan, the court refused the petitioners locus standi.
One judge dissented, finding that the issue of locus standi in respect of each petitioner should be further investigated by the court in order to ensure that the individual interests were taken into account, having regard to the binding character of the Government’s decision in the later railway planning proceedings.
In 2003 and 2004 the NRA applied to the County Administrative Board (länsstyrelsen) in the County of Västerbotten for a permit to construct the railway in the specific Natura 2000 area and to the Environmental Court (miljödomstolen) in Umeå for permits to build two bridges.
The County Administrative Board granted a construction permit for the railway by a decision of 14 October 2004, which was subsequently appealed against to the Environmental Court.
The Environmental Court decided to examine the cases jointly. By judgments of 24 May 2005 and 13 June 2005, considering itself bound by the Government’s decision of 12 June 2003 on the permissibility of the railway project, the court decided to grant all the permits requested by the NRA.
On 15 June 2006 the Environmental Court of Appeal (Miljööverdomstolen) in Stockholm quashed the Environmental Court’s judgments and referred the cases back to the latter instance. The appellate court found that the Government’s decision had not contained a detailed examination of measures necessary to compensate for environmental harm caused by the railway project, and that these issues had to be settled as part of the determination of the construction permit requests.
On 26 April 2007 the Environmental Court decided anew to grant the permits requested by the NRA. The court considered itself bound by the Government’s decision as to the permissibility of the railway project and thus limited its examination to the environmental compensation measures, as indicated by the decision of the Environmental Court of Appeal.
Two applicants – Ms Granberg and Mr Skoog – appealed against the Environmental Court’s judgment in so far as it concerned the permit for the railway construction. All applicants except Mr Osterman appealed against the part which concerned the permit to construct the bridges.
By a judgment of 6 December 2007 the Environmental Court of Appeal affirmed the binding nature of the Government’s permissibility decision and approved the construction of the railway and the bridges with certain added conditions.
On 9 May 2008 the Supreme Court (Högsta domstolen) refused leave to appeal and, thus, the Environmental Court of Appeal’s judgment became final.
On 21 June 2005 the NRA adopted a railway plan for the area in question.
Twelve applicants – all but Ms Holmström, Mr Härestål, Mr Höjer, Ms Höjer, Mr Sjöstedt and Mr Stenlund – appealed to the Government against the railway plan. They essentially complained of the specific stretch of the railway, invoking, inter alia, nuisance such as noise and vibrations affecting the enjoyment of their property.
By a decision of 28 June 2007 the Government referred to its decision on permissibility of 12 June 2003. It found that the specific stretch chosen in the railway plan was situated within the permitted “corridor” and thus rejected the appeals.
All of the applicants and several other petitioners turned to the Supreme Administrative Court and requested that it, by way of a judicial review, order the quashing of the Government’s decision. They claimed, inter alia, that, although their civil rights were affected by the planned railway, they had not had these rights considered and determined by a court, in violation of the Convention. As to the chosen location of the railway, they also asserted that the Government’s decision was contrary to provisions of the Environmental Code and the EU Habitats Directive.
On 10 December 2008 the Supreme Administrative Court, after having held a hearing in the case, rejected the petition, finding that the railway plan was in line with the Government’s decision of 12 June 2003 on the permissibility of the railway project and that the proceedings for the adoption of the plan did not demonstrate any failings. The court considered that the question of permissibility of a railway project was within the power of the Government, which had to take into account public interests such as environmental, industrial, economic and regional policy. The Government’s permissibility decision was binding for the subsequent proceedings in that courts and other decision-making bodies could not examine issues that had been determined by that decision. Thus, in the proceedings concerning the construction permits requested by the NRA, the various instances could decide on conditions and other details but not on the general permissibility as defined in the Government’s decision. Similarly, in the third stage of the decision process – the adoption of the railway plan – it was for the authorities and courts to decide only on the precise location of the railway, within the area designated by the Government’s decision. The Government had not been obliged to review its decision of 12 June 2003 on the permissibility of the railway project and the designation of the “corridor” in which the railway could be located. These issues could not be examined in the third stage of the decision process. The Supreme Administrative Court further stated that, if private interests were affected by the location of a railway project, judicial review could be obtained by petitioning the court in proceedings against the Government’s permissibility decision. The fact that the court, on 1 December 2004, had concluded that no individual petitioner could be considered to have locus standi in relation to the permissibility decision did not compel it to include in its current examination of the adoption of the railway plan the issues of permissibility of the project or its general location.
One judge dissented, considering that the Supreme Administrative Court’s judgment contravened its decision of 1 December 2004. She noted, inter alia, that the adoption of a railway plan – as opposed to the construction permits – had direct consequences for the individual as it entailed a right for the railway company, under certain conditions, to expropriate land. Consequently, the court, in the instant case, should have examined all the objections presented by the appellants, including the claim that there were better alternative locations for the railway. According to the dissenting judge, a full judicial review had also been foreseen by the court in its earlier decision.
It appears from the parties’ observations in the case that at least ten of the applicants (including seven with houses or land situated outside the “corridor”) have received some form of compensation as a consequence of the railway construction, either for land requisitioned or for reduced residential value or market value. In one case, the change to noise-reducing windows was partly paid by the NRA. It is not clear whether the other applicants requested compensation. In the vicinity of some properties, whose owners have not received compensation, noise barriers have been erected in order to keep the noise from the railway below the applicable target values.
The planning of railway construction is regulated in the Railway Construction Act (Lagen om byggande av järnväg, 1995:1649). In addition, during planning and review of a railway construction, the general provisions in Chapter 2-4 of the Environmental Code (Miljöbalken) apply, stipulating, inter alia, that the site least intrusive on the interests of human health and the environment should be chosen for activities and installations.
The planning process of a railway construction is divided into three phases, in which the work is intended to gradually develop from outline studies to detailed plans and in which the outcome of one phase is intended to serve as a starting point for the next phase. Consideration is to be given to private interests as well as public interests such as the protection of the environment. The process begins with a preliminary study to identify and examine possible options to find out which alternatives warrant further study. The enterprise intending to build the railway is required by the regulations in the Environmental Code to consult relevant county administration boards, municipalities and non-profit organisations whose purpose is to safeguard nature protection and environmental interests, as well as parts of the general public who are likely to be particularly affected.
A railway investigation is to be conducted when the preliminary study shows that alternative routes should be examined. The alternatives and their consequences should be described so as to allow them to be compared both with one another and with the alternative of not carrying out any railway expansion at all. A railway investigation should include consultation with the country administrative board, supervisory authorities and individuals who are likely to be particularly affected. The investigation must contain an environmental impact assessment formulated in accordance with the regulations of the Environmental Code. The investigation results in the National Transport Administration (Trafikverket; before April 2010: the NRA) deciding on a corridor in the terrain where the railway should be located.
Major railway projects are also subject to a Government permissibility assessment (Chapter 17 of the Environmental Code). The permissibility assessment is made on the basis of the railway investigation. No appeal lies from the Government’s decision, but a judicial review of the decision can be obtained through an application to the Supreme Administrative Court.
According to the preparatory works of the Environmental Code, the Government’s decision on the issue of permissibility is binding on subsequent reviews. Hence, if the Government has reviewed the permissibility of an activity, courts and authorities cannot review this issue (Government Bill 1997/98:45, part 1, pp. 436 et seq.). In principle, the Government’s assessment should take place at a relative early stage of the process and primarily concern the permissibility of an activity. The issue of permissibility under the Code also includes the issue of the location of the activities (ibid., pp. 440 et seq.). A permissibility review for a railway results in the Government granting permission to construct the railway within a defined corridor.
Pursuant to Chapter 11 of the Environmental Code, a permit is required for water operations. The term “water operations” refers, inter alia, to the construction in water areas and the diverting of water away from water areas. Decisions on permits are taken by an environmental court and may be appealed to the Environmental Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court. Appeals may be made by any person subjected to an adverse judgment or decision, or by authorities, municipality committees or other bodies entitled to appeal pursuant to specific provisions.
The EU Habitats Directive (Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992 on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora) – which defines how Natura 2000 sites are managed and protected – and the EU Birds Directive (Council Directive 79/409/EEC of 2 April 1979 on the conservation of wild birds) have been implemented in Swedish legislation, primarily through the provisions of the Environmental Code and the Ordinance on Site Protection under the Environmental Code (Förordningen om områdesskydd enligt miljöbalken m.m.,1998:1252).
Pursuant to Chapter 7, section 28a of the Code, a permit is required for activities or measures which may significantly affect the environment in a Natura 2000 site. Such a permit may only be granted if the activity or measure will not damage the habitats under protection or cause that the species under protection are exposed to a disturbance that may significantly impinge on their conservation in the area. However, a permit may nevertheless be granted if 1) there is no alternative solution, 2) the activity or measure must be carried out for imperative reasons of vital public interest, and 3) the necessary measures are taken to compensate for environmental losses, so as to ensure that the purpose of protecting the site concerned can still be achieved (Chapter 7, section 29).
If a permissibility review under Chapter 7, section 29 of the Code concerns an activity or measure that may affect the environment in an area that contains a prioritised species or habitat, the review may only take account of circumstances that concern 1) human health, 2) public safety, 3) vital environmental protection interests, or 4) other imperative circumstances of overriding public interest. With regard to circumstances referred to in point 4 the European Commission must be given the opportunity to state an opinion before the matter is settled.
Decisions on permits under Chapter 7, section 28a of the Code are taken by a county administrative board. If, however, a permit is required according to, inter alia, Chapter 11 of the Code, the decision should be taken by the authority deciding on the latter permission. Decisions by the county administrative board may be appealed to an environmental court and further to the Environmental Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court.
In the third planning phase a railway plan is elaborated by the enterprise that intends to construct the railway, pursuant to the provisions of the Railway Construction Act. The plan must describe the location and design of the railway construction in detail as well as the land and the special rights that need to be claimed for the railway itself and its construction. The railway plan must contain an environmental impact assessment. Moreover, consultation is required with affected property owners, municipalities and country administrative boards, and with other parties who may have a substantial interest in the matter. Subsequently, the National Transport Administration, having consulted the county administrative board, must assess whether the plan is to be adopted. If the plan involves making compulsory claims on, inter alia, land or special rights, the National Transport Administration must make a special assessment whether the advantages that may be secured by the plan outweigh the inconvenience that it causes the individual parties. A decision by the National Transport Administration to adopt a plan may be appealed to the Government. The Government’s decision is final. However, it is possible to request judicial review of the decision.
By virtue of an adopted railway plan, the railway constructor has the right to purchase necessary land, through a court decision or by a cadastral procedure. In cases concerning purchases and compensation the Expropriation Act (Expropriationslagen, 1972:719) applies.
The 1988 Act on Judicial Review of Certain Administrative Decisions (Lagen om rättsprövning av vissa förvaltningsbeslut, 1988:205) was introduced as a result of the European Court’s findings in several cases that the lack of judicial review of certain administrative decisions infringed Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. It was replaced by the 2006 Act on Judicial Review of Certain Government Decisions (Lagen om rättsprövning av vissa regeringsbeslut, 2006:304), which entered into force on 1 July 2006.
In 2004, at the time of the judicial review of the Government’s permissibility decision, the 1988 Act applied. It stipulated that an individual who was a party to administrative proceedings before the Government or any other public authority concerning, inter alia, the right to property or the relations between private subjects and public bodies which related to the individual’s personal and economic circumstances could, in the absence of any other remedy, apply to the Supreme Administrative Court, as the first and only court, for review of any decisions which involved the exercise of public authority vis-à-vis the individual. In proceedings brought under the 1988 Act, the Supreme Administrative Court examined whether the contested decision “conflicted with any legal rule”. According to the preparatory works (Government Bill 1987/88:69, pp. 23-24), its review of the merits of the cases concerned essentially questions of law but could, in so far as relevant for the application of the law, extend also to factual issues; it also had to consider whether there were any procedural errors which could have affected the outcome of the case. If the Supreme Administrative Court found the impugned decision unlawful, it had to quash it and, where necessary, refer the case back to the relevant administrative authority.
In 2008, at the time of the judicial review of the Government’s decision on the railway plan, the 2006 Act applied. The procedural framework is essentially the same as described above with some exceptions. For example, in contrast to the 1988 Act, it is no longer required that the individual has been a party to previous proceedings to be able to apply for a judicial review (Government Bill 2005/06:56, p. 12). Thus, any individual can apply for judicial review of decisions by the Government as long as they concern the individual’s civil rights or obligations within the meaning of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. However, in practice this had already applied for a number of years in accordance with domestic case-law (RÅ 1999 ref. 27).
In a judgment from 2011 concerning the Government’s permissibility decision on the construction of a road in Stockholm, the Supreme Administrative Court found that, although it could not be established at that stage which petitioners (all of whom owned property within the suggested corridor) would finally be affected by the road construction, the location of the road was in fact decided through the Government’s decision and could not be subject to review in any subsequent proceedings concerning the road project. Consequently, in the Supreme Administrative Court’s view, the contested decision entailed an assessment of the petitioners’ civil rights or obligations within the meaning of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, and thus, the petitioners were considered to have locus standi in the judicial review of the Government’s permissibility decision (HFD 2011 not. 26).