The case originated in five applications (nos. 3650/12, 12016/12, 69878/13, 31474/14 and 40906/15) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Azerbaijani nationals, Mr Seymur Mashgul oglu Haziyev (Seymur Məşğul oğlu Həziyev  “the first applicant”), Mr Magrub Agamali oglu Badalli (Məğrub Ağamalı oğlu Bədəlli  “the second applicant”), Mr Abdulla Khdayberdi oğlu Yolbarsov (Abdulla Xdayberdi oğlu Yolbarsov  “the third applicant”), Mr Mammad Rasim oglu Azizov (Məmməd Rasim oğlu Əzizov “the fourth applicant”) and Mr Murad Gulahmad oglu Adilov (Murad Güləhməd oğlu Adilov  “the fifth applicant”) (“the applicants”), on various dates (see Appendix).
The applicants were represented by various lawyers based in Azerbaijan (see Appendix). The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
The applicants complained under Article 3 of the Convention that they had been ill-treated and that the domestic authorities had failed to investigate their complaints in this respect. The first applicant also complained under Article 10 of the Convention that his right to freedom of expression had been violated. The second applicant furthermore complained of the unlawfulness of his deprivation of liberty and the lack during his detention of an effective procedure by which to challenge the lawfulness of his detention in breach of Article 5 of the Convention. The second applicant also complained under Article 8 of the Convention about breach of his right to respect for his private life and home.
On 4 May 2017 the Government were given notice of the complaints under Articles 3, 5, 8 and 10 of the Convention, and the remaining parts of the applications were declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants’ particulars are given in the Appendix.
The first applicant was a journalist at an opposition-oriented newspaper, Azadlig.
On 15 May 2010 he was detained a few hours before an unauthorised opposition protest held in Baku. On the same day the Narimanov District Court convicted him under Article 310.1 of the Code of Administrative Offences of failure to comply with a police order and sentenced him to seven days’ administrative detention.
According to the first applicant, at around 2 p.m. on 17 May 2010 at the administrative detention centre of the Binagadi district police station a prison warder, A.A., took the applicant from his cell to another one, where there were two persons in plain clothes who were unknown to the applicant, and left him there. The applicant submitted that those persons had asked him the reason for his writing critical articles about the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan and had shouted and threatened him if he did not stop reporting on the President. Allegedly, they had pushed him towards the wall and had hit him on different parts of his body approximately ten to fifteen times (at short intervals). According to the applicant, each time he had been hit he had undergone physical pain and mental suffering. Allegedly, they had beaten him on his legs and forced him to lean against the wall for an hour with his legs spread apart, until he had fainted. After he had regained consciousness, A.A. had taken him to his cell, where he had been incapable of walking for thirty minutes and had continued to suffer physical pain.
On 27 July 2010 the applicant lodged a criminal complaint with the Binagadi district prosecutor’s office and the Binagadi district police station, asking them to open an investigation in respect of his ill-treatment on 17 May 2010 and to award him compensation for the alleged ill-treatment. He never received a reply to that complaint.
On 13 October 2010 he lodged a new complaint with the Binagadi district prosecutor’s office, alleging that there had been no investigation into his previous complaints of ill-treatment and requesting that he be informed of the outcome of that new complaint.
By a letter of 12 November 2010 the Binagadi district prosecutor’s office informed the applicant that (i) on 10 August 2010 the Binagadi district police station had decided not to open criminal proceedings, but that on 12 November 2010 that decision had been annulled by the prosecutor’s office owing to the lack of an objective and thorough criminal inquiry into the applicant’s case; and (ii) the case had been sent back to the Binagadi district police station.
In a letter of 15 January 2011 lodged with the Binagadi district prosecutor’s office and the Binagadi district police station, the applicant stated that he had attended the Binagadi district police station to give a statement, but that he had neither been questioned nor informed of the identity of the investigator in charge of his case. He had also requested copies of the decisions of 10 August and 12 November 2010 and had asked to be informed of the status of the pending investigation.
On 27 July 2011 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Binagadi District Court regarding the failure of the Binagadi district police station to conduct a proper investigation and to inform him of the outcome of the proceedings. In particular, he mentioned that he had not been questioned by the police and had not been provided with any copies of the decisions issued in respect of his case. During the hearing in respect of that complaint before the Binagadi District Court the applicant was informed that on 2 December 2010 the Binagadi district police station had decided not to open criminal proceedings. The applicant was also provided with copies of the decisions dated 10 August and 2 December 2010 not to open a criminal case.
According to the Binagadi district police station’s decision of 10 August 2010 not to open a criminal case, the investigator had relied on the testimony of three officers of the administrative detention centre of the Binagadi district police station – D.Z., E.M. and S.H. – who had denied the applicant’s ill-treatment allegations. According to the decision of 2 December 2010, as part of further investigational measures the same investigator had questioned A.A. (another prison officer), who had also denied the first applicant’s allegations of ill-treatment.
On 20 October 2011 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Binagadi District Court against the decision not to institute a criminal case. He complained that the Binagadi district police station had failed to conduct an effective investigation given that, inter alia, only the officers of the detention centre had been questioned, and not the inmates who had shared a cell with him and who had witnessed his poor physical condition after his return to the cell following his ill-treatment on 17 May 2010. He also submitted written statements by his cellmates, D.B. and E.A., regarding his physical condition after his alleged ill-treatment.
On 27 October 2011 the Binagadi District Court held that the decision of 2 December 2010 had been lawful. The court also referred to the absence of any comments by the applicant regarding his alleged illtreatment in the record that he had signed upon his departure from the detention facility.
In his appeal of 31 October 2011 the applicant complained that the first-instance court had not conducted a proper examination of his claims, and that in particular (i) the first-instance court had not identified whether the detention facility at which he had been kept had had security camera recordings; (ii) the first-instance court had not identified whether on 17 May 2010 the applicant had been temporarily transferred to another cell; (iii) the prosecuting authorities had not, in order to identify the perpetrators, compiled a list of the people who had entered the facility on 17 May 2010; and (iv) the first-instance court had not questioned the witnesses, including his cellmates, D.B. and E.A. The applicant also mentioned that for the purposes of the record of his departure from the detention facility he had been asked questions only about detention conditions; hence the record only contained his answers to those questions.
By a decision of 14 November 2011 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the first-instance court’s decision.
On 25 December 2010 criminal proceedings under Article 221.3 (Hooliganism) of the Criminal Code were instituted in respect of the second applicant, who was suspected of inflicting minor bodily injury on Q.M. (his former state-appointed lawyer who had represented him in another set of proceedings).
On 28 February 2011 Sabail district police station issued a decision to formally recognise the applicant as an accused (təqsirləndirilən şəxs qismində cəlb etmə). On 2 March 2011 the authorities decided to mount a search for him on the grounds of his having absconded from the investigation. The copy of the decision of 2 March 2011 was not made available to the Court.
On 23 March 2011 officers of the Sabail district police station No. 39 arrested the applicant at his home. At around 6 p.m. on 23 March 2011, when he was lying sick in bed with a high fever due to a cold, eight plainclothes officers of the Sabail district police station, including N.A. and S.F., entered his house. The applicant submitted that they had demanded that he either accompany them to the police station or pay a bribe to avoid arrest. The applicant also submitted that he had objected, asking the officers to furnish him with more information and an arrest warrant, but that the officers had insulted him and that one of the officers had hit him on the head; he had then been taken to the police station in his underclothes and without shoes.
The applicant submitted that on 23 March 2011 he had been kept for three hours at the police station, where the police officers had handcuffed him and then beaten and insulted and bullied him. The applicant also claimed that one of the police officers had hit his head against the wall, so that his head had started bleeding. According to the applicant, he had not been given medicine and water, despite his having a high fever and had not been allowed to call home or been provided with a lawyer.
The applicant also claimed that upon his transfer to the temporary detention centre of the Sabail district police station, the doctor at that centre had noted an injury on his head and blood spots on him.
The doctors of the Baku Medical Emergency Service examined the applicant twice after being called by the police at 9.53 p.m. on 23 March 2011 and at 12.12 a.m. on 24 March 2011, respectively. Those medical reports were not made available to the Court. According to the decision of 15 April 2011 not to open a criminal case, a report of 4 April 2011 by the Baku Medical Emergency Service indicated that the doctors had recorded acute respiratory illness during the first medical examination and the findings of a general examination conducted during the second examination.
On 23 March 2011 the criminal proceedings were resumed, following the applicant’s arrest. On 24 March 2011 he was charged with the criminal offence of hooliganism under Article 221.3 of the Criminal Code. The applicant submitted that he had given self-incriminating testimony because of pressure exerted by the investigator, who had promised to release him from custody if he gave self-incriminating testimony.
On 25 March 2011 the applicant was released on an undertaking not to leave his place of residence.
On 28 March 2011 the applicant lodged a criminal complaint with the Prosecutor General’s Office, alleging unlawful detention, unlawful intrusion by the police into his home and ill-treatment by the police. With regard to his detention, he complained that he had never been summoned to the Sabail district police station in connection with the criminal case instituted against him; moreover, having lived at the same address for more than twenty years he had never been likely to abscond from the investigation or be unavailable to receive a summons, so there had never been any need for his arrest and he had been detained unlawfully without any court order. He also noted that he had not been allowed to contact his family members during his detention.
With regard to his alleged ill-treatment during his arrest, he stated that the officers had applied excessive physical force in taking him to the police station without regard, inter alia, for the illness he had visibly been suffering from. A fifty-year-old person with a category 1 disability, he had been lying in bed with a high fever due to his being sick at the time in question and had been taken to the Sabail district police station half naked, in his underclothes and without shoes by eight police officers.
As regards the alleged ill-treatment in police custody, he stated that he had been handcuffed, beaten and bullied by the police officers, as a result of which he had undergone physical and mental suffering. He had sought compensation and rehabilitation following the ill-treatment.
The applicant was examined by a forensic expert, who produced a forensic report dated 7 April 2011. The text of the report was not made available to the Court. It follows from the investigator’s decision that the report did not reveal any sign of injuries on his person, except for injuries on his wrists caused by his handcuffing (see paragraph 31 below).
On 15 April 2011 an investigator of the Sabail district prosecutor’s office issued a decision refusing to open a criminal case. The investigator concluded that the applicant had not been ill-treated during his arrest and while in police custody. In that connection, he relied on the testimonies of six police officers involved in the applicant’s arrest. The police officers, who had denied the ill-treatment allegations, had stated that two of them had shown the applicant an arrest warrant and that when the applicant had refused to comply with their request to follow the officers to the Sabail district police station he had been taken there forcibly after additional officers had been summoned. They had furthermore stated that at the police station the applicant had not been ill-treated, but that he had been handcuffed to prevent his attacking the officers, in particular, after he had hit with hands and legs N.A., one of the police officers who had arrested the applicant. Moreover, the investigator referred to (i) the forensic report of 7 April 2011, according to which there had been no sign of injuries on the applicant’s body apart from the ones on his wrists caused by his handcuffing; and (ii) a report dated 4 April 2011 issued by the Baku Medical Emergency Service, according to which its doctors recorded acute respiratory illness during the first medical examination of 23 March 2011 and the findings of a general examination conducted during the second examination on 24 March 2011. The investigator furthermore noted that the applicant had been arrested and detained lawfully, given that the arrest had been ordered in order to ensure his appearance before the prosecuting authorities.
On 3 May 2011 the applicant lodged a complaint under the judicial review procedure with the Sabail District Court against the prosecutor’s decision. He complained in particular that the investigator had failed to question his wife as a witness to his arrest at home and had not taken into account the fact that he had been subjected to psychological and physical suffering, which had been confirmed by the medical certificate on the treatment that he had received (upon his release) after a stay in the hospital of the Ministry of Internal Affairs (a state-run hospital) from 30 March until 11 April 2011. According to that medical certificate, the applicant had undergone inpatient treatment for acute asthenoneurotic syndrome caused by a closed craniocerebral injury.
On 17 June 2011 the Sabail District Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint, finding the decision not to open a criminal case to have been lawful. With regard to the detention, the court relied on a letter from the deputy head of the Sabail district police station informing the court that at the material time the police had informed the chairman of the Sabail District Court of the transfer of the applicant to the above-mentioned temporary detention centre (see paragraph 23 above).
On 27 June 2011 the second applicant appealed against that decision, reiterating his previous complaints. By a decision of 21 November 2011 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the firstinstance court’s decision.
According to the applicant, on 18 September 2012 he was arrested on suspicion of complicity in a theft committed on 14 September 2012 and was detained in the temporary detention facility of the Sabail district police station No. 9.
The applicant submitted that on the same date, in the room of officer A.M., he had been beaten by three police officers, who had made him sit with his legs outstretched and that an officer had then sat on a chair placed over his legs, while A.M. had beaten him on the soles of his feet with a rubber truncheon with the aim of extracting testimony against other persons allegedly involved in the theft. When he had told the officers that he did not have additional information, the officers had punched him to the ground, removed his trousers and threatened to rape him with the truncheon if he did not provide further information. Then they had continued to beat him while he was lying on the ground.
According to the documents in the case file the applicant was arrested as a suspected person on 20 September 2012. On 21 September 2012 he was charged with theft under Article 177 of the Criminal Code. On the same day the Sabail District Court ordered his detention for a period of two months.
On 21 September 2012 the third applicant’s sister hired a lawyer to represent the applicant. According to the applicant, the lawyer was not authorised by the investigating authorities to meet him.
On 22 September 2012 the applicant was transferred to the Baku Detention Centre, which allegedly had refused the lawyer’s request to be allowed to meet with the applicant, stating that the investigator had not given his consent or submitted written approval in that regard. The lawyer complained of a violation of the defence rights to the relevant authorities.
On 24 September 2012 the lawyer sent an enquiry to the temporary detention facility of the Sabail district police station, asking to be provided with information on the date of the applicant’s arrival in that facility, the state of his health on that date, the results of the medical examination of the applicant conducted following his arrival at the facility and a copy of the relevant medical records produced in that regard. He was informed by a letter dated 31 October 2012 that the requested documents were not available, since they had already been sent to the Baku Detention Centre, where the applicant had been transferred.
By a letter of 24 September 2012 the lawyer asked the Ministry of Internal Affairs, via its special “hotline”, to examine the security camera recordings of the Sabail District police station No. 9 in order to identify whether on 18 September 2012 the applicant had been subjected to physical force and in particular whether he had had traces of ill-treatment on him or had moved in the manner of a person suffering from physical pain while walking; the lawyer also enquired whether it might be possible for him to be provided with the relevant security camera recordings. In response, on 2 October 2012 he was informed that the Sabail district police station possessed the recordings in question.
On 25 September 2012 the applicant’s sister sent telegrams to the Sabail district police station and the Prison Service Department of the Ministry of Justice requesting assistance in addressing her brother’s complaints of ill-treatment and of his having been denied access to the lawyer of his own choice to conceal traces of his ill-treatment.
On 27 September 2012, during the appeal hearing against the firstinstance court’s decision to remand the applicant in custody, the applicant’s lawyer met the applicant for the first time. The applicant’s lawyer lodged a request with the judge of the Baku Court of Appeal, asking him to request the Prosecutor General’s Office to open a criminal case in the light of the multiple injuries found on the applicant’s legs – in particular, haematomas on the soles of his feet. Allegedly, during the appeal hearing the applicant also showed injuries on his body to the judge. The same day the judge sent a letter to the Sabail district prosecutor’s office requesting the examination of the applicant’s complaints of ill-treatment. By a decision of 27 September 2012 the appellate court upheld the order for the applicant to be remanded in custody.
On 28 September 2012 the applicant’s lawyer sent a letter to the head of the Baku Detention Centre informing him that he had seen the injuries on the applicant’s body and requesting that an examination of the applicant be undertaken. On 3 October 2012 the applicant again wrote to the head of the Baku Detention Centre requesting information on the outcome of his request of 28 September 2012. By a letter of 5 October 2012 the head of the Baku Detention Centre informed the applicant’s lawyer that upon the applicant’s arrival at the detention facility on 22 September 2012 no injury had been found on the applicant’s person and that he had not complained about the state of his health at the material time.
On an unspecified date in 2012, on the basis of a request sent by the Baku Court of Appeal judge hearing the applicant’s appeal in respect of his detention, the Sabail district prosecutor’s office opened a criminal inquiry into the alleged ill-treatment.
In his testimony to the prosecutor’s office the applicant mentioned that his body still bore traces of the alleged ill-treatment and that he wanted to undergo a forensic medical examination.
On the basis of a decision adopted by the Sabail district prosecutor’s office on 17 October 2012 on the appointment of a forensic medical expert, on 6 November 2012 the applicant was examined by a forensic expert. The forensic report issued, on 4 December 2012, reads as follows:
“... [Examination:] There is a pale brown-violet spot of an indefinite shape, measuring 3.5 by 2 cm, pigmentation on one-third of the front-inner side of the right thigh. No other injuries or traces of injuries were discovered on other parts of the body. ... That pigmentation could have emerged as a result of any pathological process in progress on the skin ...”
By a decision of 4 December 2012 the Sabail district prosecutor’s office refused to open a criminal case, finding that there was no evidence that the applicant had been ill-treated by the police. In that regard, the prosecutor’s office relied on the forensic expert’s report and the testimony of the three police officers involved in the applicant’s arrest, who denied the infliction of ill-treatment on the applicant.
On 1 March 2013 the applicant’s lawyer lodged a complaint with the Sabail District Court against that decision. He complained that the applicant had been ill-treated by the police while in police custody on 18 September 2012 and that the domestic authorities had failed to conduct an effective investigation in that respect. He noted, in particular, (i) that the forensic expert examination had been carried out belatedly, so most of the applicant’s bodily injuries had disappeared by the time that the examination had been undertaken; (ii) the forensic expert opinion report was not clear regarding the characteristics of the pigmentation found on the applicant’s person in that it did not clarify the symptoms and the origin of the condition, whether it was treatable and – in the event that the applicant received medical assistance – the outcome of such treatment; and (iii) the prosecutor’s office had relied mainly on the testimony of the police officers involved in the applicant’s alleged beating. On 19 March 2013 the Sabail District Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint, finding the decision not to open a criminal case lawful.
On 27 March 2013 the applicant’s lawyer lodged an appeal against that decision with the Baku Court of Appeal, reiterating his previous complaints. He also added that the applicant was mentally ill, and had thus been in a particularly fragile condition while in police custody.
By a decision of 1 April 2013 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the first-instance court’s decision, dismissing the applicant’s appeal as unsubstantiated.
The applicant was a member of the NIDA civic movement (hereinafter “NIDA”), whose members had participated in demonstrations of January and February 2013 held in Baku to protest against the death of soldiers serving in the Azerbaijani army.
On 11 January 2013, a day before one of the above-mentioned demonstrations, the applicant was arrested by police officers and taken to the Sabail district police station No. 9. The applicant submitted that officers had questioned him about his role in the planning of the demonstration and had punched and kicked him and beaten him with a truncheon, before releasing him on 12 January 2013.
On 7 March 2013 the applicant was arrested by plainclothes officers of the Ministry of National Security (hereinafter “the MNS”) in Baku city centre allegedly without any explanation. The applicant submitted that they had dragged him into a car, punched him in the head several times, and taken him to his home in order to conduct a search of it.
The applicant submitted that on 8 March 2013, while questioning him, two MNS officers had forced him to give a statement incriminating himself and other members of NIDA by threatening to arrest his father and to cause complications in respect of his case. In his statement he mentioned, inter alia, that NIDA had been involved in an attempted coup d’état; his statements were aired on some national television channels the same day.
On 9 March 2013 he was charged under Article 234.1 of the Criminal Code with the criminal offence of illegal possession of a quantity of narcotic substances exceeding that necessary for personal use without any intent to sell them (Qanunsuz olaraq narkotik vasitələri, psixotrop maddələri və ya onların prekursorlarını hazırlama, istehsal etmə, əldə etmə, saxlama, daşıma, göndərmə və ya satma). In September 2013 he was charged with further criminal offences under Articles 28 (Preparing to commit a criminal offence), 220.1 (Mass disorder) and 228.3 (Illegal possession of weapons by an organised group) of the Criminal Code.
By a decision of 9 March 2013 the Nasimi District Court ordered that the applicant be remanded in custody in the Baku Detention Centre. According to the applicant, his family had been informed of his whereabouts on 9 March 2013. On an unspecified date during his detention at the MNS, his family appointed a lawyer of their choice. From 7 March until 18 March 2013 the applicant was detained at the MNS; on 18 March 2013 he was transferred to the Baku Detention Centre. The applicant met his lawyer for the first time on an unspecified date after his transfer to the Baku Detention Centre.
On 14 March 2013 during a cross-examination with his co-accused, R.H., another member of NIDA, the applicant retracted his testimony incriminating R.H. and other members of NIDA, stating that he had given his earlier incriminating testimony under duress. The applicant submitted that in response to that retraction, the questioning officers had threatened him in the presence of R.H. and interrupted the questioning to take him to another room. According to the applicant, MNS officers M.G. and A.M. had then handcuffed his hands behind his back, slapped him in the face, and punched, kicked and beaten him with truncheons and as a result, he had limped on his right leg for four days, his ear had started to hurt, and his hearing ability had been temporarily damaged.
According to the applicant, after his transfer to the Baku Detention Centre he had received, at his own request, medical treatment for his ear pain and hearing problems. The medical document in this connection was not made available to the Court.
On 16 April 2013 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Prosecutor General’s Office, requesting that a criminal case be opened in respect of the alleged ill-treatment inflicted on him on 11 January, 7 March, and 14 March 2013. He asked the Prosecutor General’s Office to question witnesses – including B.G. (another member of NIDA who had been arrested together with him by police officers on 11 January 2013) and R.H.  on his behalf and to obtain the security camera recordings of the Sabail District police station No. 9 and the MNS of 11 January and 14 March 2013 respectively. He also mentioned that the bruises on his person and his limp had cleared up by the time of his transfer to Baku Detention Centre and that it had been impossible for him to obtain medical certification of his injuries owing to his having been denied access to his family and the lawyer appointed by his family, except in respect of the pain in his left ear and his hearing problems (for which he had sought medical treatment at the Baku Detention Centre). The applicant declined the offer of an examination by a forensic expert, stating that the injuries to his person had already cleared up.
On 4 June 2013 the Prosecutor General’s Office refused to open a criminal case. It relied mainly on the lack of bodily injuries on the applicant and the testimony of some of the officers involved in the fourth applicant’s arrest and detention, who denied the ill-treatment allegations.
In an appeal of 9 September 2013 against the decision not to open a case, the applicant submitted that the investigation had failed to properly examine his complaint of ill-treatment.
On 27 September 2013 the Sabail District Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint, finding the decision not to open a criminal case lawful.
On 30 September 2013 the applicant lodged an appeal with the Baku Court of Appeal against that decision, reiterating his previous complaints.
On 7 October 2013 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal, upholding the first-instance court’s decision.
The applicant is an opposition activist and co-founder of the youth organisation of the opposition Popular Front Party.
At around 4 p.m. on 11 August 2014, when the applicant and an acquaintance were driving in the latter’s car in the district of Sabirabad, they were stopped by up to ten plainclothes officers of the Narcotics Department of the Ministry of Internal Affairs (“the NDMIA”) and the Sabirabad District police station. The applicant submitted that they had dragged him out of the car, punched and hit him in the head and body, handcuffed him and dragged him into their car. The applicant furthermore submitted that on their way to the Sabirabad District police station, one of the officers sitting next to him in the back seat had slipped narcotic substances into his pockets. After travelling between two and two and a half kilometres the car had stopped in the middle of the road, a search of the applicant had been conducted and narcotic substances had been found on his person. According to the search record, 3.93 grams of marijuana and 113.17 grams of hashish were found on him. He refused to sign the search record.
The applicant submitted that after his arrival in the Sabirabad District police station, in the office of V.S., the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, he had been beaten by five officers of the NDMIA and two other police officers after he had refused to testify that the drugs found on his person had belonged to him. He had been beaten with a truncheon on the soles of his feet, back, legs and thigh for about an hour and had been insulted.
On 12 August 2014 the applicant was questioned as a suspect and on 13 August 2014 he was charged with criminal offences under Article 234.4.3 (The illegal preparation, production, possession, storage, transportation and sale of a large quantity of narcotic substances) of the Criminal Code. During questioning, the applicant complained of having been beaten at the Sabirabad District police station with the aim of extracting a confession from him.
On 13 August 2014 the fifth applicant lodged a complaint of illtreatment with the Narimanov District Court, which had ordered that he be remanded in custody. The same day the court sent a letter to the Prosecutor General’s Office, asking that the fifth applicant’s ill-treatment complaints be examined.
On 15 August 2014 the applicant was transferred to the Baku Detention Centre. According to the medical record drawn up on 16 August 2014, during the applicant’s arrival at the Baku Detention Centre, the applicant had a big violet bruise on the upper one-third portion of the inner side of his left thigh. The record also noted the applicant’s comment about being beaten during his arrest and detention in police custody.
On the basis of the applicant’s testimony of 12 August 2014 and a request lodged by the Narimanov District Court, the Prosecutor General’s Office conducted a criminal inquiry into the complaint of ill-treatment.
On unspecified dates a forensic examination was ordered and the applicant underwent forensic examination. According to the forensic expert report dated 5 September 2014, no bodily injury was found on the fifth applicant’s person. The copy of the report was not made available to the Court.
By a decision of 2 October 2014 the Prosecutor General’s Office declined to open a criminal case. According to the decision, the testimony of the officers involved in the applicant’s detention and a forensic expert report dated 5 September 2014, which had found no bodily injury on the applicant had indicated that his claims were unsubstantiated.
On 22 December 2014 the applicant’s lawyer received a copy of that decision, having complained to the prosecutor’s office on 26 November 2014 that the applicant had not been provided with a copy of it.
On 5 January 2015 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Sabail District Court against the decision of the Prosecutor General’s Office not to open a criminal case. He complained, inter alia, that in the course of the criminal inquiry the prosecutor’s office had not enquired whether the applicant had been carrying any bodily injury upon his entering the Baku Detention Centre; that an acquaintance of the applicant, who had observed the treatment of the applicant during his arrest on 11 August 2014 had not been questioned as a witness; and that the prosecutor’s office had relied mainly on the testimony of the police officers who had ill-treated the applicant.
On 16 January 2015 the Sabail District Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint, holding that the decision of the Prosecutor General’s Office not to open a criminal case had been justified. It also held that given the fact that the indictment on drug charges in the applicant’s case had already been sent to the Lankaran Serious Crimes Court, which had been designated to examine his case on the merits, that court could hear the applicant’s complaint of ill-treatment.
On 19 January 2015 the applicant lodged an appeal, complaining that the Sabail District Court’s decision had been insufficiently reasoned and that referring the applicant’s complaint to another court had been unjustified. He also asked the appellate court to request the Baku Detention Centre to provide the court with the reports on the medical examinations of the applicant conducted upon his transfer to that facility.
On 30 January 2015 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal, upholding the first-instance court’s decision.
According to the applicant, on an unspecified date his lawyer lodged a request with the Baku Detention Centre, asking it to provide him with the report on the medical examination that the applicant had undergone upon his arrival at this facility. He did not receive response to this request.
On 5 February 2015 the Lankaran Serious Crimes Court, in charge of the criminal case against the applicant, asked the Baku Detention Centre to respond to the enquiries of the applicant’s lawyer. In a letter of 17 February 2015 the head of the Baku Detention Centre informed the court that the applicant, who had entered the detention facility on 15 August 2014, had had a big violet bruise on the upper third of the inner side of his left thigh and that according to the record drawn up upon his arrival, the applicant had stated that he had sustained this injury as a result of police violence while being arrested and held in police custody.
The relevant domestic law concerning the prohibition of ill-treatment is summarised in the case of Mustafa Hajili v. Azerbaijan (no. 42119/12, §§ 26-28, 24 November 2016).
The following are the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCrP”), as in force at the material time, relevant to the second applicant’s detention.
Under Article 150.1 (Detention of a person in order to bring charges) of the CCrP, if the evidence collected in respect of a criminal case gives grounds to suppose that a person has committed a criminal offence, and if that person lives in another country or his or her whereabouts are not known, the investigator or prosecutor may issue a decision to detain him or her. In the event that a person hides from the prosecuting authorities or intentionally fails to comply with a summons, the investigator or the prosecutor shall issue a “wanted” notice, in addition to a decision to detain the person in order to charge him or her.
Under Article 150.2 of the CCrP, any official of a criminal inquiry authority, investigator or prosecutor who traces a suspect shall execute the relevant decision to detain that suspect in order to charge him or her and shall immediately inform the relevant investigator or prosecutor of that step.
Under Article 150.3 of the CCrP, the length of the detention of a suspect to bring charges against him or her cannot exceed forty-eight hours. To remand a detained person in custody, he or she must be brought before the court within forty-eight hours of his or her detention in order for the court either to order that preventive measure or to release him or her.
Article 178 (Enforced appearance) of the CCrP reads as follows:
“178.1.  Enforced appearance shall entail bringing a person by force to the authority conducting criminal proceedings and forcibly ensuring his participation in investigative or other procedures.
2.  This measure may be applied to a person participating in criminal proceedings and summoned by the authority conducting criminal proceedings only in the following circumstances:
2.1.  if he fails without good reason to attend in response to a compulsory summons of the authority conducting criminal proceedings;
2.2.  if he evades receipt of a summons from the authority conducting criminal proceedings;
2.3.  if he hides from the authority conducting criminal proceedings;
2.4.  if he has no permanent place of residence.
3.  Children under the age of fourteen, pregnant women, persons who are seriously ill and victims bringing a private criminal prosecution may not be forcibly brought before an authority conducting criminal proceedings ...”