The case mainly concerns the alleged unlawfulness of the applicant’s provisional arrest in Slovakia and his subsequent detention with a view to his extradition to Russia, even though he had previously been granted refugee status in Sweden.
The applicant was born in 1982 and lives in Alvesta (Sweden). He was represented by Ms I. Rajtáková, a lawyer practising in Košice.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková, from the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 12 July 2007 the Zavodskoy District Court of Grozny (Chechen Republic) issued an international arrest warrant against the applicant on account of his criminal prosecution for acts of terrorism that he had allegedly committed in 2004 in Grozny as a member of an armed group and in respect of which, if convicted, he faced a sentence of life in prison.
In 2010-2011 the applicant was subjected to extradition proceedings in Ukraine, but fled to Sweden.
On 6 December 2011 he was granted asylum in Sweden on the grounds of his political opinions and granted permanent leave to remain.
On 15 January 2015 at 20.45, when he was on his way to Ukraine, the applicant was apprehended by the Slovak border police as a person appearing on Interpol’s list of wanted persons; he was then taken to the Vyšné Nemecké border police station. The relevant police report cited section 17b(1) of the Police Corps Act (Law no. 171/1993).
He was arrested the next day (16 January 2015) at 1 a.m. under Article 504 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (hereinafter “the CCP”), on the basis of the international arrest warrant that had been issued against him on 12 July 2007. The relevant police report noted that the Košice regional prosecutor (hereinafter “the prosecutor”) had authorised the arrest at 1 a.m.
Later the same day the applicant was placed in a police detention cell in Košice; he was assigned a lawyer by the Košice Regional Court (hereinafter “the Regional Court”). At 1 p.m he was interviewed by the prosecutor and informed of the reasons for his arrest. It was noted on that occasion that Interpol had confirmed that the applicant was still a wanted person (whose arrest and extradition had been requested by Russia), and that the latter had undertaken to send extradition documents to the Slovak authorities in good time. The applicant denied having committed any crime in Russia, contending that he was being persecuted because of his brother’s activities in Chechnya. In response to his statement that he had been granted asylum in Sweden, the prosecutor indicated that the circumstances leading to the granting of asylum to the applicant were being verified.
On 17 January 2015 the prosecutor lodged an application with the Regional Court for the applicant to be placed in preliminary detention under Article 504 § 3 of the CCP. It stated that, at that stage, the applicant’s refugee status in Sweden, which had been confirmed by Interpol in Stockholm, was not an obstacle to the launching of a preliminary investigation in respect of his possible extradition, given that asylum policy was not standardised throughout the EU. It was thus necessary, pursuant to the European Convention on Extradition of 1957 and the CCP, to secure the applicant’s presence in Slovakia until it was established whether his extradition to Russia was admissible.
On 19 January 2015, the Regional Court heard the applicant, who reiterated that he had been granted asylum in Sweden. Observing that the process of granting asylum was subject to proceedings that differed from extradition proceedings and that preliminary investigations within extradition proceedings (under Article 502 of the CCP) were to be undertaken by the prosecutor, the Regional Court considered that it was necessary to secure the applicant’s presence on Slovak territory until the State requesting extradition had submitted a request for that extradition, as provided by Article 505 § 3 of the CCP. Pursuant to Article 505 § 1 of the CCP, it thus decided to allow the prosecutor’s application and to place the applicant in preliminary detention pending the extradition proceedings, with effect from 15 January 2015 at 8.45 p.m.
The applicant lodged an interlocutory appeal, which he later completed through a new lawyer of his choice. He mainly asserted that in view of the fact that he had been granted asylum in Sweden, Article 501 (b) of the CCP prohibited his extradition to another country. He also submitted that the authorisation of the prosecutor had been needed for his apprehension on 15 January 2015 and that Russia had not requested (as required under Article 16 of the European Convention on Extradition) that he be placed in preliminary detention.
By a letter of 27 January 2015, the prosecutor asked the Swedish authorities to provide more information about the applicant’s status in Sweden.
On 9 February 2015, the Fifth Chamber of the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s interlocutory appeal. Referring to the arrest warrant and to the documents relating to the applicant’s ongoing criminal prosecution sent via Interpol by the Russian authorities, it considered that the conditions set by the CCP for the preliminary detention had been met. The fact that the applicant had been granted asylum in Sweden (which was to be further investigated by the prosecutor with regard to the exclusion provision of Article 1F of the 1951 Geneva Convention – see paragraph 22 below) did not prevent such detention. It was indeed impossible at that stage to assess whether the extradition would eventually be admissible or not.
On 19 February 2015, the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint challenging the Supreme Court’s decision. Citing his right not to be deprived of his liberty without a legal basis, he pointed out that the State that had issued the international arrest warrant in respect of him had not requested that he be placed in preliminary detention, and submitted that his refugee status automatically excluded any extradition. He also asserted that several of his procedural rights, as enshrined in Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (c) of the Convention, had been violated during the proceedings regarding the imposition of his preliminary detention.
After a public hearing held on 26 January 2016, the Constitutional Court issued a judgment on 28 January 2016 (no. II. ÚS 352/2015, served on the applicant’s lawyer on 22 March 2016) in which it held that the applicant’s rights, as guaranteed by Articles 5 and 6 of the Convention, had not been breached. It stated that the initial limitation of the applicant’s liberty had been based on the Police Corps Act and had not required the authorisation of the prosecutor; under Article 504 § 2 of the CCP, only after the authorities had verified that the applicant was still the subject of an international search could he be arrested, with the prior authorisation of the prosecutor. His subsequent placement in preliminary detention had been conditional only on the relevant request being lodged by the prosecutor, pursuant to Article 504 § 3 of the CCP; indeed, Article 16 § 1 of the European Convention on Extradition could not be interpreted to mean that such a request had to be lodged by the State requesting extradition. The Constitutional Court furthermore observed that a translation of the decision on the refugee status granted to the applicant by the Swedish authorities had been submitted by the applicant only after the Supreme Court had decided on the matter, and that the conditions regarding the admissibility of his extradition were subject to a preliminary investigation by the prosecutor, the purpose of which could be challenged without placing the applicant in preliminary detention.
On 20 February 2015, the prosecutor lodged an application for the applicant to be placed in detention pending extradition, pursuant to Articles 505 § 5 and 506 § 1 of the CCP. He noted that preliminary detention could not last more than forty days, which would elapse on 23 February 2015, and that the aim of that detention had been attained, since a request for the applicant’s extradition (containing the necessary assurances concerning the applicant’s treatment and proceedings in respect of him in the event of his extradition) had been lodged by the Russian Prosecutor General’s Office on 17 February 2015. The prosecutor noted that during the subsequent proceedings the circumstances surrounding the recognition in Sweden of the applicant’s refugee status and the impact of those circumstances on the outcome of the preliminary investigation would be duly examined and that reports would be requested from the Slovak Ministry of Foreign Affairs and UNHCR regarding the security situation in Russia and whether the above-mentioned assurances were likely to be honoured.
On 23 February 2015, the Regional Court allowed the abovementioned application, pursuant to Article 506 § 1 of the CCP, holding that, while the aim of the preliminary detention had been attained with the service of the extradition request, the aim of the extradition proceedings could not be achieved without placing the applicant in detention pending extradition and thus preventing him from absconding. Noting that the Swedish authorities had not (according to their response to the above-mentioned enquiry lodged by the prosecutor) verified during the asylum proceedings whether the applicant appeared on Interpol’s list of wanted persons, the court indicated that the relevant circumstances and their impact on the preliminary investigation would be duly reviewed.
The applicant lodged an interlocutory appeal in which he contended, citing Directive 2011/95/EU, that Slovakia was bound by the decision of the Swedish authorities to grant him asylum.
On 10 March 2015, the applicant was heard by the prosecutor and informed of the request for his extradition lodged by Russia; he did not consent to his extradition.
On 16 March 2015, the Fifth Chamber of the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s interlocutory appeal against the decision of 23 February 2015. It noted that the extradition request (accompanied by the necessary documents) had been submitted by Russia on 17 February 2015, and that the purpose of the preliminary detention had thereby been achieved; however, the applicant’s release at that stage would frustrate the completion of the preliminary investigation and, consequently, the aim of the extradition proceedings. Referring to (i) the exclusion provision of Article 1F (b) of the 1951 Geneva Convention, which specified that the provisions of that Convention should not apply to any person in respect of whom there are serious reasons for considering that he has committed a serious non-political crime outside his country of refuge prior to his admission to that country as a refugee, and (ii) a similar exclusion provision set out in Article 12 § 2 (b) of Directive 2011/95/EU, the Supreme Court considered that the latter provision, although disregarded by Sweden when granting asylum to the applicant, precluded the Slovak Republic from accepting and applying refugee status to the latter (together “the exclusion provisions”).
In May 2015 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint against the Supreme Court’s decision. Relying on Articles 5 § 1 and 6 § 1 of the Convention, he asserted that the Slovak authorities were bound by the decision of the Swedish authorities to grant him asylum and that there were no grounds to consider that he had committed the acts listed in Article 12 § 2 (b) of Directive 2011/95/EU. Subsequently, the complaint was admitted for examination under no. II. ÚS 53/2016, and a public hearing was held before the Constitutional Court.
On 9 October 2015, the prosecutor asked the Regional Court to allow the applicant’s extradition to Russia. He referred to (i) the fact that the Swedish authorities had not, before granting asylum to the applicant, verified whether the latter’s name appeared in Interpol’s database of wanted persons, (ii) the statement of the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, according to which the protection conferred on the applicant owing to his refugee status was not unconditional, and (iii) the assurances made by Russia concerning the applicant’s treatment and proceedings in respect of him in the event of his extradition .
A public hearing held before the Regional Court on 26 January 2016 was adjourned with a view to requesting additional information from the Russian authorities as to the existence of further written evidence that might complement the extradition request. It can be seen from the case file that, in response, the Russian Prosecutor General’s Office stated that the abovementioned extradition request had been based mainly on the fact that the preliminary investigation had led to the issuance of an international search and arrest warrant; the Russian Prosecutor General’s Office added that Russian law did not require, for an international warrant to be issued, firm evidence giving rise to the suspicion of a crime having been committed.
On 8 September 2016, the Regional Court decided that the applicant’s extradition to Russia was admissible. It noted that refugees did not automatically enjoy immunity from criminal prosecution, as provided by Article 1F of the 1951 Geneva Convention and in Article 12 § 2 (b) of Directive 2011/95/EU. In the instant case, given that the applicant was suspected of having committed a serious non-political crime, the latter provision prevented Slovakia – as concluded by the Supreme Court in its decision of 16 March 2015 – from applying refugee status in his respect. Moreover, Russia, as a Contracting Party to the Convention, had provided concrete and specified guarantees that the applicant would not be subjected to any treatment that was contrary to Article 3 of the Convention.
By a judgment of 13 October 2016, the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s constitutional complaint (no. II. ÚS 53/2016). It observed that a guarantee of non-refoulement was not unconditional, since the relevant exclusion provisions allowed for persons who did not deserve refugee protection to be excluded from such protection, and as such did not constitute an obstacle to the requested State undertaking certain actions in the course of extradition proceedings (including proceedings in respect of detention pending extradition) involving such persons. Consequently, Article 14 § 3 (a) of Directive 2011/95/EU obliged member States to revoke the refugee status of a person if they had established that he or she should have been excluded from being accorded the status of refugee under Article 12. The imposition of detention pending extradition was thus a procedural tool allowing the interests at stake to be weighed proportionally. In the instant case there was no reason not to accept at that stage the Supreme Court’s conclusions; the general courts were nevertheless called on, in the subsequent proceedings, to examine and take into account all the relevant circumstances (including the Court’s case-law in respect of Article 3 of the Convention) before deciding whether to “revoke” the applicant’s refugee status and whether to extradite him to Russia.
According to the dissenting opinion of one of the judges, the Constitutional Court should have declared that the applicant’s rights had been violated, given that the decision of the Swedish authorities should have been accepted (if need be, after lodging a request with the Court of Justice of the European Union for a preliminary ruling on the acceptance of the Swedish decision), or that, in any event, the risk that the applicant might be subjected to ill-treatment in the event of his extradition to Russia should have been assessed as required by the Court’s case-law, namely M.G. v. Bulgaria, no. 59297/12, 25 March 2014.
After the applicant lodged an interlocutory appeal against the decision of 8 September 2016 (see paragraph 26 above), the Fourth Chamber of the Supreme Court reversed the Regional Court’s decision of 8 September 2016 and decided, on 2 November 2016, that the applicant’s extradition to Russia was inadmissible, mainly under Article 501 (b) of the CCP. It gave as the main reason for that decision the fact that, having been granted asylum in Sweden, the applicant enjoyed refugee protection on the territory of all EU States, despite the fact that Swedish authorities had not been aware of the criminal charge facing him in Russia. It also concluded that neither the exclusion clause contained in the 1951 Geneva Convention nor the one contained in Directive 2011/95/EU were applicable in the instant case. It furthermore observed, after reviewing all the relevant circumstances (including the general human rights situation in Russia and the reliability of the assurances offered by Russia), that the applicant’s extradition would also not be admissible (i) on humanitarian grounds, (ii) owing to a lack of reliable evidence to support the slightest plausibility of the suspicion against him, and (iii) in the light of numerous inaccuracies and contradictions contained in the extradition documents. Lastly, the Supreme Court noted that the action serving as the initial impetus for the applicant’s criminal prosecution had to be regarded as “political” and that his political views (together with his brother’s political activities) could give rise to bias on the part of the requesting State’s authorities, within the meaning of Article 3 §§ 1 and 2 of the European Convention on Extradition.
By the same decision the Supreme Court ordered the applicant’s release from detention pending extradition, with immediate effect.
On 2 December 2016, the Slovak Minister of Justice decided not to authorise the applicant’s extradition to Russia, pursuant to Article 510 § 1 of the CCP.
Upon the applicant’s release from detention pending extradition on 2 November 2016, the border police initiated proceedings aimed at securing his administrative expulsion to Sweden and decided to place him in administrative detention, pursuant to section 88(1)(a) of Law no. 404/2011.
On 4 November 2016 the border police ordered the applicant’s administrative expulsion to Sweden, which took place on 1 December 2016.
The applicant challenged this order, upon which the Supreme Court decided, by a judgment of 22 October 2019, to quash the decision on the applicant’s expulsion to Sweden and to send the matter back to the border police.
The Act governs the organisation and powers of the police. Under section 17b(1), a police officer has the power to apprehend a person on the basis of a request to bring him or her before a court, a prosecuting authority, an administrative authority, or another authority listed by specific provisions. Such a request must refer to the personal data available to the requesting authority, and must specify the underlying legal provisions under which (and the reasons for which) the person is to be brought before the authority in question.
The relevant provisions of Chapter II (Extradition), Part II (Extradition abroad) read as follows:
Article 501
Inadmissibility of Extradition
“Extradition shall be inadmissible if:
...
b) it concerns a person who has applied in the Slovak Republic for asylum or who has been granted such asylum or provided with supplementary protection to the extent of the protection to be provided to such persons under a separate act or an international treaty; this does not apply if it concerns a person who has requested asylum in the Slovak Republic repeatedly and his/her request for asylum has already been subject to a final decision,”
Article 502
Preliminary investigation
“(1) A preliminary investigation shall be conducted by a prosecutor of a regional prosecution office to whom the Ministry of Justice has forwarded a request by a foreign authority for extradition abroad, or in whose district the person to be extradited to the requesting State was arrested or lives. If the preliminary investigation was opened before the delivery of a request for extradition, the prosecutor shall immediately inform the Ministry of Justice of it.
(2) The goal of a preliminary investigation is to determine whether the conditions for extradition to be ruled admissible are met.
...”
Article 504
Arrest
“(1) Upon a request by foreign authorities, the prosecutor responsible for conducting the preliminary investigation may order [police] to arrest a person whose extradition will be requested by the foreign authorities. The prosecutor shall not be bound by the grounds for detention set out in Article 71.
(2) The person being sought by the foreign authorities for extradition may be arrested by the [police] with the prior authorisation of the prosecutor. Without such authorisation the person may be arrested only in urgent cases and if there is no possibility to obtain such authorisation in advance.
(3) The ... arrest shall be immediately reported to the prosecutor. If the prosecutor does not order the release of the arrested person within forty-eight hours of his/her arrest, he shall lodge, within the same deadline, an application to the court for the person to be held in preliminary detention or in detention pending extradition.”
Article 505
Preliminary detention
“(1) The presiding judge of a chamber of the Regional Court shall within forty-eight hours of the person’s surrender to that court decide, upon an application lodged by the prosecutor, on the preliminary detention of the arrested person. He/she shall not be bound by the grounds for detention set out in Article 71. Should the presiding judge not, within the above-mentioned time-limit, order that the arrested person be held in preliminary detention, he shall order his/her release.
...
(3) The purpose of preliminary detention is to secure the presence of an arrested person on the territory of the Slovak Republic until the State that has an interest in his extradition submits (pursuant to Article 498) a request for his extradition..
(4) Preliminary detention may not exceed the period of forty days from the moment of the person’s arrest. The presiding judge of a chamber of the Regional Court may, upon the lodging of an application by the prosecutor conducting the preliminary investigation, decide to release the person from preliminary detention.
(5) If a request for extradition by the foreign authorities was submitted in the course of the preliminary detention, the Ministry of Justice shall notify to this effect the prosecutor conducting the preliminary investigation. Upon an application by the prosecutor, the presiding judge of a chamber may order that the person be detained pending extradition if the conditions set out in Article 506 § 1 are met.
(6) The release of the person from preliminary detention shall not preclude his/her further placement in preliminary detention or his/her being placed in detention pending extradition.”
Detention pending extradition
Article 506
“(1)	If it is necessary to prevent the escape of the person whose extradition is sought or to prevent the obstruction of the purpose of such proceedings, the presiding judge of a chamber of a regional court shall place him/her in detention. He/she shall rule to this effect upon the lodging of an application by the prosecutor
(2)	conducting the preliminary investigation.
(2) If the person whose extradition is sought gives his/her consent to extradition or if his/her extradition has been declared admissible, the Regional Court shall place the person in detention pending extradition, unless this has already been done earlier under paragraph 1 by the presiding judge.
(3) The presiding judge of a chamber of the Regional Court shall order the release of the person from detention pending extradition as of the day of [the Slovak authorities] surrendering him/her to the foreign authorities – at the latest by the sixtieth day after the decision of the Minister of Justice allowing his/her extradition; ...
In addition, he/she shall order [the person’s] release from detention pending extradition if
...
b) the extradition was declared inadmissible by the Supreme Court or if the Minister of Justice has refused to allow the extradition ...”
Under section 3(1) of the Act the State bears liability for damage caused by public authorities through (a) an unlawful decision, (b) unlawful arrest, detention or another form of deprivation of personal liberty, (c) a decision concerning detention on remand, or (d) official misconduct (nesprávny úradný postup).
Under section 7, the right to compensation for damage caused by a decision on arrest, by detention or by some other form of deprivation of personal liberty is vested in the person who was subjected to it, provided that that decision was quashed as being unlawful or if official misconduct occurred in connection with it.
However, under section 8(6)(h), no such right arises in respect of detention ordered with a view to extradition, unless the damage was caused by an unlawful decision or official misconduct on the part of the Slovak authorities.
The European Convention on Extradition of 13 December 1957 (CETS no. 024), to which Slovakia and Russia are parties, provides as follows:
Article 3 – Political offences
“1. Extradition shall not be granted if the offence in respect of which it is requested is regarded by the requested Party as a political offence or as an offence connected with a political offence.
The same rule shall apply if the requested Party has substantial grounds for believing that a request for extradition for an ordinary criminal offence has been made for the purpose of prosecuting or punishing a person on account of his race, religion, nationality or political opinion, or that that person’s position may be prejudiced for any of these reasons.”
Article 16 – Provisional arrest
“1. In case of urgency the competent authorities of the requesting Party may request the provisional arrest of the person sought. The competent authorities of the requested Party shall decide the matter in accordance with its law.
...
Provisional arrest may be terminated if, within a period of 18 days after arrest, the requested Party has not received the request for extradition and the documents mentioned in Article 12. It shall not, in any event, exceed 40 days from the date of such arrest. The possibility of provisional release at any time is not excluded, but the requested Party shall take any measures which it considers necessary to prevent the escape of the person sought.”
The UN Refugee Convention, adopted in 28 July 1951 in Geneva, to which Slovakia is a party (“the 1951 Geneva Convention”), provides as follows:
Article 1 – Definition of the term “refugee”
“...
The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any person with respect to whom there are serious reasons for considering that:
(a) he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or a crime against humanity, as defined in the international instruments drawn up to make provision in respect of such crimes;
(b) he has committed a serious non-political crime outside the country of refuge prior to his admission to that country as a refugee;
(c) he has been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.”
Article 33 – Prohibition of expulsion or return (“refoulement”)
“1. No Contracting State shall expel or return (“refouler”) a refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of his race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion.
The benefit of the present provision may not, however, be claimed by a refugee whom there are reasonable grounds for regarding as a danger to the security of the country in which he is, or who, having been convicted by a final judgment of a particularly serious crime, constitutes a danger to the community of that country.”
In its Conclusion no. 12 (XXIX) on the extraterritorial effect of the determination of refugee status, adopted on 17 October 1978, the UNHCR’s Executive Committee stated, in so far as relevant, the following:
“(g)... refugee status as determined in one Contracting State should only be called into question by another Contracting State in exceptional cases when it appears that the person manifestly does not fulfil the requirements of the Convention, e.g. if facts become known indicating that the statements initially made were fraudulent or showing that the person concerned falls within the terms of a cessation or exclusion provision of the 1951 Convention; (...).”
The relevant provisions of Directive 2011/95/EU read as follows:
Article 12 – Exclusion
“2. A third-country national or a stateless person is excluded from being a refugee where there are serious reasons for considering that:
...
(b) he or she has committed a serious non-political crime outside the country of refuge prior to his or her admission as a refugee – that is to say before the date of the issuance of a residence permit on the basis of the granting of refugee status; particularly cruel actions, even if committed with an allegedly political objective, may be classified as serious non-political crimes;
...”
Article 14 – Revocation of, ending of or refusal to renew refugee status
“...
Member States shall revoke, end or refuse to renew the refugee status of a thirdcountry national or a stateless person if, after he or she has been granted refugee status, it is established by the Member State concerned that:
(a) he or she should have been or is excluded from being a refugee in accordance with Article 12;
...”
Article 21 – Protection from refoulement
“1. Member States shall respect the principle of non-refoulement in accordance with their international obligations.
Where not prohibited by the international obligations mentioned in paragraph 1, Member States may refoule a refugee, whether formally recognised or not, when:
(a) there are reasonable grounds for considering him or her as a danger to the security of the Member State in which he or she is present; or
(b) he or she, having been convicted by a final judgment of a particularly serious crime, constitutes a danger to the community of that Member State.
Member States may revoke, end or refuse to renew or to grant the residence permit of (or to) a refugee to whom paragraph 2 applies.”