The case originated in an application (no. 44690/09) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Mehmet Atilla Çapın (“the applicant”), on 13 August 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. E. Keleş and Mrs M. Keleş, lawyers practising in İzmir. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged that the dismissal of his paternity action as time-barred had resulted in a breach of Articles 6 and 8 of the Convention.
On 13 June 2017 the complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born out of wedlock in 1958 and currently lives in New York.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties and as they appear from the documents submitted by them, may be summarised as follows.
On 31 October 2003 the applicant, who was forty-five years old at the time, filed an action for recognition of paternity alleging that İsmail S. was his biological father. He claimed that he had been placed in an orphanage at the age of four when his mother got married a second time, to a military officer who did not wish to have him as his son. He grew up as an orphan believing, because his mother had told him so, that his biological father had been killed in a road accident. He maintained that he had left the country, at the age of eighteen, to work in the United States, where he had lived for about twenty-five years and had a real estate business. He further maintained that it was not until October 2003 that he had learnt from his relatives, when he had travelled to Turkey, that the person whom he had presumed to be his father was not his biological father but was in fact his mother’s first husband, N. Çapın, who had indeed been killed in a road accident. His relatives also told him that he had been born out of wedlock from his mother’s extramarital relationship with “İsmail”. He further submitted that the particular point in time when he had found out that the “İsmail” referred to in his national identity card could be İsmail S., an engineer working at a public utility company in Ankara, was 3 October 2003. He argued that he had therefore lodged the action in good time. Lastly, he asked the court to collect all evidence necessary to establish whether İsmail S. was his biological father, including identity register records, witness statements and DNA tests.
İsmail S. objected to the applicant’s paternity claim. He submitted that there was a final and binding court judgment on the matter. He referred to the paternity action filed by the applicant’s mother against him in 1958, which had been dismissed on the grounds that she led an “immoral life” within the meaning of the former Turkish Civil Code (Law no. 743), in force at the material time (see paragraph 21 below). He further maintained that the applicant had not lodged the paternity action within the statutory time-limits and that the applicant’s allegation that he had discovered that he was the applicant’s biological father during his trip to Turkey, after spending twenty-five years abroad, lacked credibility. He added that there had never been a “husband-and-wife” relationship between him and the applicant’s mother.
The first-instance court heard testimony from the applicant’s aunt, his half-sister (from his mother’s marriage to her second husband) and his wife with a view to ascertaining whether the paternity action had been brought within the statutory time-limits and determining the well-foundedness of the applicant’s paternity claim.
The applicant’s aunt testified before the first-instance court that her sister had had an extramarital relationship in the period between 1956 and 1957 with İsmail S., who at that time had been working at a public utility company in Ankara, and that she had become pregnant by him. She stated that she had known İsmail S. very well from the time when her sister had been in a relationship with him and that she had heard that he was still alive and living in Switzerland. She added that after the applicant was born her sister had filed a paternity action against İsmail S., which had been dismissed on the basis of false allegations made by İsmail S. about her sister. She confirmed that after her sister had married for the second time, she had placed the applicant in an orphanage. Lastly, she stated that she did not know how or when the applicant had discovered his father’s identity or whether he was alive or dead.
The applicant’s half-sister stated that she had always thought that the applicant had been the son of her mother’s first husband, who had been killed in a road accident. She claimed that, until her aunt had told her so towards the end of 2002, she had not known that her mother had had an extramarital relationship with a man named İsmail from which the applicant had been born or that that person was alive and living in Switzerland. She explained that she had passed the information about the applicant’s father to the applicant and his wife when they had come to visit her in Turkey sometime in October 2003. She added that her mother and aunt had always told the applicant that his father had been killed in a road accident and had kept the truth about his biological father secret from him.
The applicant’s wife confirmed that her husband had been placed in an orphanage at a very young age and that he had been told that his father was dead. She stated that her husband’s half-sister had told her what she had learnt from her aunt about the applicant’s father. She added that she had passed that information to her husband, who had thus found out that İsmail S. was his biological father and had subsequently filed a paternity action for recognition of his paternity.
The first-instance court requested a copy of the applicant’s birth certificate and the records of his family register. His birth certificate indicated that he had no paternal affiliation (nesepsiz). Moreover, “İsmail” appeared as the first name of his father on both his birth certificate and his family register records.
On 12 October 2005 İsmail S. died and the case continued against his wife and two sons. In November 2006 the heirs of İsmail S. submitted a petition to the first-instance court in which they reiterated the deceased’s objections in reply to the applicant’s claims and asked the court to dismiss the lawsuit. They mentioned that the applicant’s guardian (kayyum), appointed pursuant to the former Turkish Civil Code (see paragraph 21 below), had also filed a paternity action on behalf of the applicant. The guardian’s lawsuit had been examined together with the action filed by the applicant’s mother and dismissed on the same ground as the latter (see paragraph 8 above).
On 3 October 2007 the Ankara Family Court dismissed the lawsuit as time-barred.
The impugned passages of the Ankara Family Court’s judgment read as follows:
“... The lawsuit concerns the establishment of paternal affiliation by virtue of Articles 301 et seq. of the Turkish Civil Code. Pursuant to Article 303 § 2 of the Turkish Civil Code, the child must file the paternity action within one year of reaching the age of majority. The last paragraph of that provision provides that, following the expiry of the one-year time-limit, if there are valid grounds justifying the delay, [the paternity action] may be brought within one month following the elimination of the causes of delay. It follows that before examining the merits of the lawsuit it must be determined whether it was brought within the statutory time-limits.
According to the evidence gathered, the claimant was born in 1958 and therefore the one-year time-limit had already expired; accordingly, [he] filed the present lawsuit relying on the one-month time-limit under Article 303 in fine of the Turkish Civil Code. He was registered as without paternal affiliation from his mother’s extramarital relationship and with “İsmail” as the name of his father. The defendant, İsmail S., is the same “İsmail” against whom his mother filed an unsuccessful paternity action. It is against the ordinary course of life that the claimant, who lives in the United States of America and has attained a certain status, does not know this. The claimant was told that his father İsmail was dead but he discovered in October 2003 that he was not dead and that he was living in Switzerland. Be that as it may, knowing whether the biological father is dead or alive has no bearing on the starting point of the timelimits. In fact, pursuant to Article 301 § 2 of the Turkish Civil Code, if the putative father is alive the lawsuit must be brought against him and, if dead, against his heirs. Therefore, the court must come to the conclusion that the lawsuit was lodged after the expiry of the statutory time-limits ...”.
On 11 November 2007 the applicant appealed against the judgment. He maintained that he had rarely been in contact with his mother and halfsiblings since he had been raised as an orphan and had lived abroad after he left the orphanage. Referring to his passport records, he submitted that he had not returned to Turkey  even for his mother’s funeral in 1996  with the exception of a short trip in 1994. He claimed that the only information he had about his father was his first name, “İsmail”, which was indicated on his national identity card. He had thought that he had been placed in the orphanage because that “İsmail” had been killed in a road accident. He emphasised that he had not been aware, until he instituted the present proceedings, that the person whom his mother had told him was his father was not his biological father or that his mother had previously filed a paternity action against İsmail S. He argued that he had filed the paternity action in time and that in any case the right to know his parentage formed a crucial component of his right to know his identity and therefore should not be subject to any timelimits. He added that he only wished to find out whether or not İsmail S. was actually his biological father and that he was not interested in his assets or the estate since he owned a large real estate business with 150 employees.
On 20 January 2009 the Court of Cassation held that the applicant had failed to prove the existence of grounds capable of justifying his delay in filing the lawsuit and therefore dismissed his appeal.
On 3 March 2009 the applicant requested rectification of the Court of Cassation’s decision of 20 January 2009, reiterating the arguments in his appeal petition.
On 4 May 2009 the Court of Cassation found the applicant’s objections unfounded and dismissed his request for rectification.
After the present application had been lodged with the Court, the applicant applied to the Ankara Family Court on 4 November 2015 to have the paternity proceedings reopened. He referred to decisions of the Turkish Constitutional Court repealing the time-limits in so far as paternity actions filed by the child were concerned (see paragraph 23 below) and to the Court’s judgment in Turnalı v. Turkey (no. 4914/03, 7 April 2009).
The Government submitted that the applicant’s application had not been processed on account of his failure to pay the court fees for service of his application on the opposing parties. They provided the Court with the Ankara Family Court’s interim decision dated 8 December 2015 in which the applicant was asked to submit the addresses of the heirs of İsmail S. within a period of two weeks. They also produced the application submitted by the applicant to that effect on 30 December 2015, on which appeared a handwritten note stating that the fees for service of the application on the heirs of İsmail S., who were living abroad, had not been paid.
The applicant contested the Government’s submissions. He maintained that he had not been asked to pay fees for service of his application on the opposing parties and that he had submitted the addresses of the heirs within the time stipulated. Accordingly, he claimed that his application to have the proceedings reopened was still pending before the Ankara Family Court.
The former Turkish Civil Code was in force when the applicant’s mother and his court-appointed guardian filed a paternity action against İsmail S. Under the former Turkish Civil Code, if a court was informed of a child’s birth outside marriage it was required to immediately appoint a guardian to protect the child’s interests. The law provided that a paternity action could be filed before the child’s birth or at the latest within one year following the child’s birth. It also stipulated that a paternity action should be dismissed if it was established that the mother had behaved “promiscuously” while she was pregnant.
The new Turkish Civil Code (Law no. 4721), which entered into force on 22 November 2001, repealed and replaced the former Turkish Civil Code. The relevant Articles of the new Turkish Civil Code governing paternity actions, which were in force at the time of the domestic proceedings, read as follows:
...”
The Turkish Constitutional Court repealed Article 303 § 2 of the Turkish Civil Code by a decision of 27 October 2011. Subsequently, on 15 March 2012, it repealed Article 303 in fine in so far as the paternity actions filed by the child were concerned. In both decisions, the Constitutional Court ruled that the time-limits disproportionately restricted the child’s right to have its paternal parentage established. Pursuant to the Constitution, the Constitutional Court’s decisions of unconstitutionality do not have a retroactive effect. Moreover, the Constitutional Court specified that the decision of 15 March 2012 would take effect one year following its publication in the Official Gazette dated 21 July 2012. Accordingly, since 22 July 2013 there has no longer been a time-limit under Turkish law for the institution of paternity proceedings by a child against the putative father.
The Government provided the Court with two decisions of the Court of Cassation concerning the collection of DNA evidence in paternity proceedings.
In a decision of 23 May 2013 (E. 2013/7034 - K. 2013/8942) the Court of Cassation reversed the first-instance court’s judgment, which had dismissed the paternity action as time-barred, on the grounds that at the time the first-instance court had delivered its judgment the Turkish Constitutional Court’s decision repealing Article 303 § 2 had already taken effect. Accordingly, it held that the first-instance court should examine the paternity action on its merits and deliver its judgment on the basis of the results of a DNA analysis.
In a decision of 8 January 2013 (E. 2013/11088 - K. 2013/13915) the Court of Cassation reversed the first-instance court’s judgment, which had dismissed the paternity action for lack of sufficient evidence, and ordered the first-instance court to carry out a DNA test and decide accordingly.