The case originated in an application (no. 40631/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Firdavis Favizovich Timergaliyev (“the applicant”), on 5 September 2002.
The applicant, who has been granted legal aid, was represented before the Court by Ms K. Moskalenko and Ms O. Preobrazhenskaya, lawyers at the International Protection Centre in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been ill-treated by the police and that the criminal proceedings against him had been unfair.
On 17 December 2004 the Court decided to communicate the complaints concerning the alleged ill-treatment and unfair trial to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of the application. Having examined the Government's objection, the Court dismissed it.
The applicant was born in 1968. He is currently serving a prison sentence in the Sverdlovskiy Region.
Late on the night of 11 May 2001 the applicant was arrested by the police at the scene of a crime on suspicion of having set fire to his mother's flat. His mother died in the fire and another person, M., received serious injuries. The applicant was taken to the police department of the  in the Sverdlovskiy Region.
According to the applicant, while he was at the police department one of the policemen kicked him twice in the chest.
On 12 May 2001 the applicant was examined by a doctor, who noted a bruise on his head. The applicant stated that he had also complained of pain in the chest but that his chest had not been examined.
After the examination the applicant was transferred to the police department of the town of . According to the applicant, while he was at the police department he was kicked in the legs, kidneys, chest and ribs by two policemen.
On the same day the applicant was questioned by the investigator. He denied involvement in the arson attack and stated that he had been attacked by three strangers who had assaulted him and set fire to the flat. He was subsequently put in a cell in the temporary detention unit of Pervouralsk.
On 15 May 2001 Mr L. was appointed as legal aid counsel for the applicant. The applicant asked the investigator and Mr L. to arrange a medical examination. The investigator refused his request.
On 16 May 2001 the applicant was escorted to detention facility no. 1 in Yekaterinburg. However, he was not admitted to the detention facility because he did not have a medical certificate. He was brought back to Pervouralsk.
On 18 May 2001 he was again escorted to detention facility no. 1 in Yekaterinburg, where – for the second time – he was refused admittance without a medical certificate. On his return to Pervouralsk, he was examined by a doctor, who noted a bruise on his chest. On the same day a chest X-ray was performed. On 18 November 2004 all the X-ray photographs revealing no injuries, including the X-ray photograph of the applicant's chest, were destroyed by the medical staff of Hospital No. 1. A certificate issued by the chief physician of Pervouralsk Hospital No. 1 on 16 February 2005 confirmed that the X-ray had revealed no injury to the applicant's chest.
On 21 May 2001 the applicant was admitted to detention facility no. 1 in Yekaterinburg, where he was examined by a doctor. The doctor noted two bruises on the applicant's forehead and a bruise on his chest. When asked by the doctor about the origin of the bruises, the applicant replied that they had been received outside detention facility no. 1. He signed a statement that he had no complaints and that there was no need for an investigation.
On 27 June 2001 the applicant complained to the prosecutor, alleging ill-treatment.
On 2 July 2001 the Pervouralsk town prosecutor refused to open criminal proceedings. Having reviewed the reports on the applicant's arrest and questioning, he found that the applicant's head had already been injured when the police arrived at the crime scene. The applicant had himself stated to the investigator that he had been assaulted by strangers before the arrest, which provided sufficient explanation for his injuries. There was no evidence that he had been ill-treated by the police.
Following communication of the application, an internal inquiry was conducted in January 2005. On 26 January 2005 the head of the Criminal Investigations Unit of the Sverdlovskiy Regional Department of Internal Affairs found that the applicant had himself affirmed that he had been beaten by strangers prior to the arrest. The strangers had been identified and questioned. They were the applicant's neighbours, who had come running to put out the fire in his flat. They had tried to rescue the applicant's mother from the burning flat, but the applicant had attempted to stop them and subsequently attacked them with an axe. They had had to use force to disarm him. A fight had followed, in the course of which the applicant had been injured. Those facts had been taken into account by the prosecutor, who had refused to open criminal proceedings, finding that the allegations of ill-treatment by the police had been unsubstantiated.
On an unspecified date the case was referred for trial to the , where Mr R. was appointed as legal aid counsel for the applicant.
The applicant stated that on 21 November 2001 he had asked the court to provide him with a hearing aid and arrange a meeting with counsel. No response had been received. The Government claimed that no such requests had been made.
On 5 December 2001 the , in one hearing, found the applicant guilty of aggravated murder, causing bodily harm and intentional destruction of another's property and sentenced him – taking account of his previous criminal record – to eighteen years' imprisonment in a high-security colony.
On 19 December 2001 the applicant lodged an appeal, challenging statements by witnesses and the accuracy of their transcription in the trial record. He advanced the defence of irresistible impulse and asked the court to adopt a different legal characterisation of the imputed offence. He also asked to be given an opportunity to be present at the appeal hearing. On 14 January 2002 he lodged annex no. 1 to his grounds of appeal, concerning the interpretation of the facts.
On 26 February 2002 the Supreme Court of the  held, in an interim decision, that the applicant should be present at the hearing.
On 5 April 2002 the applicant asked the Supreme Court to appoint legal aid counsel for him.
On 22 April 2002 the applicant submitted annex no. 2 to his grounds of appeal, in which he complained of procedural shortcomings of the trial, including ineffective representation by counsel L. and R., who had never backed his requests and applications. He further complained that the trial court had refused to provide him with a hearing aid and that counsel R. had failed to support his request to that effect. He also submitted that he had been ill-treated on the day of the arrest and alleged that the investigator had withdrawn the medical certificate of 21 May 2001 and his X-ray photograph from the case file. Finally, he asked the Supreme Court to inform lawyers from  bar association no. 10, the International Protection Centre and the Human Rights Centre Memorial of the date of the appeal hearing.
On 29 April 2002 the applicant lodged annex no. 3 to his grounds of appeal, in which he asked, in particular, for legal representation before the appeal court, indicating that he had no legal training and was “half deaf”.
On 13 May 2002 the Supreme Court sent telegrams to Pervouralsk bar association no. 1,  Bar Association no. 10, the International Protection Centre and the Human Rights Centre Memorial, informing them that the appeal hearing in the applicant's case would be held on 27 May 2002 at 10 a.m. The telegrams indicated that attendance was not mandatory.
On 27 May 2002 the Supreme Court of the  held the appeal hearing and upheld the judgment of 5 December 2001. The applicant was present but not represented. The appeal judgment was silent on the issue of providing the applicant with a hearing aid. As regards the applicant's right to a defence, the judgment read as follows:
“It can be seen from the case materials that [the applicant] was represented by Counsel Mr L. during the pre-trial investigation and Counsel Mr R. during the trial. He did not refuse the services of these counsel. There are no reasons to believe that they defended his interests improperly, nor do the grounds of appeal indicate any such reasons.”
On 29 May 2002 the applicant complained to the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation about, in particular, the appeal court's refusal to provide him with legal representation. On 9 August 2002 Judge Galiullin responded that there were no grounds on which to institute supervisory review proceedings in respect of the judgments in his case.
A certificate of 6 June 2003 issued by a doctor of the medical unit of facility no. I-299 indicates that the applicant suffers from chronic bilateral sensorineural hearing impairment.
The RSFSR Code of Criminal Procedure (in force until 1 July 2002) establishes that the investigator or the court shall provide the suspect or the accused with legal aid counsel at his request. In cases where counsel chosen by the accused is not available for a long period of time, the investigator or the court may suggest that the accused choose another counsel or, alternatively, appoint another counsel for the accused (Article 48).
Counsel must imperatively be appointed by the investigator or the court if, in particular, the accused is mute, deaf or blind or if he cannot defend himself on account of a physical or mental impairment (Article 49).
The Supreme Court notifies participants in criminal proceedings of the dates of appeal hearings at their request. The non-appearance by participants who have been notified of the date of the appeal hearing does not preclude the examination of the case (Article 336).