The case originated in an application (no. 12895/06) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Armenian national, Mr Ararat Muradkhanyan (“the applicant”), on 27 March 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr L. Simonyan, a lawyer practising in Yerevan, and Mr C. Meyer, a lawyer practising in . The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 12 December 2007 the President of the Third Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1963 and is currently serving his sentence in a penitentiary institution.
Institution of two sets of criminal proceedings against the applicant in Armenia and
On 24 June 2002 criminal proceedings no. 12207102 were instituted on account of premeditated murder of several individuals committed on that day in . The applicant, whose whereabouts were unknown, was suspected of committing the murders.
On 5 July 2002 a charge of illegal possession of firearms was brought against the applicant under Article 232 of the former Criminal Code of Armenia and a motion was filed by the investigator seeking to have him detained.
On the same date the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan granted this motion in the applicant’s absence and ordered his detention for a period of two months, stating:
“Having examined the motion filed by [the investigator] and the materials of the criminal case, taking into account the nature and the gravity of the imputed offence and the fact that the only penalty envisaged for the offence committed by the accused is imprisonment, the court came to the conclusion that the materials obtained in the criminal case provide sufficient grounds to believe that the motion must be granted, since the accused is hiding from the authority dealing with the case and his whereabouts are unknown.”
Since the applicant’s whereabouts were unknown, a search was initiated for him.
On 11 September 2002 the charge against the applicant was modified by the General Prosecutor’s Office of Armenia and he was accused of murder, attempted murder and illegal possession of firearms under Articles 99, 15-99 and 232 of the former Criminal Code of Armenia.
On 25 October 2002 the criminal proceedings against the applicant were stayed since his whereabouts could not be established.
On an unspecified date criminal proceedings no. 01710009 were instituted in Ukraine on account of the murder of an individual committed on 31 March 2001 in .
According to the applicant, on 24 January 2003 he was arrested in Voronezh, Russia, by Ukrainian law enforcement officers and forcibly transported to , where on 27 January 2003 he was placed in custody.
On 30 January 2003 the Kyivsky District Court of Poltava Region ordered the applicant’s detention.
On 13 March 2003 the applicant was formally accused of murder and threat to kill under Articles 115 and 129 of the Criminal Code of Ukraine.
It appears that the applicant’s detention was thereafter extended on several occasions by the Ukrainian courts.
On 30 January 2004 the General Prosecutor’s Office of Armenia requested the applicant’s extradition to  in connection with criminal case no. 12207102.
On 12 April 2004 the Ukrainian authorities decided to extradite the applicant to  and to transmit criminal case no. 01710009 to the Armenian authorities for further investigation.
The applicant’s detention in
On 18 May 2004 the applicant was extradited to , where he was immediately detained.
On 24 May 2004 criminal proceedings no. 12207102 were resumed.
On 21 June 2004 the criminal charge against the applicant was modified and brought into conformity with the new Criminal Code adopted in August 2003. The applicant was accused under Articles 104, 34-104 and 235 of the Criminal Code of murder and attempted murder of several individuals, and illegal possession of firearms.
On 12 July 2004 the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan examined and granted the investigator’s motion seeking to extend the applicant’s detention, which was to expire on 18 July 2004, for another two months, namely until 18 September 2004. The District Court found that it was necessary to extend the applicant’s detention in order to carry out a number of investigative measures. Such measures, according to the investigator, included the identification of the applicant by three eyewitnesses, their further questioning, possible confrontations between the applicant and these witnesses, a number of medical examinations and activities aimed at finding the murder weapon.
On the same date the investigator dealing with the case found that it was impossible to continue the investigation into criminal case no. 01710009 on Armenian territory and decided to return that case to the Ukrainian authorities.
On 13 September 2004 the investigation into criminal case no. 12207102 was over and the applicant was granted access to the case file until 23 September 2004.
On 24 September 2004 the case was transferred to the Erebuni and Nubarashen District Court of Yerevan to be examined on the merits.
On 6 October 2004 the District Court decided to set the case down for trial, fixing the date of the first hearing for 14 October 2004. This decision also stated that “the preventive measure imposed on the accused should remain unchanged”.
Between 14 October 2004 and 13 October 2005 the District Court held 52 hearings, with a maximum interval of about one and a half months, during which numerous witnesses were questioned and evidence was examined. The applicant remained in detention throughout this period.
On 14 October 2005 the Erebuni and Nubarashen District Court of Yerevan decided to remit the case for further investigation. It found that the investigating authority had failed to ensure a fair examination of the case and to carry out an objective and thorough investigation. In such circumstances, the court was prevented from reaching an objective conclusion on the applicant’s guilt or innocence and the omissions in question could not be corrected during the trial. The District Court also stated in its decision that “the detention should remain unchanged”.
The applicant, the prosecutor and the victims lodged appeals against this decision. In his appeal the applicant argued, inter alia, that the District Court had failed to provide reasons for its decision to extend his detention or to take into account the fact that he had been detained since 2003 in violation of Article 5 of the Convention.
On 9 November 2005 the Criminal and Military Court of Appeal upheld the decision of the District Court, adding that “the reasons for keeping the applicant in detention still persisted”.
The applicant, the prosecutor and the victims lodged appeals on points of law. In his appeal on points of law the applicant reiterated his arguments raised in his appeal against the decision of the District Court of 14 October 2005.
On 16 December 2005 the Court of Cassation decided to leave the applicant’s appeal unexamined, finding that it did not meet the formal requirements. The Court of Cassation added that the applicant’s detention “should remain unchanged”.
On 26 December 2005 the case file was transferred to the General Prosecutor’s Office.
On 27 December 2005 the investigator took over the case and filed a motion seeking to extend the applicant’s detention by two months, namely until 28 February 2006. It was stated in the motion that the applicant had been in pre-trial detention from 18 May to 13 September 2004, while his detention period had been authorised until 18 September 2004. This was the second motion seeking an extension of the applicant’s pre-trial detention. It was necessary to extend his detention, taking into account the need to carry out a number of investigative measures, the fact that the applicant had committed a grave crime and that remaining at large he might obstruct the proceedings and abscond, as well as the fact that the applicant’s detention was to expire on 30 December 2005.
On 29 December 2005 the applicant lodged objections to this motion. He submitted, inter alia, that the motion had been filed in violation of the time-limits prescribed by Article 139 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CCP) (see paragraph 54 below). In accordance with the relevant provisions of the CCP, detention in pre-trial proceedings could be imposed and extended only by a court upon an investigator’s motion. The last occasion on which his detention had been extended was on 12 July 2004 until 18 September 2004. Even if the time-limits prescribed by Article 139 § 1 of the CCP were to be calculated from the Court of Cassation’s decision of 16 December 2005, they would still have been violated, given that 13 days had already passed since that date. As to the investigator’s argument that his detention was to expire on 30 December 2005, this was not true since his detention had expired on 18 September 2004. The CCP required that a detainee be released if the detention period had expired and had not been extended. In his case it was not even clear which detention period, that is authorised by which court decision, was being extended. He was being kept in detention without a court decision. The applicant lastly asked the court to indicate the court decision, pursuant to which his detention period was to expire on 30 December 2005.
On the same date the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan granted this motion, finding:
“Having examined the motion filed by [the investigator] and the materials of the criminal case, having heard the accused and his lawyers, the court has found that it is necessary to extend [the applicant’s] detention period in order to carry out a number of investigative measures in the criminal case...”
On 10 January 2006 the applicant lodged an appeal in which he made submissions similar to the ones in his objections. He further added that the District Court’s decision was unreasoned and that it had failed to address the arguments raised in his objections.
On 3 February 2006 the Criminal and Military Court of Appeal found that the decision of the District Court was reasoned and decided to uphold it. This decision stated that it entered into force from the moment of its delivery.
On 9 February 2006 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law, raising similar arguments.
By a letter of 27 February 2006 the Chairman of the Court of Cassation returned the appeal unexamined in accordance with the decision of the Council of Court Chairmen (ՀՀ դատարանների նախագահների խորհուրդ) of 8 December 2005 taken in connection with the entry into force of the constitutional amendments concerning the status of the Court of Cassation.
On 23 February and 26 April 2006 the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court, upon the investigator’s relevant motions, extended the applicant’s detention on two further occasions. In addition to the reasons given before, the District Court stated that the applicant, if released, could obstruct the investigation of the case by exerting unlawful influence on persons involved in the proceedings and could abscond.
These decisions were upheld by the Criminal and Military Court of Appeal on 21 March and 23 May 2006 respectively. The Court of Appeal added that the applicant was accused of a very grave crime, that he had fled before and a search had been initiated to find him and that, if released, he could abscond and obstruct the investigation.
On 4 May 2006 the Court of Cassation once again decided to leave the applicant’s appeal on points of law lodged against the Court of Appeal’s decision of 21 March 2006 unexamined apparently for the same reasons as before.
On 24 May 2006 the case was transmitted to the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan to be examined on the merits.
On 25 May 2006 the applicant requested the District Court to terminate the prosecution and to release him.
On 2 June 2006 the District Court decided to set the case down for trial, fixing the date of the first hearing for 19 June 2006. In its decision, the District Court stated that the detention was to remain unchanged.
The hearing of 19 June 2006 was adjourned for unknown reasons for an indefinite period of time.
On 16 October 2006 the District Court held the first hearing on the applicant’s case. This was followed by the court hearings of 17 and 18 October 2006. The District Court held further hearings on 14-16, 20 and 22-23 November 2006.
At the hearing of 20 November 2006 the applicant and his lawyers verbally requested that the preventive measure imposed on him be modified and that he be released on the ground that, inter alia, his detention had been lengthy.
On the same date the District Court decided to refuse this request, finding:
“[The applicant] has been accused of crimes envisaged under Article 104 § 2 (1) and (6), Article 34-104 § 2 (1) and (6) and Article 235 § 1 of the Criminal Code. Detention was imposed on him as a preventive measure by a court decision in the course of the investigation. The reasons contained in the above-mentioned decision still persist at this stage of the proceedings...”
Further hearings were held on 22 and 23 November 2006,
On 24 September 2007 the District Court of Yerevan found the applicant guilty and sentenced him to life imprisonment. At least 37 witnesses were heard in the course of the proceedings and a number of investigative measures undertaken, including several medical and other examinations.
Article 92 prescribes that in  the courts of general jurisdiction are the first instance courts, the appeal courts and the Court of Cassation. The highest judicial instance, except matters falling within constitutional jurisdiction, is the Court of Cassation which is called upon to ensure the uniform application of the law.
The relevant provisions of the Criminal Code read as follows:
Article 34: Attempted crime
“An attempted crime is a premeditated action (inaction) aimed directly at committing a crime, if the commission of the crime has not been completed due to circumstances which were beyond the person’s will.”
Article 104: Murder
“2.  Murder: (1) of two or more individuals; ... (6) [committed] in a manner dangerous to the lives of many ... shall be punishable by imprisonment from eight to fifteen years or life imprisonment.”
Article 235: Illegal acquisition, sale, possession, trafficking or carrying of arms, ammunition, explosives or explosive devices
“Illegal acquisition, sale, possession, trafficking or carrying of firearms, except for smooth-bore firearms and their cartridges, of ammunition, rifle cartridges, explosives or explosive devices shall be punishable by a maximum of three months of detention or a maximum of three years of imprisonment.”
The relevant provisions of the CCP, as in force at the material time, read as follows:
Article 65: The rights and obligations of the accused
“2.  The accused, in accordance with the procedure prescribed by this Code, is entitled: ... (12) to file motions...”
Article 134: The concept and types of preventive measures
“1.  Preventive measures are measures of compulsion imposed on the suspect or the accused in order to prevent their inappropriate behaviour in the course of the criminal proceedings and to ensure the enforcement of the judgment.
Preventive measures include: (1) detention; (2) bail; ...
Detention and bail can be imposed only on the accused...
...Bail is considered as an alternative preventive measure to detention and can be imposed only if a court decision has been issued to detain the accused.”
Article 135: Grounds for imposing a preventive measure
“1.  The court, the prosecutor, the investigator or the body of inquiry can impose a preventive measure only when the materials obtained in the criminal case provide sufficient grounds to believe that the suspect or the accused may: (1) abscond from the authority dealing with the case; (2) obstruct the examination of the case during the pre-trial or trial proceedings by exerting unlawful influence on persons involved in the criminal proceedings, by concealing or falsifying materials significant for the case, by failing to appear upon the summons of the authority dealing with the case without valid reasons or by other means; (3) commit an act prohibited by criminal law; (4) avoid criminal liability and serving the imposed sentence; and (5) hinder the execution of the judgment.
Detention and its alternative preventive measure can be imposed on the accused only if the highest punishment prescribed for the [imputed] crime is imprisonment for a period exceeding one year or if there are sufficient grounds to believe that the suspect or the accused can commit any of the actions referred to in the first paragraph of this article.
When deciding on the necessity of imposing a preventive measure or choosing the type of preventive measure to be imposed on the suspect or the accused, the following should be taken into account: (1) the nature and the gravity of the imputed offence; (2) the personality of the suspect or the accused; (3) age and state of health; (4) sex; (5) occupation; (6) family status and dependants, if any; (7) property situation; (8) whether he has a permanent residence; and (9) other important circumstances.”
Article 136: Imposition of a preventive measure
“2.  Detention and bail shall be imposed only by a court decision upon the investigator’s or the prosecutor’s motion or of the court’s own motion during the trial proceedings of a criminal case. The court can replace detention with bail also upon the motion of the defence.”
Article 137: Detention
“1.  Detention is the holding of a person in custody in places and conditions prescribed by law.
...
When deciding on detention, the court shall also decide on the possibility of releasing the accused on bail and, if such release is possible, shall set the amount of bail...
The court’s decision to choose detention as a preventive measure may be contested before a higher court.”
Article 138: Detention period
“1.  The accused’s detention period shall be calculated from the moment of his being actually taken into custody when being arrested or, if he was not arrested, from the moment of enforcement of the court decision imposing detention.
...
During the pre-trial proceedings of a criminal case the detention period may not exceed two months, except for cases prescribed by this Code ... During the pre-trial proceedings of a criminal case the running of the detention period shall be suspended on the date when the prosecutor transmits the criminal case to the court or when the accused or his lawyer are familiarising themselves with the case file or when detention is cancelled as a preventive measure.
During the pre-trial proceedings of a criminal case the accused’s detention period may be extended by a court up to one year in view of the particular complexity of the case.
During the pre-trial proceedings of a criminal case the accused’s detention period may not exceed ... one year...
There is no maximum detention period during the trial proceedings.”
Article 139: Extension of the detention period
“1.  If it is necessary to extend the accused’s detention period, the investigator or the prosecutor must submit a well-grounded motion to the court not later than ten days before the expiry of the detention period. The court, agreeing with the necessity of extending the detention period, shall adopt an appropriate decision not later than five days before the expiry of the detention period.
When deciding on the extension of the detention period, the court is entitled to accept the possibility of releasing the accused on bail and to set the amount of bail.
When deciding on the extension of the accused’s detention period, the court shall extend the detention period within the limits prescribed by this Code, on each occasion for a period not exceeding two months.”
Article 288: Judicial control of the lawfulness and reasoning of a decision imposing or not imposing detention as a preventive measure
“1.  The judicial control of lawfulness and reasons of imposing or not imposing detention as a preventive measure, as well as of extending or refusing to extend a detention period, shall be performed by the appeal court.”
Article 292: Decisions to be adopted when preparing a case for trial
“The judge who has taken over a case shall examine the materials of the case and within fifteen days from the date of taking over the case shall adopt one of the following decisions: (1) to set the case down for trial...”
Article 293: The decision to set the case down for trial
“2.  The decision setting the case down for trial shall contain ... a decision cancelling, modifying or imposing a preventive measure...”
Article 300: A decision on preventive measures
“When adopting decisions ... the court is obliged to decide on the issue whether or not to impose on the accused a preventive measure and whether or not the preventive measure, if such has been imposed, is justified.”
Article 311: Remittal of a criminal case for further investigation
“The court shall remit the case for further investigation:
1)  if there has been a substantial violation of procedural law by the body of inquiry or the investigating authority which cannot be eliminated during the trial proceedings;
2)  upon the prosecutor’s motion, when there are grounds to substitute the prosecution with a more severe one or different from the initial one for factual reasons.”
Article 312: Deciding on a preventive measure
“The court, in the course of the trial proceedings, having heard the defendant’s explanation and the opinion of the parties, is entitled to impose, modify or cancel a preventive measure in respect of the defendant.”
Article 403: Review of the judgment and decisions through cassation proceedings [as in force at the material time]
“Judgments and decisions of the first instance court and the court of appeal which have entered into legal force, and judgments and decisions of the court of appeal which have not entered into legal force can be reviewed through cassation proceedings.”
Paragraph 4 of this decision stated that Article 137 § 5 of the CCP prescribed that the court’s decision to choose detention as a preventive measure might be contested before a higher court. However, the CCP did not provide for a procedure of contesting the lawfulness and reasons of the appeal court’s decisions imposing and extending detention. Hence, in such cases the appeal court’s decisions might be contested before the Court of Cassation.
This decision states that Paragraph 4 of Decision no. 20 of the Council of Court Chairmen of 12 February 2000 must be repealed, taking into account that under Article 92 of the Constitution the Court of Cassation, as the highest general jurisdiction court, is called upon to ensure the uniform application of the law.
This decision sets out the new text of Paragraph 4 of Decision no. 20 of the Council of Court Chairmen of 12 February 2000, which provides that under Article 92 of the Constitution the highest judicial instance is the Court of Cassation which is called upon to ensure the uniform application of the law. In such circumstances an appeal to the highest judicial instance against decisions taken in pre-trial proceedings, including any decision on detention, does not follow from its constitutional status. Such appeals must be left unexamined. In exceptional cases they may be examined by the Court of Cassation if they raise issues of importance for judicial practice. At the same time, appeals may be brought against decisions of the appeal court whereby it imposes detention at first instance.