The case concerns the applicants’ complaint that their conviction for neglect of official duties had breached their rights under Article 7 of the Convention.
The first and second applicants were born in 1964 and 1960 respectively. They were represented before the Court by Mr G. Pipia, a lawyer practising in Zugdidi.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr B. Dzamashvili, of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
Between 1994 and 2006 the applicants were employed as inspectors at a regional office of the Unified State Social Insurance Fund (“the Fund”). As is apparent from the material in the case file, they were responsible for identifying pension recipients who were simultaneously employed and in receipt of remuneration despite receiving social benefits disbursed by the Fund. After identification of such individuals, the applicants were required to ensure the recovery of the unlawfully received pensions from their recipients and the return of the sums to the Fund’s bank account.
On 10 August 2006 an investigation was opened into an alleged offence of neglect of official duties under Article 342 § 1 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 18 below) in respect of several employees of the Fund.
On 19 October 2006 the applicants were charged with neglect of official duties in relation to their employment as inspectors in the period between 1995 and 2004, which had allegedly resulted in several employed persons who were beneficiaries of the Fund unlawfully receiving pensions. The alleged resulting damage to the State was 4,532 Georgian laris (GEL – approximately 1,800 euros (EUR)) and GEL 2,839 (approximately EUR 1,135) with respect to the first and the second applicants respectively. The applicants were released on bail pending trial.
On 26 October 2006 the applicants’ contracts were terminated on account of the criminal proceedings pending against them.
On 16 January 2008 a colleague of the applicants received a letter from the Parliament’s Legal Affairs Committee offering, in reply to a query she had previously submitted, an interpretation of the personal scope of the crime of official misconduct provided for in Chapter XXXIX of the Criminal Code, and an opinion as to whether the applicants’ colleague had fallen within the personal scope of that crime between the years 2002 and 2005. The letter, signed by the Chairperson of the Legal Affairs Committee, stated that as an employee of the Fund, the applicants’ colleague had not fallen within the personal scope of the crime of official misconduct until the adoption of the amendment of 25 July 2006 relating to the general note appended to Article 332 (see paragraph 19 below). The document in question contained a note at the end specifying that the interpretation offered by it did not have binding legal force.
On 3 July 2008 the Zugdidi District Court convicted the applicants of neglect of official duties. The court did not impose a custodial sentence despite the prosecutor’s application to that end and sentenced each of the applicants to a fine in the amount of GEL 500 (approximately EUR 220).
On 31 July 2008 the applicants lodged an appeal. They argued, among other things, that their conviction had not been foreseeable. It was only since 2006, as a result of legislative amendments to the Criminal Code (see paragraph 19 below), that staff members of the Fund had fallen within the personal scope of the offence of neglect of official duties. Furthermore, their duties, as set out in the relevant regulations, had not been clearly defined. As a result, they could not have anticipated that their negligence, if indeed there had been any, could have constituted a crime committed by an official or a person of equivalent status. Moreover, neglect of official duties under Article 342 § 1 of the Criminal Code was a minor offence with a twoyear statute of limitations that had already expired on 19 October 2006 when the charges had been brought in respect of offences allegedly committed before 1 January 2004. In the applicants’ submission, at the time the Zugdidi District Court delivered its judgment, “no legal ground had existed to justify the imposition of criminal responsibility”. Therefore, the applicants submitted that they should have been acquitted or, “even accepting that they had committed the offence imputed to them, they should [have been] released from serving the sentence, in accordance with Article 71 of the Criminal Code and Article 28 §§ 1 (e) and 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure” (see paragraphs 18 and 20 below).
On 19 November 2008 the Kutaisi Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal and upheld the lower court’s judgment. In the descriptive part of the judgment the appellate court noted the applicants’ positions at the Fund, stating that they were “regarded as officials” (“ითვლება მოხელედ”). The Kutaisi Court of Appeal reasoned that the applicants’ duties (see paragraph 4 above) had been clearly established under various regulations concerning the Fund. It noted that as of 7 May 2000 the Fund had been classified as a public-law legal entity (see paragraph 23 below) and concluded that “an inspector [of the Fund was] covered by the crime of official misconduct as [he or she] carried out public functions as part of the [relevant] public-law legal entity.” As regards the applicants’ request to be released from the sentence on account of the expiry of the statute of limitations, the court found that a fifteen-year time-limit for prosecution, as had been in force at the time of the trial (rather than at the time of the alleged commission of the offences imputed to the applicants), should have been applied to the situation in question.
On an unspecified date the applicants lodged an appeal with the Supreme Court. Among other things, the applicants submitted that at the material time they had been neither “officials” nor persons of equivalent status within the meaning of Article 342 § 1 of the Criminal Code. It was only following the legislative amendments of 25 July 2006 that the provision in question had started to apply to persons in a similar position, as had also been confirmed by the Parliament’s Legal Affairs Committee (see paragraph 8 above). Alternatively, in the event that the Supreme Court had decided not to “terminate the proceedings on account of the absence of a crime ... they should [have been] released from serving the sentence, in accordance with Article 71 of the Criminal Code and Article 28 §§ 1 (e) and 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure” because prosecution of the offence in question had been time-barred (see paragraphs 18 and 20 below).
On 28 May 2009 the Supreme Court adopted a reasoned decision following an oral hearing. The descriptive part of the decision noted that the applicants had been employed by the Fund and “had been regarded as officials” (“ითვლებოდა მოხელედ”). As far as the first applicant was concerned, it was noted that she had been negligent in her duties in respect of three beneficiaries of the Fund between 1995 and 2004, 1990 and 2004, and 1997 and 2004 respectively. As concerns the second applicant, her negligence had been revealed in respect of three beneficiaries between 1998 and 2004, 2001 and 2004, and 1998 and 2001 respectively. The second applicant had also failed to stop issuing pensions in respect of three individuals since 2002.
The Supreme Court reproduced in its decision the applicants’ arguments that they had been neither public servants nor persons of equivalent status, and that the personal scope of Chapter XXXIX of the Criminal Code had not included employees of the Fund until the general note appended to Article 332 of the Code had been amended in 2006, that point having been confirmed, according to the applicants, by the Parliament’s Legal Affairs Committee. In response, the Supreme Court noted that the applicants had been tasked with revealing beneficiaries of the Fund who had been in gainful employment and ensuring the return of the pensions paid to such individuals back to the Fund’s account. In that connection, the Supreme Court noted that as of 7 May 2000 the Fund had been classified as a public-law legal entity (see paragraph 23 below) and concluded that “an inspector [of the Fund was] covered by the offence of official misconduct as [he or she] carried out public functions as part of the [relevant] public-law legal entity.” The Supreme Court therefore upheld the appellate court’s judgment in respect of the applicants’ conviction.
As regards the question of the statute of limitations, the Supreme Court agreed with the applicants that at the material time, the legislation had provided for a period of two years. The offences imputed to the applicants having been committed before 1 January 2004, the two-year statute of limitations had already expired by the time the charges had been brought against them. Therefore, the Supreme Court granted the applicants’ request to be “released from serving the sentence” (see paragraphs 10 and 12 above) amending the appellate court’s judgment only in respect of the applicants’ exemption from the relevant sentences (fines in the amount of GEL 500 (approximately EUR 220) in respect of each applicant) with the further effect of no criminal record existing in respect of the relevant offence (see paragraph 18 below).
On an unspecified date the applicants instituted proceedings against the Social Services Agency (the legal successor of the Fund), seeking damages on account of the termination of their employment contracts. On 26 October 2009 the Zugdidi District Court dismissed the application. Noting the criminal proceedings instituted against the applicants and their subsequent convictions, the court reasoned that the termination of the applicants’ contracts had had a valid legal basis. That decision was upheld by the appellate court on 29 January 2010 and by the Supreme Court on 10 May 2010.
On 31 August 2009 the applicants gave their representative a power of attorney authorising him, unconditionally, to represent their interests before all domestic courts and before the European Court of Human Rights by submitting all necessary applications on their behalf. On 9 November 2009, relying on the document in question, the applicants’ representative submitted the present application to the Court.
The Criminal Code (1999), as it stood at the material time, provided as follows:
Article 71 § 1 (a) (Exemption from criminal liability on account of the expiry of the statute of limitations)
“An individual shall be exempted from criminal liability if ... two years have elapsed since the commission of an offence for which the sentence prescribed by [this Code] does not exceed two years.”
Article 79 § 2 (Criminal record)
“A person whose sentence is annulled is regarded as having no criminal record.”
Article 342 § 1 (Neglect of official duties)
“Neglect of official duties, that is, the non-performance or improper performance of official duties by an official (‘მოხელე’) or a person of equivalent status, owing to a careless attitude towards such duties, which has resulted in a substantial breach of the rights of an individual [or] a legal entity, [or] of the lawful interests of the public or the State, shall be punished by a fine, limitation of freedom for up to six months, or imprisonment for up to two years.”
On 14 August 2003 the Criminal Code was amended and a note was added to Article 332 (abuse of official authority) specifying that “the crime of official misconduct specified in Articles 332, 333, 334, 335, 336, 338, 339, 341 and 342 of the present Chapter [XXXIX] also covers crimes committed by representatives of the International Criminal Court”. On 16 December 2005 the note in question was amended as follows: “The crime of official misconduct specified in Articles 332, 333, 334, 335, 336, 338, 339, 341 and 342 of the present Chapter also covers crimes committed by representatives of the International Criminal Court and position-holders (“თანამდებობის პირი”) who perform administrative acts (including members of a collegial body) under the General Administrative Code of Georgia.” On 25 July 2006 the note was amended again to read as follows: “The crime of official misconduct contemplated in this Chapter also covers [crimes committed by] representatives of the International Criminal Court and [by] position-holders who perform administrative acts under the General Administrative Code of Georgia [or by] staff of agencies exercising public authority.”
The Code of Criminal Procedure (1998), as it stood at the material time, provided as follows:
Article 28: Grounds for terminating [criminal proceedings]
“1. [Criminal proceedings] shall not be initiated, and if initiated, shall be terminated: ...
(e) if the statute of limitations provided for by the Criminal Code of Georgia has expired; ...
It is not permissible to terminate [criminal proceedings] under subparagraphs c, e, f, k, n and o of this Article if the accused is against such a termination (თუ ბრალდებული ამის წინააღმდეგია). In such cases, [criminal proceedings] shall continue under the ordinary procedure and shall be terminated either by an acquittal, or by a conviction and the exemption of the convicted person from serving the sentence.”
Chapter XXVIII of the CCP provided for a right to be rehabilitated in respect of persons prosecuted as a result of “unlawful or groundless” prosecutions. In particular, Article 219 § 2 provided that a judgment of acquittal was one of the grounds for rehabilitation, while Article 219 § 3 provided that rehabilitation also applied to any person who had been prosecuted before the domestic courts but the prosecution was terminated on any grounds referred to in Article 28 of the CCP. Under Article 223 § 2 (a) rehabilitated persons who had been dismissed from their employment owing to the criminal proceedings against them, were entitled to compensation in respect of the lost income; and to a right to be restored to previous employment or a comparable position (Article 226 § 1).
The Act on Public-Law Legal Entities (1999), as it stood at the material time, provided as follows:
Section 2: Definition of a public-law legal entity
“A public-law legal entity is an organisation separate from State government bodies, established under a presidential decree (ბრძანებულება) or an administrative act of a State government body based on law, which carries out political, State, social, educational, cultural or other public activities independently, subject to State control.”
Under Presidential Decree no. 181 dated 7 May 2000, the Unified State Social Security Fund – the legal predecessor of the Fund, which had existed since 1991 under the auspices of the Ministry of Health and Social Security – was designated as a public-law legal entity (see paragraph 22 above). Presidential Decree no. 558 dated 31 December 2002 (on the establishment of the Unified State Social Insurance Fund as a public-law legal entity) merged the previously separately functioning State Medical Insurance Company with the Fund. These two documents listed the Fund’s functions as follows: creation, review and implementation of State programmes in the sphere of social insurance and security, medical aid, employment and other fields. It was operating under the authority of the Ministry of Labour, Health and Social Affairs.
The Government provided the Court with, among other material, a copy of a Supreme Court decision (Chamber of Criminal Cases, case no. 2კ96კოლ.-02, 15 January 2001) according to which the Supreme Court endorsed the lower courts’ reasoning that security officers at a metro station who had been employed by the Ministry of the Interior and had effectively been police officers fell within the personal scope of Article 332 of the Criminal Code as persons with equivalent status to that of an official “owing to their position” (“სამსახურებრივი მდგომარეობიდან გამომდინარე”).