The case originated in an application (no. 63997/00) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Vladimir Aleksandrovich Fedorov (“the applicant”), on 12 November 2000.
The applicant was represented by Mr A.V. Kiryanov, Mrs E.V. Kiryanova and Mr K.N. Lugantsev, lawyers practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant complained, in particular, under Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (b) and (c) of the Convention about the quashing in supervisory review proceedings of the final judgment in his criminal case held by the Taganrog Town Court on 24 September 1999 and about a violation of his right to defend himself in those proceedings.
By a decision of 6 October 2005, the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant was born in 1967 and lives in , Rostov Region.
On 24 September 1999 the Taganrog Town Court convicted the applicant and three other persons of theft of cigarettes from a container in a sea port, an offence provided for by Article 158 § 2 (a) of the Criminal Code. The applicant was sentenced to two years’ imprisonment, and released conditionally with six months’ parole. The parties did not appeal and the judgment became final seven days later.
On an unspecified date the prosecutor of the Rostov Region lodged an application for supervisory review, seeking to have the judgment quashed on the ground that there had been substantial violations of the procedural law by the trial court.
On 27 January 2000 the Presidium of the  conducted supervisory review proceedings. The prosecutor, but not the applicant or his counsel, was present at the hearing. The Presidium quashed the judgment of 24 September 1999 in the part concerning the applicant on grounds that the trial court had failed to examine and assess the evidence correctly and that its findings were inconsistent with the evidence. These considerations, in the Presidium’s view, justified the quashing of the judgment under Article 379 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The case was remitted for fresh examination by the first-instance court.
On 14 February 2000 the  examined another case challenging Article 377 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see below) and found that provision incompatible with the Constitution in so far as it allowed a supervisory review in a criminal case to the detriment of the acquitted or convicted person.
According to the applicant, neither he nor his counsel was informed of the hearing held on 27 January 2000 or of the quashing. He learned about these developments in the case on 13 September 2000, when summoned by the  for the fresh examination of his case. Thus, subsequently on an unspecified date the applicant requested the Supreme Court to reverse, by way of supervisory review, the decision of 27 January 2000 in the light of the ’s ruling of 14 February 2000. In June 2001 the Deputy President of the Supreme Court informed the applicant that his request was dismissed on the ground that the decision in the applicant’s case had been adopted before the ’s ruling.
The applicant applied to the  requesting that the ruling of 14 February 2000 be extended to his case. On 21 December 2001 the  refused to examine the applicant’s complaint as its subject matter was identical to that of the case examined on 14 February 2000. It held that the ruling of 14 February 2000 applied to all persons whose cases had been reopened on the basis of Article 377 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, hence the decision of 27 January 2000 could still be reversed in ordinary proceedings.
In the meantime, on 27 December 2000 the , composed of one professional and two lay judges, conducted a fresh examination of the criminal case against the applicant. He was found guilty of theft and convicted under Article 158 § 2 (а) and (c) of the Criminal Code, and given a conditional sentence of two years and six months’ imprisonment with six months’ parole. With reference to the Amnesty Act of 26 May 2000 the court ordered that the applicant in any event be relieved from serving his sentence. The parties did not appeal and the judgment became final seven days later.
On 5 November 2003 the prosecutor of the Rostov Region lodged an application for supervisory review, requesting the Presidium of the Rostov Regional Court to amend the judgment of 27 December 2000 by reclassifying the applicant’s actions under Article 158 § 2 (a) of the Criminal Code, and to reduce the sentence to a year and a half of conditional imprisonment. According to the Government, the applicant was informed of the application for supervisory review and of the hearing which was scheduled for 27 November 2003.
On 27 November 2003 the Presidium of the  granted the prosecutor’s application and amended the judgment of 27 December 2000 accordingly. The court ordered that the applicant be relieved from serving the sentence due to the Amnesty Act of 26 May 2000 remained in force.
Article 158
...
Theft committed
(a)  by a group of persons acting in conspiracy;
(b)  with unlawful entry of premises or other storage;
(c)  with causing substantial damage to an individual;
...
is punishable by a fine ..., or community works ..., or correctional works ..., or imprisonment of up to five years.
Section VI, Chapter 30, of the 1960 Code of Criminal Procedure (Уголовно-процессуальный кодекс РСФСР), as in force at the material time, allowed certain officials to challenge a judgment which had become effective and to have the case reviewed on points of law and procedure. The supervisory review procedure (Articles 371-83 of the Code) is distinct from proceedings in which a case is reviewed in the light of newly established facts (Articles 384-90). However, similar rules apply to both procedures (Article 388).
Under the terms of Article 356 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, a judgment takes effect and is enforceable from the date on which the appeal court renders its decision or, if no appeal has been lodged, once the time-limit for appeal has expired.
Relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure read as follows:
Article 379
Grounds for setting aside judgments which have become effective
“The grounds for quashing or varying a judgment [on supervisory review] are the same as [those for setting aside judgments (which have not taken effect) on appeal] ...”
Article 342
Grounds for quashing or varying judgments [on appeal]
“The grounds for quashing or varying a judgment on appeal are as follows:
(i)  prejudicial or incomplete investigation or pre-trial or court examination;
(ii)  inconsistency between the facts of the case and the conclusions reached by the court;
(iii)  a grave violation of procedural law;
(iv)  misapplication of [substantive] law;
(v)  discrepancy between the sentence and the seriousness of the offence or the convicted person’s personality.”
Article 371 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provided that the power to lodge a request for a supervisory review could be exercised by the Prosecutor-General, the President of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation or their respective deputies in relation to any judgment other than those of the Presidium of the Supreme Court, and by the presidents of the regional courts in respect of any judgment of a regional or subordinate court. A party to criminal or civil proceedings could solicit the intervention of those officials for a review.
Article 373 of the Code of Criminal Procedure set a limitation period of one year during which a request calling for the supervisory review of an acquittal could be brought by an authorised official. The period ran from the date on which the acquittal took effect.
Under Articles 374, 378 and 380 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, a request for supervisory review was to be considered by the judicial board (the Presidium) of the appropriate court. The court could examine the case on the merits, was not bound by the scope and grounds of the request for supervisory review and was obliged to conduct a full review of the evidence.
The Presidium could dismiss or grant the request. If the request was dismissed, the earlier judgment remained operative. If it granted the request, the Presidium could decide to quash the judgment and terminate the criminal proceedings, remit the case for a new investigation, order reconsideration by a court at any instance, uphold a first-instance judgment reversed on appeal, or vary or uphold any of the earlier judgments.
Article 380 §§ 2 and 3 provided that the Presidium could, in the same proceedings, reduce a sentence or amend the legal classification of a conviction or sentence to the defendant’s advantage. If it found a sentence or legal classification to be too lenient, it was obliged to remit the case for reconsideration.
Under Article 377 of the Code the public prosecutor took part in a hearing of a supervisory review. A convicted person and his or her counsel could be summoned if a supervisory review court found it necessary. If summoned, they were to be given an opportunity to examine the application for supervisory review and to make oral submissions at the hearing.
In Ruling no. 2-P of 14 February 2000, the  declared Article 377 incompatible with the Russian Constitution to the extent that it had permitted the supervisory review hearing to decide on an application for supervisory review which was to the detriment of the convicted or acquitted person. The Court held that such a person and his or her counsel should be able to study the application, they should be notified of the date and place of the hearing and given an opportunity to present their position on the arguments in the application.