The case concerns, in particular, a complaint under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 that the applicants were awarded disproportionately low amounts of compensation when their property was expropriated by the State for the construction of roads.
The applicants were born in 1971, 1951 and 1944 respectively and live in Sofia. The first applicant was represented by Ms N. Sedefova, and the second and third applicants were represented by Mr A. Kashamov; both lawyers practise in Sofia.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms I. Nedyalkova of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In 2007 the Council of Ministers (Government) expropriated a number of privatelyowned plots of land on the outskirts of Sofia for the construction of a junction on the Sofia-Varna motorway.
In two decisions dated 21 and 25 February 2008 the local body responsible for deciding on the restitution of agricultural land – the Kremikovtsi agriculture department – ordered the restitution of three plots of land in the same area to their pre-collectivisation owners. On 3 July 2008 the first applicant bought the plots of land from those people’s heir for 4,000 Bulgarian levs (BGN, equivalent to 2,046 euros (EUR)). In 2010 he obtained three notarial deeds.
The first of the plots at issue measured 19,187 square metres and was described in the relevant documents as eighth category “marshland”. Its valuation for taxation purposes was BGN 671.50 (EUR 343).
The other two plots, totalling 4,643 square metres, were described as “other agricultural land” of the tenth category. The Government submitted that before the construction of the motorway junction, those plots had partially consisted of ponds – the result of previous gravel extraction. The two plots’ valuation for taxation purposes was BGN 41.80 (EUR 21).
In August 2011 the Minister of Public Works proposed the expropriation of several more plots of land necessary for the construction of the junction, including parts of those acquired by the first applicant. The plots had not been the subject of the initial expropriation (see paragraph 4 above) as at that time they had not been privately owned. On 15 September 2011 the Council of Ministers decided to expropriate the land at issue, awarding monetary compensation to the owners.
The land expropriated from the first applicant measured 21,323 square metres. The total compensation awarded to him in the decision of 15 September 2011, calculated in accordance with the Regulation on the calculation of the value of agricultural land (hereinafter “the Regulation”, see paragraph 30 below), amounted to BGN 1,748 (EUR 894) – on average about BGN 0.08 (EUR 0.04) per square metre.
The first applicant applied for a judicial review of the Council of Minister’s decision, arguing that the compensation was too low and in breach of section 32(2) of the State Property Act 1996 (hereinafter “the 1996 Act”, see paragraph 25 below). He pointed out that the Supreme Administrative Court had awarded compensation varying from BGN 55 (EUR 28) to about BGN 101 (EUR 52) per square metre for the land expropriated for the same purpose in 2007 in the area appertaining to the same village (землище) (see paragraph 4 above).
The Supreme Administrative Court appointed an expert to calculate the market value of the land expropriated from the first applicant. In his report submitted on 16 January 2012 the expert stated that he had been unable to identify any comparable plots meeting the requirements of section 1a of the supplementary provisions of the 1996 Act, and that the amount of compensation thus had to be calculated in accordance with section 32(3) of the same Act (see paragraphs 25 and 26 below). Applying the rules contained in the Regulation, the expert assessed the value of the first applicant’s expropriated land at BGN 4,779 (EUR 2,445) – on average BGN 0.22 (EUR 0.11) per square metre.
The first applicant contested the expert report. He presented several notarial deeds for the sale of plots of land in the area, as well as documents concerning the inclusion of one such plot in the capital of a company.
The expert was tasked with preparing a new valuation, taking into account the documents presented by the first applicant. In his report of 12 March 2012 he found that most of the plots of land concerned were not comparable, since they appertained to the territory of a different village, or had been included in the urban area of Sofia and were not categorised as agricultural land. Another plot could not be taken into account as the respective contract had not been concluded within the one-year period provided for under section 1a(2) of the supplementary provisions of the 1996 Act (see paragraph 26 below), namely between July 2010 and July 2011; the contract at issue had been concluded in April 2010, and the plot concerned had been sold for about BGN 6 (EUR 3) per square metre. According to the expert, only one plot of land qualified as comparable, as it was of the same kind, on the territory appertaining to the same village, and it had been sold in August 2010, within the one-year period. The price of that plot had been about BGN 225 (EUR 115) per square metre. If that was to be taken as the average market value of land in the area, the value of the first applicant’s expropriated land had to be set at BGN 4,804,627 (EUR 2,457,609).
The Supreme Administrative Court gave a judgment on 5 April 2012. It held that one comparable plot of land was not sufficient to establish the market value of the expropriated land, and that the amount of compensation should therefore be calculated under section 32(3) of the 1996 Act. Applying the method provided for in the Regulation, the expert had calculated the amount of compensation due to the first applicant at BGN 4,779 (see paragraph 11 above), which was the amount to be awarded.
The second and third applicants were the owners of a plot of land on the outskirts of Sofia, on the strength of a restitution decision of the then Serdika land commission (later renamed “the agriculture department”) of 21 June 1999. The plot, measuring 6,101 square metres, was described in the decision as a fourth-category “field”. Its valuation for taxation purposes was BGN 1,141.20 (EUR 583).
Between 2012 and 2015 the second and third applicants rented the plot together with two other plots as agricultural land to a private party. In exchange, they were to receive fifty kilograms of grain each year.
On 21 December 2013 the Council of Ministers issued a decision to expropriate the second and third applicants’ plot, and other land in the area, for the construction of a section of the ring road around Sofia. The decision stated that the second and third applicants would receive monetary compensation in the amount of BGN 5,116, equivalent to EUR 2,616, or BGN 0.84 (EUR 0.43) per square metre.
The second and third applicants applied for a judicial review of the expropriation decision, arguing in particular that the compensation awarded to them was too low and bore no relationship to the fair market value of the land.
The Supreme Administrative Court appointed an expert to calculate the market value of the land. The expert submitted two reports dated 14 May and 10 September 2014. He listed a number of contracts concluded within the period to be taken into account concerning land in the same area, and proposed several calculations of the value of the second and third applicants’ land, depending on which of the plots concerned were to be considered as comparable. The valuations ranged from BGN 21.5 (EUR 11) to BGN 104 (EUR 53) per square metre.
The Supreme Administrative Court gave a judgment on 14 November 2014. It found that as only one of the plots described by the expert (sold in 2012 for a price equivalent to BGN 25 (EUR 13) per square metre) could qualify as comparable, it was insufficient to calculate an average market value. As to the remaining plots of land, they could not be considered as comparable because some of them were not located in the same zone (see paragraph 26 below) and others had been jointly mortgaged in a single contract without an indication of their individual values. Another plot of land had been included in the capital of a company but, according to the Supreme Administrative Court, that was not among the types of transaction provided for by section 1a(2) of the supplementary provisions of the 1996 Act (see paragraph 26 below). In particular, such a transaction was not to be entered into the property register.
Accordingly, since only one comparable plot had been found and it was insufficient to establish an average market value of the expropriated land, the amount of compensation had to be calculated in accordance with the Regulation. As that had been the method used by the Council of Ministers when expropriating the second and third applicants’ land and awarding them BGN 5,116 (BGN 0.84 per square metre) in compensation, the application for a judicial review of that decision had no merit.
At the beginning of 2015 the Council of Ministers settled several other similar cases that had been pending before the Supreme Administrative Court, concerning agricultural land of unspecified category in the same zone as the second and third applicants’ and expropriated on the strength of the same decision of 21 December 2013. It agreed to pay compensation of BGN 20.05 (equivalent to EUR 10) per square metre to the owners. The decision to seek a settlement, according to a memorandum submitted to the Council of Ministers by the Minister of Public Works in December 2014, had been taken in order to unblock urgently the construction of the ring road, delayed by numerous applications for judicial reviews. The Minister of Public Works noted that in a neighbouring zone where land had been expropriated as well, the owners had been paid the compensation indicated above, calculated on the basis of sufficient comparable plots, and that most of the owners had not applied for a judicial review. Such compensation was therefore considered appropriate for the cases to be settled.
Article 17 § 5 of the Constitution of Bulgaria provides that private property may be expropriated for State or municipal needs only on the basis of a law, only if those needs cannot be satisfied otherwise, and in exchange for prior and equivalent compensation.
Section 32(1) of the State Property Act (Закон за държавната собственост – the “1996 Act”) reiterates that private property can be expropriated for State needs that cannot be satisfied otherwise, in exchange for equivalent compensation. Until 2006 no further requirements regarding the term “equivalent compensation” were provided for.
In 2006 Parliament adopted a Bill amending section 32 of the 1996 Act. A new subsection (2) was added, specifying that the equivalent monetary compensation had to be calculated on the basis of “the market value of comparable properties situated in proximity to the expropriated one”. A new subsection (3) was also added, providing that where no relevant comparable properties could be found for the calculation of the market value, the monetary compensation was to be calculated on the basis of formulae adopted by the Government. As concerns the value of land defined as agricultural, subsection (3) refers to the formulae contained in the Regulation (see paragraphs 30-32 below).
The Bill also added a new section 1a to the supplementary provisions of the 1996 Act. Its subsection 2 defines the term “market value” used in section 32(2) as the average value indicated in all contracts for valuable consideration entered in the property register – sales of properties, exchanges, public auctions, mortgages and others – concluded in the year preceding the assessment for the purposes of expropriation, and where, in addition, at least one of the parties is a commercial entity. Subsection 4 defines furthermore the term “in proximity” used in section 32(2) as: a) in the same zone (район) in the cities where zoning exists; b) in the same neighbourhood (квартал) in the remaining towns and villages; c) belonging to the territory of the same town or village (“в едно и също землище”), as concerns agricultural and forestry land.
The explanatory memorandum to the above-mentioned Bill stated that the amendments were aimed at removing a legal lacuna, namely the lack of definition of the term “equivalent compensation”, and at introducing common criteria in that regard. Previously, the experts appointed by the Supreme Administrative Court had used different methods of valuation, leading to varying results, and in some cases to compensation “exceeding by five to eight times the real market value of the property to be expropriated”. During the parliamentary debate on the Bill, it was also noted that the previous practice (experts’ calculations without any statutory criteria to rely on) had incited corruption. Some members of Parliament spoke in addition of the practice, when purchasing and selling immoveable property, of declaring lower values in order to pay less tax. Such practice justified the inclusion in the list under section 1a(2) only of transactions where one of the parties was a commercial entity.
Initially, the practice of the Supreme Administrative Court was divergent on the question whether it was acceptable to calculate the market value defined above if only one comparable property existed. In the majority of cases it held that no “average” value could be established where only one comparable property had been shown to exist (Решение № 13101 от 3.11.2010 г. на ВАС по адм. д. № 5728/2010 г.; Решение № 4984 от 5.04.2012 г. на ВАС по адм. д. № 12888/2011 г.), but in some cases it reasoned that, in so far as a comparable property had been actually sold on the market, this was sufficient to establish a market price (Решение № 13321 от 9.11.2009 г. на ВАС по адм. д. № 7327/2009 г.). Following a legislative amendment in 2014, section 1a(2) now expressly requires at least two comparable properties in order to assess the market value of a property.
Section 34a of the 1996 Act provides that the Council of Ministers (Government) will take decisions on the expropriation of private property where this is needed for projects of national significance. Section 38 of the Act provides that its decisions are subject to judicial review. At the time, the competent tribunal was the Supreme Administrative Court, whose judgments were final.
The Regulation on the calculation of the value of agricultural land (Наредба за реда за определяне на цени на земеделските земи), referred to by section 32(3) of the 1996 Act (see paragraph 25 above), was adopted by the Council of Ministers in 1998. Initially, it was applicable only in the context of the restitution of agricultural land and where such land was the subject of a transaction with the participation of the State. In 2006 it was decided that the Regulation should also be applicable to compensation for expropriated property under the 1996 Act.
The Regulation provides for a basic value, depending on the category of the land for agricultural purposes (the first category being land of the highest quality and the tenth category, land of the lowest quality) and “the market conditions”. The basic value is then to be augmented or reduced by reference to criteria such as proximity to cities, infrastructure or the coast, or whether the land is irrigable.
Section 3 of the Regulation states that the basic value equals twenty­five times the annual rent for the respective category of agricultural land. For the different categories of land, the value varies between BGN 0.04 (EUR 0.02) and BGN 0.63 (EUR 0.32) per square metre. The scale of basic values has not been updated since 1998.
In 2006 a group of members of Parliament challenged the constitutionality of all amendments to the 1996 Act described in paragraphs 25-26 above. In a judgment of 4 July 2006 (Решение на Конституционния съд № 6, 4.07.2006 г., к.д. 5/2006 г.) the Constitutional Court found that these amendments did not conflict with the Constitution.
The Constitutional Court considered that the introduction of common criteria for the assessment of the market value of expropriated properties did not impinge upon, but in fact protected, the rights of owners of expropriated property. It went on as follows:
“In this way it is guaranteed that the same objective criteria will be used, namely transactions at market value with immoveable properties similar to the one to be expropriated and situated in proximity to it, where at least one of the parties is a commercial entity. The determination of equivalent monetary compensation without reliance on any clear objective criteria is not in the interest of the owners of expropriated properties and may always be to their detriment. This is so because the impact of subjective factors, not based on common objective criteria, leads to deviations from the realistic value, in one direction or the other.”
According to the Constitutional Court, the amendments at issue filled a legal lacuna and were necessary to guarantee that all persons were equal before the law. The legislative approach to the matter was balanced. The equivalent compensation required under section 32 of the 1996 Act meant “the market value which the owner could receive if the property were sold on the free market”.
Concerning more specifically section 32(3) of the 1996 Act, the Constitutional Court found that it represented the “natural continuation” of the requirement of common criteria. It pointed out, nevertheless, that the provision concerned an “exception”, and that its application had to be premised on the “undeniable impossibility” of applying section 32(2).
Four (out of twelve) judges of the Constitutional Court dissented. They considered that the 2006 amendments to the 1996 Act described above had been expressly aimed at reducing the compensation paid by the State, to the detriment of the right to property. Some of the judges argued that the list of transactions which could be used for the purpose of comparison (under section 1a of the supplementary provisions of the 1996 Act) had been unjustifiably shortened. Other judges contested the newly-introduced approach in its entirety, namely the reliance on other transactions to calculate the relevant market value. They highlighted some issues in that regard, such as the practice by parties to immoveable property transactions of fraudulently declaring much lower values.
As to section 32(3) of the 1996 Act, referring to, among other things, the Regulation (see paragraph 25 above), the dissenting judges stated that its application could not lead to an award of “equivalent” and just compensation or to the establishment of fair market values. On the contrary, it could only lead to valuations which were “evidently and dramatically lower”. The judges considered that other means of establishing a market value, for instance through the expertise of an estate agent, were more appropriate. They pointed out in that regard that a property “always ha[d] a market value”.
Article 239 of the Code of Administrative Procedure provides that a final judgment issued by the administrative courts can be set aside and the proceedings reopened where, in particular, a judgment of the Court finds a violation of the Convention. An application for reopening is to be submitted to the Supreme Administrative Court within three months of notification of the Court’s judgment.
Article 5 § 4 of the Constitution stipulates that international treaties which have been ratified and published in the Official Gazette and have entered into force for Bulgaria are to be considered part of the domestic law. They are to take precedence where the provisions of an Act adopted by Parliament conflict with them.