The case originated in an application (no. 3150/15) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr X (“the applicant”), on 30 December 2014. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by his father Mr Y.P., who had been granted leave to present the applicant’s case by the President of the Section under Rule 36 § 4 (a) of the Rules of Court. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant alleged that his involuntary placement in a psychiatric facility had been unlawful in the light of the failure of the national authorities to meet the substantive requirements for involuntary hospitalisation and the procedural defects in the judicial authorisation of his hospitalisation.
On 13 May 2015 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1995 and lives in Moscow.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On an unspecified date the applicant was diagnosed with schizotypal personality disorder and was undergoing voluntary treatment for his condition.
On 24 April 2014 he was apprehended by the police on the street in the Bibirevo district of Moscow. The police report stated that the applicant had been “harassing an underage teenager” without providing a detailed account of the events. It is not clear from the material available to the Court whether the intervention by the police had been triggered by any complaint from that teenager or any other person.
He was then taken to the local police station and later transferred by the psychiatric ambulance service to the Central Clinical Psychiatric Hospital of the Moscow Region (ГКУЗ МО «Центральная клиническая психиатрическая больница») (“the Hospital”). The report of the ambulance service stated the following:
The psychiatrist who admitted the applicant to the Hospital made the following record:
On 25 April 2014 the applicant was examined jointly by the attending psychiatrist and the head of one of the Hospital’s departments. They made the following record:
On the same day the applicant, after conferring with his father, demanded to be discharged from the Hospital; however, his request was denied.
On the same day a medical counselling panel composed of the resident psychiatrists of the Hospital examined the applicant and diagnosed him with organic delusional disorder. The panel also found that the applicant was a danger to himself and others and that there was a risk of significant damage to his health due to the deterioration or aggravation of his psychiatric condition in the absence of psychiatric assistance. The full text of the panel’s report and conclusion read as follows:
“25.04.2014 12.00 Panel examination due to refusal of treatment.
Lethargic, sluggish. Subdued mood. Attributes [the cause of] his subdued mood to [his] inability to meet up with a boy he is attracted to. Unsure whether that boy also is attracted to him. Goes across the city to see that ‘boy’. He wants to be ‘treated gently, to be caressed, fondled’. Admitted that he goes to women’s clothing stores [because he likes the clothing], which is ‘soft and bright’. For a long time has been visiting the neighbourhood where he met the boy; previously he had been going to other neighbourhoods to watch boys.
Diagnosis: Organic delusional disorder.
Conclusion: needs involuntary placement and treatment, in accordance with section 29(a) and (c) of the 1992 Psychiatric Assistance Act.”
On the same day the Hospital applied for judicial authorisation of the applicant’s involuntary hospitalisation under section 29(a) and (c) of the Psychiatric Assistance Act 1992, since the applicant was a danger to himself or others and there was a risk of significant damage to his health owing to the deterioration or aggravation of his psychiatric condition in the absence of psychiatric assistance. The application restated the findings of the earlier joint examination (see paragraph 11 above) and set out the following conclusions:
“On 25 April 2014 was examined by the panel of resident psychiatrists of [the Hospital] and diagnosed with organic delusional disorder.
The patient needs to be involuntarily hospitalised and treated under section 29 (a) and (c) of the Psychiatric Assistance Act of 1992.
The examination and treatment of the patient can take place only under an in-patient regime ...
[It is requested]
[That authorisation be granted for the applicant’s involuntary placement in a psychiatric facility];
That the request for authorisation be assessed on the premises of the Hospital, since because of his mental state [the applicant] cannot be produced in court ...”
On 5 May 2014 the Savyolovskiy District Court of Moscow (Савёловский районный суд г. Москвы) held a hearing on the premises of the psychiatric facility. The hearing was attended by the applicant, his father and mother, the attending psychiatrist Mr P., the head of one of the Hospital’s departments (Mr L.), the representative of the Hospital (Mrs K.) and the local prosecutor.
During the hearing Mr P., Mr L., and Mrs K. generally advanced the same arguments as those presented in the application for judicial authorisation (see paragraph 14 above), maintaining that the applicant needed to be hospitalised and treated, that he posed a danger to himself and others, and that there was a risk of significant damage to his health in the event of a deterioration in or aggravation of his psychiatric condition in the absence of psychiatric assistance. Mr P. also reported that the applicant considered himself to be healthy and refused treatment, while at the same time “being confused, replying to questions with other questions, and being exceptionally insincere”. They also emphasised the fact that the applicant had been apprehended by the police for sexually harassing an underage person.
The applicant’s parents had conflicting opinions about the need for hospitalisation. The mother stated that the applicant did “not feel well” and had been “irritable lately”, that her communication with him was restricted by the father and that she had not seen him since 10 February 2014. In her opinion, in-patient treatment was necessary. The applicant’s father, acting as his representative, objected to involuntary hospitalisation and did not agree that his son posed any danger to himself or to others. He stated that Mr X was voluntarily following the treatment prescribed by a neurologist and a psychiatrist, that his condition showed signs of improvement and that hospitalisation would interfere with his studies and future career. In his opinion his son had only tried to become friends with “the boy”, not sexually harass him. He furthermore stated that the police report referred to by the Hospital contained no information on the alleged sexual harassment or other unlawful acts.
The applicant stated the following during the hearing:
The District Court, having considered the above-mentioned statements, medical evidence, a police report, and the applicant’s educational records, the same day authorised the applicant’s involuntary hospitalisation. The authorisation issued by the court in a succinct manner stated that, while the applicant and his father objected to hospitalisation, the evidence presented by the medical panel of the Hospital demonstrated that the applicant was a danger to himself and others and that his mental state might deteriorate in the absence of treatment.
The applicant’s father appealed. The statement of appeal indicated that the District Court had relied exclusively on the evaluation of the resident psychiatrists, had not addressed inconsistencies in evidence, had failed to substantiate the assertion that the applicant’s condition was severe and that he posed a danger to himself or others, and, lastly, had failed to demonstrate the absence of any alternative treatment options.
On 20 May 2014 the applicant was discharged from the Hospital after an improvement in his mental state.
Certificates issued by the local police station in May 2014 stated that the applicant had not committed any administrative or criminal offence and that he had been referred to psychiatrists because of mental disorders.
On 18 July 2014 the appeal was dismissed by the Moscow City Court (Московский городской суд). The relevant parts of the decision read as follows:
“... The case file shows that on 24 April 2014 [a policeman apprehended the applicant]. The police report indicates that [he] had been harassing underage persons ...
Since the behaviour of [the applicant] exhibited symptoms of mental disorder, [he was taken to the Hospital], where he initially agreed to hospitalisation, stated that since 2013 [he had been subject to] mood changes, and that he [suffered from] anxiety, irritability and difficulties in focusing his attention. Previously he had been hospitalised in [a psychiatric facility]; following his discharge from [that facility] his mental state improved, [and] he had continued his studies. However during the last year the condition re-appeared.
[According to the medical evidence] on 25 April 2014 [the applicant] was lethargic, sluggish, and had a subdued mood, which he attributed to his inability to meet up with a boy he is attracted to.
During the hearing the representative of [the Hospital] stated that [the applicant] had been brought in in a delusional state, and had talked about ‘a boy’ who did not [in fact] exist. In this state he had been travelling long distances, presenting a danger to himself and others ...
The evidence [submitted to the first-instance court] substantiating the need for involuntary hospitalisation – including information on previous treatment for his delusional disorder and somatic condition (a second-degree disability) – constituted legal grounds for involuntary hospitalisation.
Since the reaching of conclusions regarding the mental health of a person is within the exclusive competence of psychiatrists, the [district] court reasonably gave due regard to the report on the need to provide in-patient treatment to [the applicant] ...
The appeal does not refer to any factual information demonstrating that the relatives of [the applicant] or other persons are capable of ensuring his and other persons’ safety without an in-patient treatment regime ...”
The applicant’s subsequent attempts to initiate a review of the above-mentioned judicial decisions proved unsuccessful.
The relevant provisions of the Russian legislation are reproduced in Zagidulina v. Russia, no. 11737/06, §§ 21-30, 2 May 2013.