The case originated in an application (no. 31237/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Armenian national, Mr Lavrent Kirakosyan (“the applicant”), on 15 September 2003.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Muller, Mr T. Otty, Mr K. Yildiz and Ms L. Claridge, lawyers of the Kurdish Human Rights Project (KHRP) based in London, Mr T. Ter-Yesayan and Ms N. Gasparyan, lawyers practising in , and Mr A. Ghazaryan. The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 12 September 2005 the President of the Third Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1960 and lives in the village of .
The applicant has been a member of an opposition political party, the National Democratic Union (NDU), since 1995. Since 1997 he has headed the party’s local offices in the Baghramyan area. He is also a farmer and rears cattle on his farm.
In February and March 2003 a presidential election took place in . Following the first and second rounds of the election, a series of protest rallies were organised in  by the opposition parties, alleging irregularities.
On 21 March 2003 the applicant participated in a rally in  which was part of a nationwide public demonstration. Following the demonstration the applicant returned to his home in the .
On 22 March 2003 at 8 a.m. two police officers from the Baghramyan Police Department (ՀՀ ոստիկանության Բաղրամյանի բաժին) visited the applicant at his home.
The applicant alleged that the police officers had told him that he was required to accompany them to the police station as somebody wished to see him, without providing further reasons.
The Government alleged that the police officers had visited the applicant at his home because they suspected him of participating in an unauthorised demonstration the previous day.
It appears from the materials of the case that the applicant was asked by the police officers to accompany them to the police station. He showed resistance but was nevertheless taken to the police station.
At the police station the arresting police officers drew up a record of the applicant’s arrest (արձանագրությաւն բերման ենթարկելու մասին) in which it was stated that “[the applicant] participated on 21 March [2003] in the demonstrations which took place in Yerevan and, when asked to come to the police station, he disobeyed the lawful orders of the police officers and used foul language”. This record was signed by the applicant.
The applicant alleged that the chief of police and his deputy had informed him that his attendance was required because of his participation in the demonstration the previous day. The applicant was told that he would face a penalty of ten to fifteen days of administrative detention. He pleaded with the officers to impose a fine instead of detention in view of certain personal circumstances, such as his wife being heavily pregnant and about to give birth, and the need to care for his farm and cattle. The applicant was informed that this was impossible since the instructions temporarily to arrest all activists came from the Minister of Interior himself.
According to a written statement (արձանագրություն բացատրություն վերցնելու մասին) made by the applicant at the police station, police officers had visited him at home and asked him to come to the police station the morning after his participation in the demonstration of 21 March 2003. He had refused to go to the station, inquiring about the reasons, to which the police officers had replied that there were questions to be clarified. An argument erupted which lasted about five minutes, during which the applicant admitted that he had insulted the police officers and disobeyed their lawful orders. Then he had realised that what he was doing was wrong but it was already too late, so he had been taken to the police station.
The police officers drew up a record of an administrative offence (վարչական իրավախախտման արձանագրություն) in which it was stated that the applicant “had maliciously disobeyed the lawful orders of the police officers and had used foul language for about five to seven minutes”. The applicant was charged under Article 182 of the Code of Administrative Offences (Վարչական իրավախախտումների վերաբերյալ ՀՀ օրենսգիրք – “the CAO”). This record was signed by the applicant.
About two hours after his arrest the applicant was brought before Judge S. of the  (Արմավիրի մարզի առաջին ատյանի դատարան).
Judge S., after a brief hearing, sentenced the applicant under Article 182 of the CAO to ten days of administrative detention. The judge’s entire finding amounted to the following sentence:
“On 22 March 2003 at 8 a.m. in the village of Karakert of the Armavir Region [the applicant] maliciously refused to obey the lawful order of the officers of the Baghramyan Police Department acting in pursuance of their duties of preserving public order; in particular, while being taken to the police station, he disobeyed the police officers, used foul language and prevented them from performing their duty.”
According to the record of the court hearing, the hearing was held in public with the participation of the judge, a clerk and the applicant. The judge informed the applicant of his right to challenge the judge and the clerk and to have a lawyer. The applicant did not wish to lodge any challenges or to have a lawyer. The judge then proceeded with examination of evidence. The applicant submitted that the police officers of the Armavir Police Department had wanted to take him to the police station but that he had resisted their orders. Thereafter, the judge examined the materials prepared by the police. No further evidence was produced or requests made by the applicant. The judge departed to the deliberation room, after which he returned and announced the decision.
According to the applicant, the trial was conducted in the following manner. He explained to the judge his domestic circumstances and pleaded for an administrative fine to be imposed instead of detention, to which the judge immediately replied that he would subject the applicant to administrative detention. The judge added that he was unable to decide otherwise as he was acting on instructions from higher authorities. The hearing was held in the judge’s office and lasted only a few minutes.
The applicant was taken to the Armavir Temporary Detention Facility at the Armavir Regional Department of Internal Affairs to serve his sentence.
The applicant alleged that, on the way to the detention facility, he had been asked by one of the accompanying police officers to sign the above record of an administrative offence, which he had refused to do.
The Government contested this allegation and claimed that the applicant had actually signed this document while in police custody prior to the court hearing.
The applicant alleged, and the Government did not dispute, that at the Armavir Temporary Detention Facility he had been placed in a cell with seven other people. The cell measured 8.75 sq. m and had a very small, dirty window which was covered by dirty metal bars preventing natural light from entering the cell. There were no beds in the cell so the detainees had to sleep on the floor. The cell was infested with pests and insects.
On 23 March 2003 the applicant sent a letter to the Armavir Regional Prosecutor (Արմավիրի մարզի դատախազ) and the head of the local police department in the name of all the detainees in the cell, asking for their release or alternatively for them to be moved to a better cell.
On 25 March 2003 the applicant and three other detainees were transferred to another cell, apparently as a result of the above letter. The applicant alleged, and the Government did not dispute, that the new cell also measured 8.75 sq. m and that the window was in a similar condition. There were only two beds in the cell so the detainees had to take turns to sleep. The beds had very dirty mattresses and no bed linen or blankets were provided. The cell was infested with pests and insects. The light in the cell was always switched on, day and night, and the detainees could not turn it off. The toilet was located outside the cells and was for common use by all the detainees on that floor of the detention facility. It was very dirty since there was no running water. The detainees were only allowed to use the toilet three times a day: in the morning, afternoon and evening.
The applicant submitted that during his entire stay in the detention facility, no water or food was provided to the detainees. The officers of the detention facility required money for providing water. Anyone bringing food to detainees was required to pay before the food was given to the detainees.
Members of the board of the NDU applied to the office of the prosecutor and the Court of Appeal for the applicant’s early release. The applicant alleged that the authorities had refused both applications and had given informal indications to the NDU members that they were not in a position to make a decision to release the applicant early as they were receiving instructions from a higher authority.
The applicant further alleged that on the third day of his detention his wife had given birth prematurely with complications and had to undergo treatment. Furthermore, after his release from detention on 31 March 2003, he had returned home to discover that in his absence a large number of the cattle on his farm had either died or been lost.
For a summary of the relevant provisions of the CAO see the judgment in the case of Galstyan v. Armenia (no. 26986/03, § 26, 15 November 2007). The provisions of the CAO which were not cited in the above judgment, as in force at the material time, provide:
Article 182: Maliciously disobeying a lawful order or demand of a police officer or a member of the voluntary police
“Maliciously disobeying a lawful order or demand of a police officer or a member of the voluntary police made in the performance of his duties of preserving public order shall result in the imposition of a fine of between 50% and double the fixed minimum wage, or of correctional labour for between one and two months with the deduction of 20% of earnings or, in cases where, in the circumstances of the case, taking into account the offender’s personality, the application of these measures would be deemed insufficient, of administrative detention not exceeding 15 days.”
The relevant provisions of the Law, as in force at the material time, read as follows:
Section 13: Rights of arrested and detained persons
“An arrested or detained person is entitled: ... (3) to lodge, himself or through his lawyer or lawful representative, applications and complaints alleging a violation of his rights and freedoms with the administration of the facility for arrested or detained persons, their superior authorities, a court, a prosecutor’s office, the Ombudsman, the bodies of public administration and local self-governance, non-governmental unions and [political] parties, mass media and international institutions and organisations protecting human rights and freedoms.”
Section 20: Ensuring the material and living conditions of arrested and detained persons
“...The living space afforded to arrested and detained persons must comply with the building and sanitary-hygienic norms established for general living spaces. The area of the living space afforded to arrested and detained persons shall not be less than 2.5 sq. m for each individual.
Arrested and detained persons must be provided with individual bedding and bed linen.”
The relevant provisions of the Decree read as follows:
“Special sections of the [facilities for holding arrested persons] shall be reserved for persons who have been subjected to administrative detention for periods prescribed by [the CAO]...”
The relevant parts of the Report read as follows:
“4.  Conditions of detention
 a.  introduction
 43.  At the outset, the CPT wishes to highlight the criteria which it applies when assessing police detention facilities.
All police cells should be clean, of a reasonable size for the number of persons they are used to accommodate, and have adequate lighting (i.e. sufficient to read by, sleeping periods excluded) and ventilation; preferably, cells should enjoy natural light. Further, cells should be equipped with a means of rest (for example, a chair or bench) and persons obliged to stay overnight in custody should be provided with a clean mattress and clean blankets.
Persons in custody should be able to satisfy the needs of nature when necessary, in clean and decent conditions, and be offered adequate washing facilities. They should have ready access to drinking water and be given food at appropriate times, including at least one full meal (that is, something more substantial than a sandwich) every day.  Persons held in custody for 24 hours or more should, as far as possible, be offered one hour of outdoor exercise every day.
temporary detention centres
During the visit, the CPT’s delegation visited temporary detention centres in , Akhurian, Hrazdan, Maralik and Sevan. Establishments of this type are used to hold two categories of detainees: criminal suspects and persons under administrative arrest.
Conditions of detention in the temporary detention centres visited varied from acceptable (at the Hrazdan Department of Internal Affairs) to poor (e.g. at the Akhurian and Sevan Departments of Internal Affairs).
As regards occupancy levels, a consultation of registers and the number of sleeping places per cell suggested that the minimum standard of 2.5 m² of living space per person, as stipulated by the Law on [Conditions for Holding Arrested and Detained Persons], was respected as concerns criminal suspects. However, the CPT must add that this minimum standard is too low. As concerns the cells for administrative detainees, the information gathered during the visit indicated that conditions could become extremely cramped, e.g. up to 6 detainees in a cell of 9 m² in Hrazdan and Sevan.
All the centres visited presented deficiencies concerning the in-cell lighting and ventilation. With the exception of the Hrazdan centre, access to natural light was poor (small windows, sometimes - as in  - covered by metal shutters) or inexistent (e.g. in Akhurian). Artificial lighting was invariably dim, with some cells (e.g. in , Akhurian and Maralik) submerged in near darkness. As to ventilation, it left something to be desired at  and Sevan.
As to the state of repair and hygiene of the detention areas, it ranged from quite acceptable at the Hrazdan Department of Internal Affairs to poor at the Sevan establishment. Cells at the Temporary detention centre in  were in a reasonably good state of repair; however, their level of cleanliness left something to be desired. Detention areas in Akhurian and Maralik were dilapidated but clean.
Cells were furnished with beds or wooden sleeping platforms. The delegation noted that mattresses, sheets, pillows and blankets were available for criminal suspects at all the temporary detention centres visited; however, this was not the case for administrative detainees.
The delegation did not hear any complaints from persons who were - or had recently been - detained at the centres visited as regards access to a toilet. However, with the notable exception of the Hrazdan Department of Internal Affairs, the communal toilet and washing facilities were dilapidated and dirty.
The centres in  and Hrazdan possessed shower facilities, which could apparently be used by newly-arrived detainees (upon recommendation of a feldsher/doctor) and by those administrative detainees who stayed in the respective establishments for longer than a week. In both centres, the shower facilities were in an acceptable state of repair and cleanliness, and hot water was available. However, the only personal hygiene item that was distributed to detainees was a small piece of soap.
According to information provided by police officers in the majority of the temporary detention centres visited, detainees were offered food three times per day, including one hot meal. However, this was not the case at the Sevan Department of Internal Affairs, where food was only delivered once per day, reportedly due to the limited budget set aside for this purpose (320 AMD - i.e. some 50 euro cents - per detainee per day). In this situation, the provision of food was to a large extent ensured by detainees’ families. Detained persons without family contacts had to rely on the generosity of other detainees or individual police officers for food.
All the temporary detention centres visited possessed outdoor exercise areas, where detainees were apparently allowed to take exercise for one hour per day (in the case of women and juveniles - for two hours per day). However, at the Temporary Detention Centre of the City Department of Internal Affairs in , the delegation was informed that detainees could be deprived of outdoor exercise as a form of punishment for violation of the centre’s internal regulations.
 49.  The CPT recommends that the Armenian authorities take steps at temporary detention centres to:
-  ensure that all detainees are offered adequate living space; the objective should be at least 4 m² per person;
-  provide adequate in-cell lighting (including access to natural light) and ventilation;
-  maintain the cells and common sanitary facilities in a satisfactory state of repair and hygiene;
-  ensure that all detainees (including those held for administrative violations) are offered a mattress and blankets at night;
-  ensure that administrative detainees are able to take a hot shower at least once a week during their period of detention;
-  ensure that all detainees are offered food - sufficient in quantity and quality - at normal meal times;
-  put an end to deprivation of outdoor exercise as a disciplinary punishment.”
The relevant part of the Report reads as follows:
“4.  Conditions of detention
Temporary detention centre of the Department of Internal Affairs of the City of
Conditions of detention in this facility remained basically the same as those observed during the 2002 visit, i.e. poor. One positive change was that persons under administrative arrest were now provided with bedding (pursuant to Order No. 8 of the Head of the National Police of 20 August 2003). Further, the delegation was informed that the food entitlement for detainees had been increased by Government decision of May 2003. Otherwise, no refurbishment or major repairs had taken place since the previous visit.
Consequently, the CPT reiterates the recommendations made in paragraph 49 of the report on the 2002 visit, in particular as regards living space, in-cell lighting, ventilation, state of repair and hygiene.”
The relevant parts of the Report read as follows:
“4.  Conditions of detention
police holding areas
At the beginning of the 2006 visit, the delegation was informed that, pursuant to Order NK–328–NG of the President of the , dated 28 December 2004, a large-scale refurbishment programme had been initiated in all police holding areas. The CPT welcomes this. It should also be noted that a recent amendment to the [Law on Conditions for Holding Arrested and Detained Persons] increased the official standard of living space per detained person in police holding areas to 4 m². This can be considered as acceptable when applied to multi-occupancy cells; however, 4 m² is not an adequate size for a single occupancy cell.
During the visit, the delegation could observe the impact of the above-mentioned programme. Some of the police holding areas (e.g. in Charentsavan, Gavar and Hrazdan) were still undergoing refurbishment and were to reopen shortly. As regards the already refurbished holding areas, conditions in them were overall of a high standard.”