The case originated in an application (no. 12275/10) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a German national, Mr Pavel Molotchko (“the applicant”), on 2 March 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr S. J. Schleicher, a lawyer practising in . The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms V. Lutkovska, of the Ministry of Justice.
On 3 March 2010 the President of the Section decided to indicate to the Government, under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, that the applicant should not be extradited to . On 5 January 2011 the President decided to discontinue the application of Rule 39 (see paragraphs 64-68 below).
On 1 June 2010 the Chamber decided to give notice of the application to the Government. After consulting the parties, the Chamber decided, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 and Rule 72 §§ 1 and 2, that no hearing was required in the case and that it was not necessary to relinquish jurisdiction in favour of the Grand Chamber. The Chamber also decided that it was not necessary to adopt any investigative measure to establish the facts of the case (Rule A1, Annex to the Rules of Court).
In accordance with Article 36 § 1 of the Convention, the German Government were invited to exercise their right to intervene in the proceedings, but they declined to do so.
The applicant was born in 1964 in . In 1991 he left Belarus for . He obtained refugee status in that country on the ground that he was of Jewish origin and, because of this, risked persecution in . In 2004 the applicant acquired German nationality. The applicant pursued business activities in both countries.
In January 2007 the  authorities instituted criminal proceedings against the applicant and several others, accusing them of organised crime, abuse of power, smuggling and bribery. According to the  investigators, the applicant and his co-accused committed these crimes in 1999 and 2001 when they were engaged in business activities in that State. In particular, they allegedly bribed high-ranking officers of the Belarus Customs Service and Committee for State Security (“the KGB”) to allow them to import goods into  without paying high customs duty. Subsequently, criminal proceedings were brought against a number of former and acting State officials, with the result that some of them were dismissed from office and some were convicted. The investigations were carried out jointly by the General Prosecutor’s Office and the Ministry of the Interior and were led by investigator B. attached to the General Prosecutor’s Office.
On 11 October 2007 an arrest warrant was issued against the applicant. It was later revoked, as the applicant was cooperating with the investigators and was living permanently in . In particular, on a number of occasions in 2008 and 2009 the applicant was questioned by investigators at the Belarus consulate in , and provided witness statements which, according to the applicant, were used in proceedings against others, including several former high-ranking KGB officers and the former Minister of the Interior. The applicant submits that during one of the meetings with the investigators he was questioned in his lawyer’s absence.
On 22 February 2010 the General Prosecutor of Belarus issued an arrest warrant against the applicant on the grounds that he had committed serious crimes and was living permanently outside . In the arrest warrant it was stated that the applicant was to be placed in the KGB Detention Centre.
According to the applicant, one of his lawyers contacted investigator B., asking about the reasons for the decision to arrest the applicant. In a telephone conversation between the lawyer and the investigator, the latter stated that a decision to bring the applicant to Belarus had been taken at a high political level in order to coerce him to change or retract the statements he had made during his questioning, with a view to torpedoing the proceedings against the senior officials accused of involvement in smuggling and bribery.
On 3 March 2010 the KGB arrested the investigator on charges of abuse of power. According to the applicant, the investigator was dealing mainly with high-profile corruption cases involving the KGB and the police staff. Her arrest was one of the consequences of a “power struggle” between the KGB, the Ministry of the Interior and the Prosecution Service, the former having the strongest position in the political system of . Several other investigators dealing with the applicant’s case were also arrested by the KGB.
The investigator is being tried in . The court hearings are being held in camera as the case concerns State secrets.
In 2010 some extracts from the video recording of the applicant’s questioning in 2008-09 were broadcast by the Russian television company NTV, in a programme which concerned alleged corruption of the highest officials in , including the President.
On 22 February 2010 the applicant went to  on business.
On the same day the General Prosecutor of Belarus requested the General Prosecutor’s Office of Ukraine (“the GPU”) to arrest the applicant pursuant to Article 61 of the Convention on Legal Assistance and Legal Relations in Civil, Family and Criminal Cases (“the Minsk Convention”, see paragraph 89 below).
On 23 February 2010 the applicant was arrested by the Ukrainian State Security Service (“the SBU”).
According to the applicant, he was taken to the SBU the same day, where he was denied access to a lawyer and forced by unknown SBU officers to sign a waiver of his right to legal assistance. He was questioned by the officers for about six hours.
On 24 February 2010 the SBU requested the Babushkinskyy District Court, Dnipropetrovsk (“the ”) to remand the applicant in custody for forty days, pending submission of an extradition request by the  authorities.
On the same day the court, relying on Article 29 of the Constitution of Ukraine, Article 61 of the Minsk Convention, and Articles 148-150, 155, 165-1 and 165-2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 93 below), ordered that the applicant remain in detention until 5 March 2010. The court held that it was necessary to obtain further information concerning the SBU’s request.
The court hearing on 24 February 2010 was attended by a prosecutor, SBU officers and the applicant. During the hearing the applicant’s request for a lawyer was refused, as the court considered a lawyer’s participation unnecessary.
On an unspecified date the applicant hired Ms M., a lawyer practising in Kyiv, to act as his legal representative. Subsequently, the applicant also hired Mr S., a lawyer practising in .
On 5 March 2010 the  examined a new request lodged by the SBU on 4 March 2010 for the applicant’s continued detention pending a decision on the extradition request of 24 February 2010 (see paragraph 50 below). The applicant and one of his lawyers were present at the court hearing and asked the court to refuse the SBU’s request. The lawyer also complained that the applicant’s arrest had not been in accordance with the relevant regulations and that his right to legal assistance had been violated.
The court held that it was necessary to obtain information concerning the administrative proceedings instituted by one of the applicant’s lawyers against the GPU (see paragraph 69 below) and extended the applicant’s detention until 10 March 2010.
The court further held that the applicant’s arrest had been lawful. It found that the arrest had been in accordance with Articles 56 §§ 1 and 2, 57 and 58 of the Minsk Convention and had been based on a request and accompanying documents submitted by the General Prosecutor’s Office of Belarus. The court also noted that the applicant had expressly waived his right to a lawyer.
On 10 March 2010 the , having examined the SBU’s request of 4 March 2010 in the applicant’s and one of his lawyers’ presence, ordered the applicant’s detention pending his extradition. The court found that the extradition request was in compliance with Article 58 of the Minsk Convention and that there were no grounds for refusing extradition under Article 57 of the Minsk Convention.
One of the applicant’s lawyers appealed, stating in particular that the request for the applicant’s extradition had not been made in accordance with the relevant regulations. The lawyer also challenged the lawfulness of the applicant’s possible extradition to .
On 15 March 2010 the Dnipropetrovsk Court of Appeal upheld the decision of 10 March 2010, finding that the applicant’s detention was based on an extradition request submitted in accordance with the Minsk Convention. Having noted that the applicant was a German national and resident and was wanted by the  authorities for serious crimes, the Court of Appeal concluded that if at liberty the applicant might evade investigation and trial. The court declined jurisdiction to deal with the submissions that the applicant’s extradition should be refused.
The applicant states that he was not present at the hearing before the Court of Appeal.
On an unspecified date one of the applicant’s lawyers lodged with the Supreme Court a request for review of the decisions of 10 and 15 March 2010 on the basis of exceptional circumstances. There is no information about its outcome.
On 21 June 2010 the Dnipropetrovsk Krasnogvardiyskyy District Prosecutor lodged a request with the Krasnogvardiyskyy District Court, Dnipropetrovsk (“the Krasnogvardiyskyy Court”) seeking the applicant’s placement under extradition arrest pending a decision on his extradition. The prosecutor relied on Article 60 of the Minsk Convention and Article 463 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraphs 91 and 93 below). He also submitted that, having regard to the preliminary results of an inquiry concerning the extradition request, there were no circumstances preventing extradition under Article 57 of the Minsk Convention. In particular, the applicant was not wanted for political or war crimes; the prosecution was not time-barred; the charges had not been previously determined in Ukraine; the applicant was not a Ukrainian national, and had been refused refugee status in Ukraine; the applicant confirmed that he was in good health and had full command of the Russian language.
On 23 June 2010 the  examined the prosecutor’s request in the applicant’s and his lawyers’ presence and found that there were grounds for the applicant to remain in detention.
The court observed that administrative arrest, introduced into the Ukrainian legal system with changes to the Code of Criminal Procedure on 17 June 2010, had actually been applied in the applicant’s case by the  on 10 March 2010. On that ground it refused to decide on the question whether the applicant should be placed under extradition arrest. Relying on Article 463 § 8 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the  proceeded to examine the grounds for the applicant’s continued detention. It noted that the extradition request had been made in accordance with Article 58 of the Minsk Convention; that there were no grounds for refusing the applicant’s extradition pursuant to Article 57 of the Minsk Convention; that both Ukrainian and Belarus law envisaged imprisonment for over one year for the crimes for which the applicant was wanted and the charges were not time-barred; that the Belarus authorities had issued a warrant for the applicant’s arrest in the framework of the criminal proceedings; that the applicant did not have refugee status, nor did he enjoy immunity from prosecution; and that the eighteen-month period for extradition arrest had not expired. The court further noted that the parties did not indicate any circumstances capable of serving as a basis for the applicant’s release.
On 30 June 2010 the Dnipropetrovsk Regional Court of Appeal quashed the decision of 23 June 2010, holding that the first-instance court had failed to decide on the prosecutor’s request. The matter was remitted for fresh examination.
On 13 July 2010 the , relying on the same arguments as in its decision of 23 June 2010, decided to place the applicant under extradition arrest pending a decision on his extradition to .
One of the applicant’s lawyers appealed, alleging that the decision of 13 July 2010 was unlawful, that there were no grounds for placing the applicant under extradition arrest, that the prosecutor’s request should not have been examined before the Supreme Court had dealt with the lawyer’s appeal against the decisions of 10 and 15 March 2010, and that the applicant should have been released from detention within seventy-two hours of the entry into force of the extradition-related amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure on 17 June 2010.
The lawyer also argued that the first-instance court had failed to take into account submissions that the applicant risked treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Convention and that the extradition inquiry had not been completed. The lawyer stated that the applicant had not been duly informed of the  authorities’ decision to arrest him and that the decision was invalid on that ground.
On 21 July 2010 the Dnipropetrovsk Regional Court of Appeal upheld the decision of 13 July 2010, finding that the first-instance court had duly examined all the relevant circumstances and complied with the procedure envisaged by Article 463 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The Court of Appeal held that the questions of the applicant’s responsibility for the crimes with which he was charged in Belarus and the lawfulness of the procedural decisions taken by the  authorities fell outside the scope of the review. It was also noted that the interim measure indicated by the European Court of Human Rights had expired on 25 March 2010 and that the applicant’s appeals to the Supreme Court and the European Court of Human Rights did not prevent him from being placed under extradition arrest.
On 8 September 2010 the Krasnogvardiyskyy Prosecutor lodged a request with the  for the extension of the applicant’s detention.
On an unspecified date the applicant and his lawyers lodged with the same court requests for the applicant’s release. In particular, it was suggested that the applicant could be released on guarantee by the Union of Jewish Religious Communities and Organisations of the Dnipropetrovsk Region. Because of his religious beliefs and state of health the applicant required special kosher food and communication with a representative of a religious organisation, which was allegedly impossible in detention.
On 29 September 2010 the  allowed the prosecutor’s request, relying on the same grounds as in its decision of 13 July 2010. The court also refused the requests for the applicant’s release.
The prosecutor’s further requests for the applicant’s continued detention, lodged with the  on 25 November 2010, 2 February and 18 April 2011, were allowed by the court on 2 December 2010 and 15 February and 27 April 2011 respectively, for the same reasons as in its previous decisions. The  also noted that the applicant was not a Ukrainian national and was not seeking to acquire that nationality. Relying on the preliminary results of the pending extradition inquiry, the Krasnogvardiyskyy Court further noted the applicant was not wanted by Belarus for political or war crimes; that in Ukraine there was no judgment or decision terminating the proceedings against the applicant on the charges in connection with which the applicant’s extradition was requested; and that Ukrainian law did not provide for the initiation of proceedings on those charges solely on a victim’s complaint.
The applicant and his lawyers took part in the court proceedings and were able to raise counter-arguments.
The applicant stated that he had appealed against the decision of 29 September 2010 and that the Dnipropetrovsk Regional Court of Appeal had dismissed the appeal as unsubstantiated on 6 October 2010. The applicant did not provide a copy of the appeal or the appeal decision.
The decision of 2 December 2010 was not challenged on appeal.
One of the applicant’s lawyers appealed against the decisions of 15 February and 27 April 2011. On 23 February 2011 the Dnipropetrovsk Regional Court of Appeal, having heard the appeal in the lawyer’s and the prosecutor’s presence, confirmed the former decision, while on 11 May 2011 it quashed the decision of 27 April 2011 and remitted the matter to the first-instance court for new consideration.
In its decision of 23 February 2011 the Court of Appeal noted that at the beginning of the appeal hearing the applicant’s lawyer had requested the court to summon the applicant to that hearing. The court of appeal refused the request, stating that the right to be summoned to appeal hearings was given to detainees convicted or acquitted of a crime.
Meanwhile, another of the applicant’s lawyers submitted several requests to the GPU seeking the applicant’s release from detention. Several requests for assistance in this matter were submitted to the German consulate in Kyiv.
On 19 May 2011 the prosecutors ordered the applicant’s release on bail. Pending a decision on his extradition request, the applicant was allowed to travel within , but not to leave the country.
After the decision to refuse the request for the applicant’s extradition was taken by the Ukrainian authorities (see paragraph 63 below), the restriction on his movements was lifted and he left Ukraine for .
On 24 February 2010 the General Prosecutor of Belarus sent a request to the Ukrainian authorities seeking the applicant’s extradition to  in connection with the criminal proceedings against him.
The extradition request contained the following assurances: that the applicant would not be prosecuted for a crime committed prior to extradition without the consent of the GPU; that he would not be removed to a third country without the consent of the GPU; that he would not be subjected to torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment; that he would be assured the right to a fair trial; that if necessary he would be provided with adequate medical assistance; that after the termination of the criminal proceedings or after serving his sentence, if one was imposed, the applicant would be free to leave Belarus; that the criminal prosecution of the applicant was not related to his political views, race, religion or ethnic origin; and that the death penalty was not envisaged for the crimes of which he was accused.
On 26 February 2010 the First Deputy Prosecutor General of Ukraine acknowledged the receipt of the request for the applicant’s extradition and requested the Belarus authorities to provide additional assurances in respect of the applicant’s prosecution and detention in .
On the same day the Ukrainian Migration Service informed the GPU that the applicant had not requested refugee status in .
By a letter of 1 March 2010, the Deputy General Prosecutor of Belarus provided additional assurances that the staff of Ukraine’s embassy or consulate in Belarus would be allowed to visit the applicant in detention; that their meetings with the applicant would not be monitored by the Belarus authorities; that they would be given the opportunity to obtain information about the state of the proceedings against the applicant and to be present at his trial; and that they would be informed of the outcome of the proceedings.
On 26 February 2010 the GPU requested the SBU and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine to provide it with information concerning the applicant’s travel from and to Belarus and Ukraine and concerning his possible involvement in the political opposition in Belarus and persecution by the Belarus authorities on this ground.
The GPU also requested the German Consulate in Kyiv to provide information concerning the applicant’s nationality and his application for refugee status in . On 4 March 2010 the Consulate informed the GPU that the applicant was a German national and that German nationals could not apply for refugee status in that country.
On 17 March 2010 the SBU replied that they had no information about the applicant’s travel outside the territory of Ukraine or his possible involvement in the political opposition in . A similar reply was given by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine on 23 March 2010.
By a letter of 9 March 2010, the GPU informed the Court that, given the Court’s ruling under Rule 39 in the applicant’s case, no decision on his extradition request would be taken before the Court had decided on it.
On 29 April 2010 the GPU informed one of the applicant’s lawyers that a decision concerning the request for the applicant’s extradition could not be taken because of the Court’s decision to apply Rule 39 in the case. The GPU also noted that the decision did not preclude the applicant’s detention and extradition inquiry.
On 17 June 2010 the GPU ordered the Dnipropetrovsk Regional Prosecutor’s Office to complete, by 17 August 2010, an inquiry concerning the request for the applicant’s extradition in accordance with Article 465 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Acting on a request by the GPU of 2 July 2010, the Consul of Ukraine in  visited two detainees who had previously been extradited to that country, and noted that the conditions of their detention were satisfactory and that there were no complaints in that respect or concerning unlawful methods of investigation, and that their defence rights were observed. The Consul’s note was submitted to the GPU on 29 July 2010.
On 17 August 2010 the time allowed for the extradition inquiry was extended by the GPU until 17 October 2010. There is no information concerning subsequent actions taken by the authorities in the framework of the inquiry.
On 28 July 2011 the Deputy Prosecutor General of  issued a decision refusing the request for the applicant’s extradition. In particular, it was noted that according to the outcome of the extradition inquiry there were no grounds preventing the applicant’s extradition under the Minsk Convention. However, the Deputy Prosecutor General further noted that:
“...
According to the conclusions of [the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe], the Council of Europe, the European Union, and of a number of international organisations, the human rights situation in Belarus has significantly worsened since the December 2010 presidential election [in that country].
In these circumstances, it was not possible to exclude a risk of violation of the rights of P. V. Molotchko, as guaranteed by Articles 3 and 6 of [the Convention], in case of his extradition to Belarus.
[The Convention] was binding for Ukraine, though  was not a party to that international treaty and there were no effective mechanisms of control over respect for human rights in that country. Therefore, Ukraine, as a State Party to [the Convention], would bear the entire responsibility for any violation of the rights of P. V. Molotchko on the .
Accordingly, extradition of P. V. Molotchko [to Belarus] would be contrary to ’s undertakings under the international treaties on human rights [to which it is a party]. This constitutes a ground for refusing extradition of a person under Article 466 § 1 (5) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.”
On 2 March 2010 the applicant lodged with the Court a request for an interim measure suspending his extradition to . On 3 March 2010 the President of the Section decided that Rule 39 should be applied in the applicant’s case for a limited period and that the applicant should not be extradited to  until 25 March 2010. The application was granted priority on the same date (Rule 41). On 25 March 2010 the President decided to extend until further notice the interim measure indicated in the case.
By a letter of 7 July 2010, the Government informed the Court that the GPU would take a decision on the request for the applicant’s extradition under the new regulations on extradition. However, they assured that in any event the applicant would not be extradited, given the interim measure indicated by the Court.
On 28 October 2010 the Government requested the Court to lift the interim measure in the light of the developments in the domestic law, namely the introduction of the new regulations on extradition.
On the basis of the information provided by the Government and the applicant’s comments in reply, on 5 January 2011 the President decided to discontinue the application of Rule 39. In particular, it was noted that the Government had given an assurance that the applicant would have the opportunity to challenge an extradition decision, if any, and that the lodging of a complaint with the courts against such decision would suspend its execution.
The parties were informed that the decision lifting the interim measure was taken on the understanding that the applicant would have the opportunity to contact the Court with a Rule 39 request if the extradition decision became final and enforceable. The Government were invited to inform the relevant authorities of their interpretation of the new legislation and to inform the Court of the applicant’s removal at least three working days in advance.
On 5 March 2010 one of the applicant’s lawyers lodged an administrative claim against the GPU with the , challenging the lawfulness of the applicant’s possible extradition to . She also requested the court to apply an interim measure with a view to preventing the applicant’s extradition.
On the same day the court, holding that the applicant’s extradition might hinder the right to challenge it before the courts, decided to apply the requested interim measure and ordered the GPU not to extradite the applicant.
On 12 March 2010 the same court decided to return the claim to the lawyer, as she had not submitted documents authorising her to act on behalf of the applicant. By a separate decision on the same day, the court revoked its procedural ruling of 5 March 2010.
Neither the applicant nor the lawyer took part in the hearing on 12 March 2010. They learned of the decisions from the Government’s submissions in the proceedings before the Court, a copy of which the lawyer received on 26 March 2010.
It cannot be established if the decisions of 12 March 2010 were challenged on appeal. No material was provided by the parties in this respect.
On 23 March 2010 the applicant requested the Ukrainian Migration Service to grant him refugee status, alleging that he was a victim of political persecution in Belarus because he was involved in the organisation and financial support of the political opposition in that country.
On 23 April 2010 the request was refused. The parties did not specify the reasons for that decision.
The applicant challenged the refusal before the courts.
By decisions of 31 August and 13 October 2010 the administrative courts at two levels of jurisdiction upheld the refusal. The courts noted that when the applicant had come to Ukraine he had not had the intention of obtaining refugee status: he had applied for it only after his arrest with a view to extradition; the applicant was not involved in political or civic activities in Belarus; the applicant did not prove that he had been active in the political opposition in that country; before arriving in Ukraine the applicant had been living in Germany, whose protection he had not sought when he had learned of the criminal proceedings against him in July 2008; the applicant was accused of serious crimes of a non-political nature; the applicant had failed to substantiate the alleged threat to his life and health in Belarus; the applicant’s submissions in the latter respect were limited to general information about the political situation in that country. The courts further noted that the migration authorities had duly examined the applicant’s written submissions and his statements made at interview. The courts concluded that the applicant’s request was a disguised attempt to evade criminal prosecution in .
The applicant did not appeal on points of law.
After his arrest on 23 February 2010 the applicant was placed in the SBU Isolation Unit (“the ITT”, ізолятор тимчасового тримання).
On 12 March 2010 the applicant was transferred to the Dnipropetrovsk Temporary Detention Centre (“the SIZO”, слідчий ізолятор). According to the applicant’s submissions of 19 March 2010, in the SIZO his head was shaved against his will and he was placed in a cell where suspects of serious crimes were detained; he did not get enough food and drinking water; he was at risk of contracting tuberculosis; and he did not receive parcels of food and medication sent to him from outside the SIZO.
In later submissions the applicant also alleged that during the winter period in 2010 and 2011 he had been escorted to the court hearings in an unheated van.
According to the Government’s submissions of 30 July 2010, the applicant’s head had not been shaved, but his hair had been cut short. The applicant was provided with adequate food in the SIZO. The applicant’s lawyers visited him in the SIZO on 15 March, 6 April, 5 and 21 May, 3 June, and 1 and 5 July 2010. The lawyers brought the applicant food and personal hygiene products which the SIZO authorities allowed him to keep. He did not request any medication from the SIZO authorities.
The Government also submitted a statement written by the applicant on 20 July 2010, the relevant extracts from which read as follows:
“... I would like to comment on the questions put to me ... I arrived in the SIZO on 12 March 2010 ... during sanitary processing [in the SIZO] I requested the attendant to cut my hair short (not to shave off the hair completely) so that it would not be too hot ... I do not have any complaints about my health ... signed personally, no physical or psychological influence or abuse ...”
The applicant maintained that he had given the statement at the request of the SIZO authorities, and without obtaining his lawyer’s advice, because he had been afraid that the authorities would punish him if he refused. The applicant denied the statement and insisted that his hair had been cut against his will.
On 4 March and 15 May 2010 the applicant was taken to one of the SBU offices, where he was questioned by Belarus KGB officers, who tried to coerce him into denying the statements he had made in 2008-09 and to make incriminating statements against the  investigators who had previously dealt with his case.
On 30 November 2010 an investigator from the SBU, acting on a request of the Deputy Prosecutor General of , tried to question the applicant concerning his criminal case, in the presence of one of his lawyers and several KGB officers. The applicant refused to answer any questions, stating that the presence of KGB officers was contrary to domestic and international law and that it made him feel under political pressure.
On 23 December 2010 the applicant complained to the GPU, alleging that during the questioning the KGB officers had exerted psychological pressure on him in order to extract incriminating statements aimed at former Belarus investigators and to persuade him to pay compensation to . By a letter of 28 January 2011, the GPU stated to the applicant that these allegations were unfounded.
The applicant stated that the KGB had continued contacting him concerning the criminal case, though he provided no details in that respect.
The Convention was ratified by the Ukrainian Parliament on 10 November 1994. It entered into force in respect of Ukraine on 14 April 1995 and in respect of  on 19 May 1994. The relevant extracts from the Convention provide as follows:
Article 56
Obligation of extradition
“1.  The Contracting Parties shall ... on each other’s request extradite persons who find themselves on their territory, for criminal prosecution or to serve a sentence.
Extradition for criminal prosecution shall extend to offences which are criminally punishable under the laws of the requesting and requested Contracting Parties, and which entail at least one year’s imprisonment or a heavier sentence...”
Article 57
Refusal to extradite
“1.  No extradition shall take place if:
a) the person whose extradition is sought is a national of the requested Contracting Party;
b) at the moment of receipt of the request [for extradition] criminal prosecution may not be initiated or a sentence may not be executed as time-barred or for other reasons envisaged by the legislation of the requested Contracting Party;
c) on the territory of the requested Contracting Party there has been an [enforceable] judgment or decision discontinuing the proceedings against the person whose extradition is sought, concerning the same crime;
d) the legislation of the requesting and requested Contracting Parties envisages that criminal prosecution for [the crimes of which the person is accused] may be initiated [only upon a victim’s complaint].
Extradition may be refused if the crime in connection with which it is sought was committed on the territory of the requested Contracting Party.
In the event of refusal to extradite, the requesting Contracting Party shall be informed of the reasons for the refusal.”
Article 58
Request for extradition
“1.  A request for extradition shall include the following information:
A request for extradition for the purpose of criminal prosecution shall be accompanied by a certiﬁed copy of a detention order...”
Article 59
Additional information
“1.  If a request for extradition does not contain all the necessary data, the requested Contracting Party may ask for additional information, for the submission of which it shall set a time-limit not exceeding one month. This time-limit may be extended for up to a month at the request of the requesting Contracting Party...”
On 21 May 2010 the Parliament of Ukraine passed a law introducing a new Chapter (No. 37) to the Code of Criminal Procedure governing extradition procedures, including arrest and detention of persons whose extradition is sought by a third State (law on the introduction of changes to the Code of Criminal Procedure concerning extradition “the Criminal Procedure (Extradition) Act”). The law was officially published on 17 June 2010 and entered into force on the same day. It did not contain transitional provisions.
The relevant provisions of Chapter 37, which was amended on 2 June 2011, read as follows:
Article 450
Definitions
“...
Extradition inquiry [shall embrace] activities carried out by bodies determined by law in order to establish and examine circumstances which, as defined by an international treaty of Ukraine or another of its legislative acts, are capable of preventing the extradition of a person who has committed a crime.
Extradition arrest [shall mean] placing a person in detention to ensure his or her extradition.
Provisional arrest [shall mean] placing a person who has been arrested on suspicion of having committing a crime outside Ukraine, in detention for the period determined by this Code or by an international treaty of Ukraine until receipt of an extradition request.
...”
Article 451
General conditions for extradition
“An extradition request shall be made if for at least one of the crimes in connection with which the extradition is being sought Ukrainian law envisages imprisonment for a maximum period of not less than one year...
An extradition request from the competent authority of a foreign State may be examined only if the conditions provided for in paragraph one of this Article are met.
...”
Article 452
Central authorities concerning a person’s extradition
“The General Prosecutor’s Office and the Ministry of Justice shall be the central authorities concerning a person’s extradition, unless otherwise envisaged by an international treaty of .
The General Prosecutor’s Office shall be the central authority concerning extradition of the accused (suspected) where the proceedings [in the foreign State] are at the stage of pre-trial investigations.
...”
Article 461
Particularities of arrest of a person who has committed a crime outside 
“Arrest on the  of a person who is wanted by a foreign State in connection with the commission of a crime shall be carried out by a body of inquiry.
The body of inquiry that carries out the arrest shall immediately inform the prosecutor who supervises the observance of laws by that body. The notification of the prosecutor, accompanied by the record of the arrest, shall contain detailed information on the reasons for the arrest.
Upon receipt of the notification the prosecutor shall check the legality of the arrest of the person who is wanted by the competent authorities of foreign States, and shall immediately inform the regional prosecutor.
Within seventy-two hours of the arrest, the regional prosecutor’s office shall report the arrest to the central authority, which shall inform the competent authority of the foreign State within three days.
Every case of arrest of a foreign national who has committed a crime outside  shall also be reported by the regional prosecutor’s office to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.
The arrested person shall be released immediately if:
  1) within seventy-two hours of the arrest he or she has not been served with a reasoned decision of a court on the application of provisional or extradition arrest;
  2) it has been established that there are circumstances under which the extradition may not be carried out.
The procedure of arrest of such persons and of examination of complaints about their arrest shall be governed by Article 106 of this Code, taking into account the particularities envisaged by this Chapter.”
Article 463
Extradition arrest
“Upon receipt of an extradition request from the competent authority of a foreign State, the prosecutor, on the instruction (request) of the central authority, shall lodge a request for the extradition arrest of the person with the court at the place of the person’s detention.
The request [for the extradition arrest] shall be accompanied by:
1) a copy of the extradition request from the competent authority of the foreign State, certified by the central authority;
2) documents concerning the person’s nationality;
3) available materials from the extradition inquiry.
Materials submitted to the court shall be translated into the official language or another language, as provided by an international treaty of .
On receipt of a request [for an extradition arrest], the judge shall check the identity of the person concerned, shall invite him or her to make a statement, shall check the extradition request and the available materials from the extradition inquiry, shall hear the opinion of the prosecutor and of other participants, and shall deliver a decision:
1) ordering the extradition arrest;
2) refusing the extradition arrest if there are no grounds for its application.
When considering a request [for extradition arrest], the judge shall not examine the question of guilt and shall not review the lawfulness of procedural decisions taken by the competent authorities of the foreign State in the proceedings against the person whose extradition is requested.
The judge’s decision may be appealed against to the court of appeal by the prosecutor, the person placed under the extradition arrest, or his or her defence counsel or legal representative, within three days of the date of delivery of the decision. The lodging of an appeal against the judge’s decision shall not suspend its entry into force or its execution. A decision of the court of appeal shall not be subject to [further] appeal.
Extradition arrest shall be applied until a decision on the extradition of the person concerned and his actual surrender (extradition), but shall not last more than eighteen months.
Within this period, and not less than once every two months, the judge at the place of the person’s detention shall check, upon the prosecutor’s request, if there are grounds for further detention of the person or for his or her release.
Upon a complaint by the person placed under the extradition arrest, or by his or her defence counsel or legal representative, the judge at the place of the person’s detention shall check, but not more often than once a month, if there are grounds for the person’s release.
If the maximum period of extradition arrest, provided in paragraph 7 of this article, has expired, and the question of the person’s extradition and actual surrender has not been resolved by the central authority, the person shall be released immediately.
The fact that the person has been released from extradition arrest by the court does not preclude its repeated application for the purpose of the person’s actual surrendering to a foreign State in execution of a decision on extradition, unless otherwise stipulated by an international treaty of .
If the person has been released from detention by the court, the regional prosecutor or his deputy, with the agreement of the competent central authority, shall order the application of other necessary measures to prevent the person from absconding and to ensure he or she is surrendered later.
Such measures shall be sufficient to ensure that the decision to extradite can be put into effect, and may, in particular, include bail, restrictions on the person’s movement and control over his or her place of residence. The application of bail and of restrictions on the person’s movement shall be carried out in accordance with the procedure envisaged by Articles 98-1, 151 and 154-1 of this Code, taking into account the particularities of this Chapter.
The regional prosecutor or his deputy shall notify the person concerned and his or her defence counsel or legal representative of the order issued in respect of the person.
The regional prosecutor or his deputy may entrust the body of inquiry with the execution of the order.”
Article 464
Termination of provisional or extradition arrest
“Provisional or extradition arrest shall be terminated if:
1) the central authority has not received a request for the person’s extradition within the time-limits provided for by an international treaty of ;
2) the extradition inquiry reveals circumstances which preclude the person’s extradition;
3) the competent authority of a foreign State has refused to seek the person’s extradition;
4) the central authority decides to refuse the person’s extradition.
The person’s release shall be [ordered] by the regional prosecutor or his deputy on the instruction (request) of the central authority; in the circumstances provided for in paragraph 2 of this Article it shall be carried out with the agreement of the relevant central authority. A copy of the release decision shall be sent to the head of the preliminary detention institution and to the court which decided on the application of provisional or extradition arrest.”
Article 465
Extradition inquiry
 “The extradition inquiry concerning circumstances capable of preventing the person’s extradition shall be carried out by the central authority or, upon its instructions (request), by the regional prosecutor’s office.
The extradition inquiry shall be [completed] within thirty days. This period may be extended by the relevant central authority.
Materials of the extradition inquiry together with the conclusion [as to its outcome] shall be sent to the relevant central authority.”
Article 466
Refusal of extradition
“A person’s extradition to a foreign State shall be refused if:
1) on the day of the decision on extradition the person ... is, according to Ukrainian laws, a Ukrainian national or a stateless person permanently residing in Ukraine;
2) Ukrainian law does not provide the punishment of imprisonment for the crime for which extradition is being sought;
3) the charges concerning the crimes for which extradition is being sought are time-barred according to Ukrainian law ...
4) the competent authority of the foreign State has not provided, upon the central authority’s request, additional materials or data, without which a decision on the extradition request may not be taken;
5) the person’s extradition is incompatible with ’s undertakings under its international treaties;
6) there are other circumstances envisaged by an international treaty of .
The person who has been granted refugee status may not be extradited to a foreign State where his or her health, life, or freedom is endangered for reasons of race, faith (religion), ethnicity, nationality, membership of a particular social group, or political opinion, unless otherwise provided by an international treaty of Ukraine.
In the event of refusal of extradition on the grounds of nationality, refugee status or other grounds that do not exclude [the possibility of pursuing] proceedings in a [criminal] case, the General Prosecutor’s Office of Ukraine instructs, at the request of the competent authority of a foreign State, the pre-trial investigation body to investigate the criminal case against that person in accordance with the procedure prescribed by this Code.”
Article 467
Decision on an extradition request
“Having examined the materials of the extradition inquiry, the central authority shall take a decision to extradite the person or to refuse [his or her] extradition to the foreign State. The decision shall be taken by the head of the central authority or his or her deputy.
The central authority shall inform the competent authority of the foreign State and the person concerned of its decision.
If a decision to extradite the person is taken, that person shall be given a copy of the decision. If the decision has not been challenged before a court within seven days, actual surrendering to the competent authorities of the foreign State shall be organised.”
Article 467
Procedure for appeal against a decision to extradite a person
“A decision to extradite a person may be appealed against by the person concerned, his or her defence counsel or legal representative to a local court at the place of the person’s detention.
...
The appeal shall be examined in a single-judge formation within ten days of the date of its receipt by the court. The hearing shall be held in the presence of the prosecutor, the person concerned, his or her defence counsel or legal representative, if the latter participates in the proceedings.
When considering the appeal, the judge shall not examine the question of guilt and shall not review the lawfulness of procedural decisions taken by the competent authorities of the foreign State in the proceedings against the person whose extradition is requested.
Following the examination, the judge shall take a reasoned decision:
1) rejecting the appeal;
2) allowing the appeal and quashing the decision to extradite.
After the entry into force of the judge’s decision quashing the decision to extradite, the person concerned shall be immediately released from detention.
An appeal against the judge’s decision may be lodged with a court of appeal by the prosecutor who participated in the hearing before the court of first instance or by the person concerned, his or her defence counsel or legal representative, within seven days of the date of delivery of the impugned decision. The lodging of an appeal against the judge’s decision shall suspend its entry into force and its execution.”
The overview is based on the analysis of a number of decisions taken during the period from 17 June 2010 to 20 April 2011 by the district courts in Kyiv and by the Kyiv Court of Appeal concerning extradition matters, including detention pending extradition proceedings. The relevant provisions of the overview read as follows:
“...
As follows from the regulations on extradition, the court dealing with a request for the application of extradition arrest must check whether there is an extradition request by the competent authority of the foreign State and whether there are relevant documents concerning the person’s nationality; [the court must] examine materials of the extradition inquiry and verify if there are circumstances preventing [the requested] extradition (Articles 2, 3, 6, 10 and 11 of the European Convention and additional protocols thereto [and] Article 57 of [the Minsk Convention]).
...
It must be emphasized that for a full, objective and expeditious examination of requests for the application of provisional or extradition arrest, the participation of the person in whose respect the arrest is being applied and the prosecutor is necessary, because [before adopting] a final decision [on the request] the judge [shall] check the arrested person’s identity, invite him to make a statement and hear the prosecutor. No cases were identified in which the requests were examined in the absence of [those parties].
...”
Other relevant domestic law provisions pertinent to the case are summarised and cited in the judgment of Soldatenko v. Ukraine, no. 2440/07, §§ 21-25, 23 October 2008.
Pursuant to Section 3.1.1 of the Regulations, detainees must undergo sanitary treatment upon their arrival in a SIZO. The details of such treatment are not specified. Section 2 of the Rules of Conduct of Detainees provides that male detainees may choose not to shave heads and to keep haircuts of a “short style”.
The rules governing detention of people in ITTs within the SBU structure provide for medical examination and sanitary treatment of all detainees upon their arrival and subsequently at regular intervals. The sanitary treatment includes washing of detainees and disinfection of their clothing. A detainee’s hair may be cut off on the instructions of the authority dealing with the criminal case and with the consent of the detainee (sections 4.4 and 7.7).
According to Section 9.3 of the Regulations, persons placed in ITTs within the police structure must undergo complex sanitary treatment, which includes, inter alia, cutting their hair short, provided that the authority dealing with the relevant case agrees.
On 20 June 2007 the CPT published a report on its visit to  from 9 to 21 October 2005, the relevant parts of which read as follows (emphasis added by the CPT):
 “...
Prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment
...
Further, an end should be put to certain practices that are pointless in terms of security and perceived by life-sentenced prisoners as humiliating, namely: i) indicating the nature of the sentence on the new prison uniform for men and women (on this point, Rule 20.2 of Recommendation Rec (2006) 2 of the Committee of Ministers to Member States on the European Prison Rules); ii) obliging men to have shaven heads; iii) obliging prisoners to stand facing the wall whenever staff or visitors are present.
The CPT recommends that the necessary measures be taken in all penal establishments holding prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment, in the light of the above remarks.
...”
In its Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2009, released on 11 March 2010, the Department of State noted with respect to :
“...
Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution and law provide for an independent judiciary; however, in practice the judiciary remained subject to political pressure, suffered from corruption and inefficiency, and lacked public confidence.
... Judges also continued to complain about pressure from high-ranking politicians seeking improper resolution of cases.
...
All courts, except for the Supreme Court, were funded through the SJA, which was also responsible for staffing. The Ministries of Justice and Education were responsible for training judges. The judiciary’s lack of adequate staff and funds contributed to inefficiency and corruption and increased its dependence on the executive branch. On December 22, the Constitutional Court ruled that the president’s right to appoint and dismiss the head of the SJA is unconstitutional. The court stated that because the SJA oversees a state body and is not a cabinet-level agency the responsibility of appointing and dismissing the head of the SJA falls to the prime minister with the concurrence of the cabinet.
...
While the law provides for judicial independence, in some cases it also gives the president considerable power over the judiciary. The president has the authority, with the agreement of the Ministry of Justice and the chair of the Supreme Court or of a corresponding higher specialized court, to establish and abolish courts of general jurisdiction. The president determines the number of judges in the court system, appoints and removes chairpersons and deputy chairpersons of courts, and establishes appellate commercial and appellate administrative courts.
...”