The case originated in an application (no. 42507/06) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Mikail Tüzün (“the applicant”), on 17 October 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr S.S. Acar and Mr S. Uz, lawyers practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant complained that it had been impossible for him to modify the amount of his claim in the light of the compensation amount established in an expert report submitted to the administrative court. He also complained about the length of those proceedings.
In a decision of 8 April 2014, the Court declared the applicant’s complaint regarding the length of proceedings inadmissible on account of a new remedy offered by Law no. 6384 and adjourned the examination of the remainder of the application.
On 26 June 2017 the Government were given notice of the applicant’s remaining complaint.
The applicant was born in 1960 and lives in Istanbul.
On 11 December 1995 the applicant, a traffic control officer, was hit by a car while on duty. He suffered bodily injuries as a result of the accident. An official disability report indicated that he had a reduced working capacity of 60%.
On the basis of this report the applicant, while reserving the right to increase his claims in due course, made an initial request for compensation to the Ministry of Interior, claiming 20,000 Turkish liras (TRY) in pecuniary damages and TRY 5,000 in non-pecuniary damages.
Following tacit dismissal of the claim by the Ministry, the applicant brought a case for compensation before the Istanbul Administrative Court for the amounts he had specified in his request to the Ministry.
During the course of the proceedings, the court decided of its own motion to order an expert report to determine the exact amount of pecuniary damage suffered by the applicant. The report, which was submitted to the court on 26 September 2005, indicated the applicant’s pecuniary damages as 157,077 TRY. The applicant did not submit a request to the court to increase his initial claims in the light of that report. The Istanbul Administrative Court in its decision delivered on 15 February 2006 only awarded him the amounts initially requested by him.
At the time of the events, Turkish administrative law did not allow claimants to amend their initial claims during the course of proceedings before the administrative courts (see, in particular, Okçu v. Turkey, no. 39515/03, §§ 27-32, 21 July 2009).
Since 30 April 2013, as a result of an amendment to the Code of Administrative Procedure, parties in full remedy actions have been able to revise their initial claims, provided that the related costs are paid.