The applicant is serving a sentence in Straubing Prison. He complained under Articles 3, 6 and 13 of the Convention about repeated random strip searches prior to or after receiving visitors in prison and about the domestic courts’ refusal to grant him compensation for the nonpecuniary damage he had suffered as a result of these searches.
The applicant was born in 1960 and is currently serving a life sentence in Straubing Prison. He had been granted legal aid and was represented by Mr D. Thenhausen, a lawyer practising in Bielefeld.
The Government were represented by one of their Agents, Mr H.J. Behrens, of the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 5 November 2016 the Federal Constitutional Court, on a constitutional complaint lodged by a different person detained in Straubing Prison, declared that the random strip search of that detainee prior to his receiving outside visitors had been unconstitutional (file no. 2 BvR 6/16). The court found that the search had been carried out on an order issued by the prison authorities under section 91(2) of the Bavarian Execution of Sentences Act (see paragraph 30 below) to the effect that one prisoner out of five was to be strip-searched on that day. As the order did not permit such a search to be dispensed with in a particular case, it constituted a disproportionate interference with the detainee’s personality rights (allgemeines Persönlichkeitsrecht) under Article 2 § 1 of the Basic Law read in conjunction with Article 1.
The Federal Constitutional Court considered that strip searches involving the inspection of body orifices that were usually covered constituted a serious interference with the personality rights of the individual concerned. This was also reflected in the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights regarding strip searches, which was to be taken into account in the interpretation of the Basic Law. In order to strike a fair balance between the detainee’s personality rights and respect for his privacy on the one hand, and the prison’s security interests on the other hand, it would have been necessary for the search order to permit the prison staff to dispense with a strip search in cases where an abuse of visiting rights by the prisoner concerned was very unlikely. The court’s decision was published on 8 December 2016.
The applicant brought several sets of proceedings in the criminal courts dealing with the execution of sentences, requesting that a number of the strip searches he had been obliged to undergo in Straubing Prison be declared unlawful.
On 28 December 2016 the Nuremberg Court of Appeal declared that the random strip search of the applicant conducted prior to a prison visit by a records clerk of the Straubing District Court on 24 August 2015 had been unlawful. It referred to the reasons given in the Federal Constitutional Court’s decision of 5 November 2016 (see paragraphs 5 et seq. above) which had concerned the same practice of strip searches in Straubing Prison. On 18 September 2017 the Regensburg Regional Court further declared that a strip search of the applicant carried out on 11 February 2016 before a visit by a records clerk of the district court had been unlawful.
Furthermore, on 8 February, 7 April and 4 October 2017 respectively the Regensburg Regional Court, referring to the aforementioned decision of the Federal Constitutional Court, declared that the strip searches of the applicant on 3 December 2015, 13 June 2016 and 1 September 2016, which had been carried out after he had received visitors, had been unlawful. Following appeals against the first two decisions, those decisions were upheld by the Nuremberg Court of Appeal.
On 2 October 2017 the Nuremberg Court of Appeal, referring to its previous decisions, further found that the order for a strip search of the applicant on 19 January 2017 after a visit by a records clerk of the district court, and also the disciplinary measures taken against the applicant for refusing to undergo the search, had been unlawful. It considered that the applicant had a legal interest in that finding as there was a risk of repetition of such searches, given that the applicant would receive further visits in the future.
On 6 February 2017 the applicant applied to the Regensburg Regional Court for legal aid in order to bring official liability proceedings under Article 839 of the Civil Code read in conjunction with Article 34 of the Basic Law (see paragraph 31 below). He intended to claim compensation for non-pecuniary damage on account of random strip searches based on section 91(2) of the Bavarian Execution of Sentences Act (see paragraph 30 below) and carried out prior to visits he had received in prison. He stated that he had had to undergo such illegal strip searches on 23 January 2014, 11 February 2014, 29 September 2014, 13 October 2014, 24 August 2015 and 11 February 2016.
The applicant stated that during these searches he had been obliged to undress completely. He had then been searched under the armpits and in the mouth and had had to bend down for an inspection of his anus. The searches had been ordered on a random basis in respect of one in five prisoners, without any exceptions being made. No security reasons for such searches had been demonstrated in his case. The searches had been carried out prior to his receiving visits from clerks of the district court registry who had come to take a record of the remedies of which he wished to avail himself before the courts. He stated his intention to claim compensation of 1,000 euros (EUR) per illegal strip search.
On 20 March 2017 the Regensburg Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s legal aid request. It found, following a summary examination, that the official liability proceedings which the applicant intended to bring did not have sufficient prospects of success (see Article 114 § 1, first sentence, of the Code of Civil Procedure, paragraph 36 below). Sufficient prospects of success existed only where the court, having regard to the claimant’s description of the facts and the documents before it, considered the claimant’s position to be at least arguable and was persuaded that the claimant could prove his or her allegations.
The Regional Court argued that, having regard to the case-law of the Federal Court of Justice and the Federal Constitutional Court (see paragraphs 33-34 below), not each and every breach of an individual’s personality rights warranted the payment of compensation for nonpecuniary damage. Compensation was to be paid only for sufficiently serious breaches of those rights which could not be compensated for adequately by other means.
The Regional Court found that, in the applicant’s case, adequate compensation had already been granted by other means. It referred in that regard to the findings of the Nuremberg Court of Appeal in its decision of 28 December 2016 (see paragraph 8 above) and those of the Federal Constitutional Court in its decision of 5 November 2016. It further considered that there had been no fault on the part of the prison staff, as the Regional Court itself had confirmed the lawfulness of random strip searches prior to the aforementioned decision of the Federal Constitutional Court.
On 17 May 2017 the Nuremberg Court of Appeal dismissed an appeal lodged by the applicant. It confirmed that the applicant’s intended official liability action had insufficient prospects of success. Having regard to all the circumstances of the case, it found that it was not necessary to award the applicant monetary compensation for the breach of his personality rights.
The Court of Appeal clarified that the strip searches of the applicant had been unlawful and had constituted a serious interference with his personality rights. The searches had been disproportionate as there had been no possibility of dispensing with a search in an individual case. This followed from the Federal Constitutional Court’s decision of 5 November 2016 and the Court of Appeal’s decision of 28 December 2016 (see paragraphs 5 and 8 above). The court further conceded that an abuse of visiting rights had been unlikely in the circumstances of the applicant’s case.
However, the fault on the part of the prison staff who had ordered and carried out the searches in question prior to the Federal Constitutional Court’s decision of 5 November 2016 had at most been minor. Both the Regional Court and the Court of Appeal had considered random strip searches of prisoners prior to visits to be lawful before the Federal Constitutional Court’s decision, arguing that the surprise element of random searches was decisive for their effectiveness. Moreover, according to the defendant’s statements, the rules on strip searches in Straubing Prison had immediately been brought into line with the Federal Constitutional Court’s decision, so that there was no risk of future random searches without an examination of the particular circumstances of the case.
The Court of Appeal further considered that the applicant had obtained sufficient just satisfaction also by virtue of the Nuremberg Court of Appeal’s finding in its decision of 28 December 2016 (see paragraph 8 above) that one of the impugned strip searches, namely the search on 24 August 2015, had been unlawful. The reasons given in that decision applied equally to the other searches at issue in the applicant’s case.
On 19 June 2017 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the Federal Constitutional Court against the decisions of the Regional Court and the Court of Appeal refusing to grant him legal aid. He argued, in particular, that the impugned decisions had breached his personality rights and his right to court proceedings. Given the gravity of the interference with his personality rights on account of the strip searches, he should have been granted monetary compensation for the non-pecuniary damage suffered.
On 23 January 2018 the Federal Constitutional Court, without giving reasons, declined to consider the applicant’s constitutional complaint (file no. 1 BvR 1688/17).
On 9 October 2017 the applicant again applied to the Regensburg Regional Court for legal aid in order to bring official liability proceedings claiming compensation for non-pecuniary damage on account of strip searches carried out after visits he had received in prison. He had had to undergo such strip searches, based on section 91(3) of the Bavarian Execution of Sentences Act (see paragraph 30 below), on 27 February 2014, 18 June 2015, 3 December 2015, 13 June 2016, 1 September 2016 and 19 January 2017. He had received visits from a police officer on one occasion, and from clerks of the court registry recording various appeals he wished to lodge with the courts on the remaining occasions. He again intended to claim compensation of EUR 1,000 per illegal strip search.
On 20 March 2018 the Regensburg Regional Court granted the applicant legal aid in order to bring official liability proceedings claiming EUR 200 in compensation regarding the strip search of 19 January 2017. It dismissed the remainder of the applicant’s request on the grounds that his intended action lacked sufficient prospects of success in this regard (Article 114 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure).
The Regional Court considered that until the publication of the Federal Constitutional Court’s decision of 5 November 2016 on 8 December 2016 it had been possible to grant adequate compensation for a breach of the applicant’s personality rights by alternative means to monetary compensation. In particular, the Regensburg Regional Court, in its decisions of 8 February and 4 April 2017 which had been upheld on appeal, had declared that the strip searches of the applicant after the visits on two of the occasions at issue, on 3 December 2015 and 13 June 2016, had been unlawful (see paragraph 9 above). The court also gave the same reasons as in its decision of 20 March 2017 for concluding that additional monetary compensation was unnecessary in respect of the five searches between 27 February 2014 and 1 September 2016 (see paragraph 15 above).
In contrast, the assessment of the further strip search of 19 January 2017, which had come after the publication of the Federal Constitutional Court’s decision, raised difficult legal questions which had to be resolved in the main proceedings adjudicating on the official liability action. That action had sufficient prospects of success in respect of a claim for compensation amounting to EUR 200 as, if compensation was indeed appropriate, that amount appeared adequate. Moreover, as required under Article 114 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure on the conditions for being granted legal aid, the applicant was unable to afford the costs of the official liability proceedings.
On 4 June 2018 the Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal lodged by the applicant against the rejection of his legal aid request concerning the five strip searches carried out before the publication of the Federal Constitutional Court’s decision of 5 November 2016. It repeated in substance the reasons it had given in its decision of 17 May 2017 (see paragraphs 16-19 above).
On 18 June 2018 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the Federal Constitutional Court against the decisions of the Regional Court and the Court of Appeal refusing to grant him legal aid.
On 29 August 2018 the Federal Constitutional Court, without giving reasons, declined to consider the applicant’s constitutional complaint (file no. 1 BvR 1322/18).
The applicant does not appear to have brought official liability proceedings in respect of any search on 19 January 2017, having realised that on that day he had not in fact undergone a strip search but had been sanctioned for refusing to undergo the strip search that had been ordered (see paragraph 10 above).
Section 91 of the Bavarian Execution of Sentences Act, concerning searches, provides in so far as relevant as follows:
“(1)  It shall be permissible to search prisoners, their belongings and the cells. Searches of male prisoners may only be carried out by men, and searches of female prisoners only by women; this shall not apply to searches of prisoners by technical means or other devices. The need to protect prisoners’ sense of modesty shall be duly taken into account.
(2)  Body searches involving the removal of clothing shall be permitted only in the event of an imminent threat or on an order by the prison governor in the individual case. When male prisoners are being searched, only men shall be present; when female prisoners are being searched, only women shall be present. Searches shall be carried out in a closed room without any other prisoners present.
(3)  The prison governor may issue a general order to the effect that prisoners must be searched in accordance with subsection (2) on admission to the prison, after contacts with visitors and following any absence from the prison.
...”
Under Article 34 of the Basic Law, taken in conjunction with Article 839 of the Civil Code, an individual has the right to be compensated by the State for any damage arising from a breach of official duty committed intentionally or negligently by a public servant.
Damages for breaches of official duty are afforded to the individual concerned in accordance with Articles 249 et seq. of the Civil Code. Under Article 253 § 1 of the Civil Code, compensation for non-pecuniary damage can be awarded only if it is provided for by law.
According to the established case-law of the Federal Court of Justice, a claim for non-pecuniary damage can arise in the event of a violation of an individual’s personality rights under Articles 1 and 2 § 1 of the Basic Law. However, a claim for monetary compensation for a breach of these rights exists only where there has been a sufficiently serious interference with these rights which could not be compensated for in another manner. In this assessment, the reason why the State actor took the impugned measure and his or her motives, as well as the degree of fault, have to be taken into account (see, inter alia, Federal Court of Justice, no. III ZR 9/03, judgment of 23 October 2003, Neue  Juristische  Wochenschrift (NJW) 2003, pp. 3693 et seq., and no. III ZR 361/03, judgment of 4 November 2004, NJW 2005, pp. 58-60 with further references; see also Federal Constitutional Court, file no. 1  BvR  2853/08, decision of 11 November 2009, § 21, and file no. 1 BvR 2639/15, decision of 14 February 2017, § 15 with further references).
While the Federal Constitutional Court considered this restriction on the right to claim damages following a breach of an individual’s personality rights to be compatible in principle with the Basic Law, it stressed that the reasoning of the domestic courts in finding that no monetary compensation was necessary had to give due weight to the personality rights enshrined in the Basic Law (see Federal Constitutional Court, no. 1 BvR 2853/08, cited above, §§ 19-20, and file no. 1 BvR 2639/15, cited above, §§ 14-16 with further references).
Pursuant to Article 78 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure, representation by counsel is compulsory for parties to civil proceedings before the Regional Court, the Court of Appeal and the Federal Court of Justice. Under Article 78 § 3 of that Code, these rules are not to be applied to procedural acts that may be carried out before the records clerk of the court registry. A request for legal aid is such an act which can be carried out before the records clerk (see Article 117 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure).
Article 114 of the Code of Civil Procedure lays down the conditions for a party to civil proceedings to be granted legal aid. It provides as follows:
“(1)  Any party who, in view of his or her personal and economic situation, is unable to afford the costs of conducting the proceedings or is able to afford them only in part or as instalments shall be granted legal aid upon application, provided that the legal action he or she intends to bring ... has sufficient prospects of success and does not appear vexatious. ...”
Where a party has been granted legal aid, a lawyer of the party’s choice who is prepared to represent him or her is officially appointed if representation by counsel is compulsory in the proceedings (Article 121 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure).
The court with jurisdiction to deal with the intended legal action has jurisdiction to decide on applications for legal aid; there is no oral hearing in legal aid proceedings (Article 127 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure). As a rule, an appeal lies against any decision refusing legal aid (Article 127 § 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure).
Under the Federal Constitutional Court’s well-established case-law, the courts’ refusal to grant legal aid for bringing proceedings raises an issue under the constitutional right of equal access to court. It was constitutional to grant legal aid only in cases in which the legal action the claimant intended to bring had sufficient prospects of success and did not appear vexatious. However, the examination of the prospects of success in the summary legal aid proceedings may not replace the main proceedings but should only make them available (see Federal Constitutional Court, no. 2 BvR 94/88, decision of 13 March 1990, §§ 23-26, BVerfGE  81,  347  et  seq.).