The case originated in an application (no. 17391/06) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mr Niyaz Dzhanlatovich Primov, Mr Nasir Dzhanlatovich Dzhavadov and Mr Bunyam Askerovich Askerov, who are Russian nationals born in 1957, 1962 and 1953 respectively (“the applicants”). The application was lodged on 3 May 2006.
The applicants were represented by Ms Kostromina and Ms Mikhaylova, lawyers practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the ban on the demonstration of 25 April 2006, its violent dispersal and the arrest of the three applicants had violated their rights under Articles 10 and 11 of the Convention. They also invoked Article 5 in respect of their arrests.
On 5 May 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
On 10 April 2006 a group of seven people living in the Dokuzparinskiy District of Dagestan, a mountainous region close to the border with Azerbaijan, posted a written notice informing the district authorities that on 25 April 2006 they would hold a public demonstration in the village of Usukhchay. The applicants’ names were not mentioned in the list of organisers of the demonstration. The principal aims of the demonstration were to criticise the work of the head of the local administration, Mr A., to denounce corruption and the misuse of public funds by the local administration, and to draw attention to the inactivity of the law-enforcement agencies vis-à-vis abuses committed by Mr A. and his colleagues. The demonstration was supposed to be held in a recreational park in the village of Usukhchay from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m.; the estimated number of participants was 5,000. The organisers asked the police to dispatch officers for the protection of those participating in the demonstration. Although the applicants’ names were not in the notice, they claimed that they had played an active part in the organisation of the meeting in their respective communities.
The notice (уведомление) was sent to the district administration with copies to the Dokuzparinskiy district prosecutor and the head of the district police department. The applicants produced a copy of a payment slip from a post office in Makhachkala indicating that the notice had been posted by registered mail on 10 April 2006. It appears from the documents submitted by the Government that the notice was received by the district administration on 17 April 2006.
On 17 April 2006 the head of the district administration, Mr A. – the same person who was the principle target of the criticism by the demonstrators – informed the organisers that the district administration was opposed to the demonstration. In his letter of 17 April 2006 Mr A. said that, first, the notice had been lodged (подано) outside the time-limit fixed in the Public Gatherings Act. Secondly, the park in Usukhchay was not supposed to admit more than 500 people, so it was impossible to hold a demonstration there. Thirdly, the purpose of the demonstration was to condemn the embezzlement of public funds and the deliberate destruction of financial records by the district administration. However, according to Mr A., the competent law-enforcement authorities, in particular the prosecutor’s office, and financial authorities such as the Ministry of Finance of Dagestan, had already inquired into those allegations and concluded that there had been no case to answer. The letter also contained a warning addressed to the organisers that if they proceeded with the demonstration as planned, they would be held liable in accordance with the law.
At about 4 p.m. on 19 April 2006, a group of men armed with iron rods and sticks attacked another group of individuals near the village of Khiv. Two persons were injured. Having received information about the clash, the Derbent police dispatched a group of officers to the scene. The police set up an improvised roadblock near the “Gereykhanov Sovkhoz” (Kasumkent village) to check the passing cars and prevent further clashes. A few hours later a group of about 300 people armed with wooden sticks, iron rods and similar objects arrived at the roadblock in several cars without licence plates. The police stopped those cars. According to the authorities, the second applicant then climbed onto the roof of his car and started to incite his fellow villagers to resist the police and to run them over. His followers started to abuse the police verbally, pushed them out of their way and tried to overturn a police vehicle and a truck which the police had used to block the road. One of the police officers was injured, and his uniform was ripped. As a result, the police gave up and let the cars pass.
The second applicant denied having participated in the scuffle. He maintained that on that day he had been taking part in a gathering in the Kurakhskiy District. As to the episode near the police roadblock, he claimed that he had argued with the police officers, asking them to let him and his car through, and the windscreen of his car had been broken by them. However, he had not committed any unlawful acts.
On an unspecified date the prosecutor’s office opened a criminal investigation into the events of 19 April 2006 (case no. 6424).
On 21 April 2006 the second applicant was arrested with reference to case no. 6424, which concerned the riot on 19 April 2006 in the village of Khiv. On 22 April 2006 the Khiv District Court granted the police’s request to detain the second applicant on remand. The second applicant was suspected of having committed a crime under Article 212 § 3 (“Mass riots”), and Article 318 § 1 (“Use of violence against a public official”) of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation. The court ruled that the second applicant should be detained because otherwise he might obstruct the establishment of the truth, destroy evidence or abscond. The second applicant appealed, claiming that the court’s decision was unsubstantiated, but on 28 April 2006 the Supreme Court of Dagestan dismissed the appeal in a summary fashion.
On 20 June 2006 the Sovetskiy District Court of Makhachkala ordered the second applicant’s release, indicating that he had a permanent place of residence, three children to take care of and an elderly father who was ill, and that the charges against him were not serious. The second applicant was released.
Subsequently, the criminal case against the second applicant was closed by the trial court for “active repentance”.
Despite the decision of the local administration of 17 April 2006 whereby the demonstration of 25 April 2006 had not been allowed, the organisers decided to hold it as planned. The first and the third applicants took part in that “unauthorised” demonstration; the second applicant was not amongst the protesters since at that time he had been detained on remand in connection with the episode of on 19 April 2006 in the village of Khiv (see paragraphs 8 to 13 above).
At about 10 a.m. on 25 April 2006, a group of approximately 1,000 people gathered on the outskirts of Usukhchay. Other demonstrators were unable to reach the assembly point because the roads had been blocked by the police.
The organisers tried to meet representatives of the village administration in order to discuss the situation, but to no avail. When the demonstrators started moving towards the centre of the village, the police blocked their way. At the same time another group of demonstrators from the neighbouring village of Miskindzha were stopped by the police on the way to Usukhchay; they were ordered to return to Miskindzha and hold their demonstration there separately, if they so wished.
In the afternoon the demonstrators from Usukhchay started moving towards Miskindzha. As the police had blocked the road, the demonstrators had to leave their cars and walk. Because of the bad weather and the long distance to walk, some of them decided to give up. As a result, when the demonstration arrived at Miskindzha, there were no more than 200 to 300 participants.
The meeting was peaceful; however, at about 3 p.m. the demonstrators were encircled by police officers from the Special Police Force Unit (the “OMON”). The police opened fire with automatic rifles above the demonstrators’ heads. They also used tear gas, smoke bombs and stun grenades to disperse the demonstration. The demonstrators started to run in the direction of the village; the police officers followed them. The police beat the demonstrators with rubber truncheons and rifle butts. As a result, one person was shot dead, five people were severely injured and several dozen people were beaten up or were injured by the shells of the tear-gas bombs which had exploded in the midst of the crowd. Sixty-seven people were arrested, and the organisers of the meeting were charged in connection with their participation in the organisation of an unauthorised demonstration. From the first and the third applicants’ submissions it appears that they were present at the scene of the confrontation in Miskindzha up to a certain moment but left when the clash started at about 3 p.m. None of them was hurt during the clash.
As to the gunshot injury received by a police officer, one of the participants in the demonstration, referring to the words of another witness, Mr S.F., claimed that the wound had been self-inflicted: the officer concerned had shot himself in the leg by accident, because his gun had not been locked.
On 24 April 2006 the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Dagestan issued Order No. 7 “On measures to stabilise the situation in the Dokuzparinskiy District of Dagestan”. The order described the unauthorised demonstration of 25 April 2006, which supposedly would involve about two thousand people “with an aggressive predisposition”. The order mentioned the risks of blocking the roads and disturbing the normal work of State institutions. A “mixed squad” was formed comprising of thirty-five police officers from the Special Forces Unit of the Ministry (OMON) and 147 officers from eight local police stations. Colonel Iz. was appointed as commander of the “mixed squad”. The order provided for undercover observation of the leaders of the demonstrators, video-recording of the events, strengthening of identity checks at the roadblocks and other security measures.
The squad moved to Usukhchay and took position at several roadblocks controlling roads leading to the village and near certain buildings occupied by State bodies. The aim of the operation was to secure public order, guarantee the constitutional rights and freedoms of the population and prevent clashes between the supporters of Mr A. and his opponents.
In their observations, the Government claimed that on the eve of the demonstration someone had taken alcohol, foodstuff and illegal drugs to Usukhchay. It had all been distributed amongst the residents of the village. In addition, there was information about individuals from other villages who had arrived in Usukchay with the aim of inciting the local population to participate in the unlawful demonstration and to insubordination to the lawenforcement authorities.
At about 11 a.m. on 25 April 2006, three groups of people gathered near the premises of the village administration. One group of about 150 people were supporters of Mr A., the head of the district administration. The two other groups – which counted about one thousand people in aggregate – were the opponents of Mr A. Official documents contained in the case file also refer to another group of about 450 to 500 people, who arrived in Usukhchay to take part in the demonstration; it is unclear whether that group was able to join the gathering in the centre or was stopped by the police on the outskirts of the village.
In view of the risk of clashes between the opposing groups, representatives of the protesters were invited to take part in negotiations in the local prosecutor’s office. The negotiations involved Colonel Iz., the Deputy Minister of Internal Affairs of Dagestan, the prosecutor, Ms Lg., and the head of the local police, Mr Akb. The authorities proposed to the organisers that they could hold the demonstration in a municipal garage.
However, that offer was declined. The demonstrators started to move from Usukhchay to Miskindzha, where they arrived at about 1 or 2 p.m. In the meantime, however, someone had blocked the road with objects including paving stones, timber beams and water pipes. This was a federallevel road connecting several villages and its blockage caused a considerable traffic jam.
The authorities warned the organisers that if the road remained blocked, the organisers would be held liable, and that the law-enforcement authorities present on the spot would use force and “special equipment”.
The organisers refused to follow the instructions and told other demonstrators to disobey the police orders. When the police, following the orders of Deputy Minister Colonel Iz., started to remove the barricade from the road, unidentified men in the crowd started to throw stones at them. In addition, several shots were fired from a garden situated uphill on the left side of the road. Some of the protesters were armed with cold weapons such as iron rods, which they used as bats while attacking the police, whereas others tried to grab the service guns from the police officers.
As a result, the police had to use firearms and special equipment. In particular, they used two stun grenades, twenty-three tear-gas grenades, thirtysix rubber bullets, and fired 747 shots from automatic rifles above the heads of the crowd. Fifty-two of the most active protesters were arrested and taken to the Dokuzparinskiy police station.
In addition, unidentified police officers used pump-action shotguns loaded with 22 mm grenades filled with tear gas. Those shots were fired in the direction of the crowd.
Following the clash between the police and the demonstrators, several police officers were injured. Eleven had bruises on their arms and legs, scratches and concussion; one had a ruptured spleen; and one, Mr Il., had a gunshot wound in the form of a perforated bullet hole in the right thigh.
Four civilians were seriously injured and one died. Mr Akh. had a blunt gunshot wound to the right side of the thorax with fractured ribs; Mr Nsr. had a gunshot wound to the left side of the thorax with broken shoulder bones; Mr Al. was wounded by a shell fragment in the right shin and thigh; Mr Gnd. had a gunshot wound to the right forearm with a fractured bone; and Mr Ng. received a mortal wound by a gas grenade to the thorax and died on the way to hospital.
In support of their account, the Government produced some documents apparently obtained in the course of the investigation (case no. 67610). It is unclear, however, whether all those documents related to case No. 67610 and whether they constituted the entirety of the materials collected within that case. The content of those documents, insofar as relevant, is described below.
The Government produced medical certificates describing the injuries of several police officers, but not Mr Il. They also produced several medical certificates describing the injuries sustained by the protesters, all of whom had bruises and scratches. According to the certificates, the protesters claimed that the police had kicked, beaten and battered them with rubber truncheons and gun butts. Some of the protesters had been injured by the rubber bullets used by the police. Others claimed that they had been beaten up after having been arrested and taken to the police station.
In his testimony Mr Akb., the head of the Dokuzparinskiy police, gave an account of the events which was generally consonant with that of the Government. He said that he had been warned about the demonstration in a telegram sent by the organisers. On 17 April 2006 he had met one of them and discussed the event. He further explained that at some time after 10 a.m. on 25 April 2006, his men had stopped a large group of protesters who had been trying to enter Usukhchay. Mr Akb. had spoken with the leaders of the protesters and explained to them that “the demonstration had not been authorised, and that the actions [of the demonstrators] were unlawful”. Subsequently, he had been involved in the negotiations with the demonstrators. The deputy head of the district administration had proposed to the protesters that they hold the demonstration in a municipal garage, explaining that if they stayed in the square near the district administration premises, they risked blocking the main road. The leaders of the protesters visited the garage, but were not satisfied with that offer. They informed the authorities that they would send the protesters to Miskindzha and hold their demonstration there, in the village community centre. When the negotiations were over, a small group of protesters started to move towards the village centre, whereas others marched to Miskindzha, accompanied by the police. At about 1 p.m. Mr Akb. was informed that the federal road had been blocked by two large heaps of stones. He arrived at the scene and started to negotiate with the leaders of the protesters. He tried to persuade them to unblock the road, but they refused and insisted on meeting the leadership of the Dagestan Republic. New people arrived at the scene, armed with stones and sticks. Since the negotiations had failed, Mr Akb. ordered the police to start clearing the road. The men who had gathered on the sides of the road started to throw stones at the police officers, several of whom were hit, so Mr Akb. authorised the use of shields and rubber truncheons. Once the first heap of stones had been removed and the traffic had started to move, the police discovered that 300 metres further down the road it had again been obstructed with pipes. Throughout that time the police officers had stones thrown at them. Mr Akb. authorised them to use firearms but only above the heads of the protesters. By 6 p.m. the road had been unblocked.
Mr Yakh., one of the protesters, testified that when they had arrived in Miskindzha, the road had not yet been blocked. People had started to block the road spontaneously with stones in order to draw the authorities’ attention to their claims. The leaders of the demonstration, who spoke before the crowd, called everybody to order and asked them not to break the law. Then a police colonel appeared. He asked the leaders of the protesters to unblock the road, but they refused. The police then attacked the protesters from two sides and started to shoot and throw gas grenades into the crowd. People started to run in the direction of Miskindzha. Mr Yakh. testified that he had not seen protesters throwing stones at the police: by contrast, the police had thrown stones at the crowd in order to unblock the road.
Witness Mr Ag., a district administration official, testified that all the protesters, including women and elderly people, had been drunk, because earlier a mini-lorry had brought a cargo of vodka which had been distributed to the protesters. Mr Ag. joined the crowd and went with the protesters to Miskindzha, where he listened to the speeches of the leaders of the demonstration before a crowd of approximately 300 people. After the failure of the negotiations between the protesters and the authorities, the leaders started to incite the protesters to throw stones; he also heard the sound of shots coming from the side where the protesters had gathered. A police officer was wounded. The police started to move towards the protesters and fired two or three warning shots above their heads. When the police started to remove the stones from the road and arrest the protesters, Mr Ag. left. On the way back he overheard two women complaining that the organisers had not paid them and that they had been used as a human shield against the police.
According to an undated report by the head of the Special Forces Unit, Major Kr., the police had started using gas grenades only when a large group of about 1,000 men armed with iron rods, wooden sticks and knives had attacked them. Major Kr. also specified that when his officers were moving from the first barricade to the second, someone had started to shoot at them from under the nearby trees with an automatic gun and a hunter’s gun.
Witness Mr Agb. testified that on 25 April 2006 he had been going on his business but had been stopped by the crowd. He had heard the first applicant calling the protesters not to block the road but to gather in the community centre of Miskindzha. However, some of the demonstrators disobeyed; two lorries arrived and dumped stones on the road. Some of the protesters were throwing stones at the police.
One of the witnesses, Mr Chub., was the driver of the lorry that had brought stones for the first barricade. He explained that he had loaded the stones near the river in order to build a shed in his garden. Near the entry to Miskindzha he was stopped by a group of youngsters who ordered him, under the threat of violence, to dump the stones directly on the road.
The written testimonies of several other eyewitnesses were inconclusive. Some of them testified that a group of adolescents had been throwing stones at the police; others said that the police had used firearms by shooting in the air, whereas the demonstrators had no firearms. Some witnesses heard shots from the side of the protesters.
On 29 April 2006 the first applicant was arrested for participating in the organisation of an unauthorised demonstration on 25 April 2006 (criminal case no. 67610). He was suspected of having committed a crime under Article 213 § 2 (“Hooliganism”), and Article 318 § 2 (“Use of violence against a public official”) of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation (for all further references to the Criminal Code see “Relevant domestic law” below).
In particular, the police suspected that the first applicant had incited the demonstrators to block the road and to “disobey the lawful orders of the police with the use of firearms”. The police applied to the Sovetskiy District Court for a detention order against the first applicant.
According to the Government, the decision of the Prosecutor of the Dagestan Republic (hereinafter “the RPO”, the Regional Prosecutor’s Office) to seek the first applicant’s detention was based on the witness statements of Mr Als., Mr Agsh., Mr Shk. and an anonymous witness. Those witnesses identified the first applicant as one of the leaders of the demonstration who had incited the crowd to attack the police.
On 30 April 2006 the Sovetskiy District Court of Makhachkala placed the first applicant in pre-trial detention. In its ruling the court noted that he was suspected of having committed a serious crime and that he might continue his criminal activity, abscond or obstruct the course of justice. The court also referred to his “personality”.
The first applicant’s lawyer appealed. He indicated that the first applicant worked as head of a municipal social-security office, had a permanent place of residence and four children, and had good references from his colleagues and neighbours. The lawyer also stated that the first applicant had not been contacted by the investigators before his arrest. The lawyer noted that a suspect could be held in pre-trial detention before being formally charged only in exceptional circumstances. The court’s ruling did not refer to any specific facts showing that the first applicant indeed intended to continue his criminal activities, abscond or obstruct the course of justice. Furthermore, the lawyer pointed to various irregularities in the application by the police and in the court’s ruling imposing the detention order.
On 6 May 2006 the Supreme Court of Dagestan dismissed the appeal in a summary fashion. The Supreme Court’s reasoning was identical to that of the lower court.
On 8 May 2006 the first applicant was charged under Article 213 § 3 and Article 318 § 2 of the Criminal Code. In the indictment the first applicant was referred to as “the organiser of the demonstration”. The indictment also mentioned that, as one of the organisers of the demonstration, the first applicant had ordered the protesters to block the road, throw stones in the direction of the police and use firearms.
It appears that in the meantime the first applicant had a confrontation with the witnesses who had earlier identified him as one of the instigators of the riot. According to the Government, they had all denied their previous allegations concerning his role in the riot.
On 27 June 2006 the Sovetskiy District Court of Makhachkala refused to extend the first applicant’s pre-trial detention. The court ruled that the police had not produced any evidence that he might abscond or obstruct the course of justice, and that another preventive measure could not be applied. The court also stated that the need to question other demonstrators who had used violence against the police was not a good reason for extending his detention. The court lastly stated that the first applicant had no previous convictions, was married, was in employment, had good references, had been awarded State decorations and had a permanent place of residence. The first applicant was released.
On 25 December 2006 the criminal case against the first applicant was discontinued for lack of evidence. The investigator established that the road going to Miskindzha had been blocked by the protesters; when the police had tried to clear the road, the protesters had started to throw stones and sticks at them. Several police officers had been injured; police officer Il. had been wounded by a bullet fired from a hunter’s gun.
The investigator’s decision to discontinue the case referred to the protocol of examining the site of the clash during which he had discovered the following objects: 139 5.45 mm cartridges (the type used in the police’s automatic guns), one 7.45 mm cartridge (standard army Kalashnikov rifle), two cardboard cartridges (hunter’s gun) and one cartridge from a teargas grenade.
The investigator further referred to the testimony of several demonstrators who had stated that when the police had approached the demonstrators, most of the people had remained calm. However, some time later, a group of young men whom the witnesses had identified as “the people of Mr Kanberov”, had arrived and started to throw stones and shout insults at the police.
Two police officers questioned by the investigator were granted anonymity. They testified that the leaders of the demonstration, including the first and third applicants, had ordered the protesters to disobey the police and throw stones at them. The testimony of the two anonymous witnesses was confirmed by several other police officers who testified under their real names, including Mr Sch. However, during a face-to-face confrontation with the first applicant, officer Sch. retracted his statement.
Police officer Mr Msl. testified that the first applicant had left the scene of the confrontation between 12 noon and 1 p.m., namely before the start of the clash, because of an emergency in his family. That fact was confirmed by witness Mr Dzhv. Witness Mr Um. testified that the first applicant had tried to persuade the protesters to follow the orders of the police and had designated thirty people to keep order during the demonstration.
The first and third applicants were also questioned. They denied their guilt and claimed that they had been collaborating with the police and had tried to call the protesters to order.
The investigator lastly referred to a video recording of the demonstration which showed that the first and third applicants had asked the protesters not to react to provocations and to remain calm.
On 25 December 2006 the first applicant was informed of his right to claim damages in connection with the criminal prosecution against him.
The third applicant was arrested on 29 April 2006. Whereas it is undisputed that the third applicant was present during the demonstration of 25 April 2006, his arrest was connected not to that demonstration but to his role in the events of 19 April 2006 in the village of Khiv and was ordered within criminal case no. 6424 (see paragraphs 8 to 13 above).
On 1 May 2006 the Sovetskiy District Court of Makhachkala ordered the third applicant’s pre-trial detention. The court reasoned that as he might be given a prison sentence, he might abscond. The court noted that although the arrest warrant had been issued by the police on 20 April 2006, the third applicant had not been arrested until 29 April 2006.
The third applicant appealed. He stated, in particular, that before 29 April 2006 the police had not taken any steps to enforce the arrest warrant of 20 April 2006. He had been arrested on the premises of the Ministry of the Interior of Dagestan, where he had gone of his own motion.
On 6 May 2006 the Supreme Court of Dagestan upheld the findings of the first-instance court in a summary fashion. On the same day the third applicant was charged under Articles 212 and 318 of the Criminal Code for participating in the events of 19 April 2006 in the village of Khiv. The charges against him were similar to those against the second applicant.
On 26 June 2006 the Sovetskiy District Court of Makhachkala refused to extend the third applicant’s pre-trial detention. The court ruled that the police had not produced any evidence that he might abscond or obstruct the course of justice. The court also indicated that the need to conduct further investigative steps was not a legitimate reason for extending his detention. The court concluded that it was possible to apply a milder preventive measure. The third applicant was released.
As follows from the Government’s submissions, the accusations against the third applicant were based on the testimony of one witness. The prosecution authorities decided to drop the charges against him.
On 25 April 2006 the RPO ordered a criminal investigation into the events in Usukhchay and Miskindzha (case no. 67611). The facts were categorised under Article 105 § 2 (e) (“Murder”) and Article 222 (“Unlawful possession of or trafficking in firearms”) of the Criminal Code (“the CC”).
On 7 May 2006 Colonel Mk., acting head of the Special Forces Unit (OMON) of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Dagestan, drew up a report on the events of 25 April 2006. He explained that the tear-gas grenades had been used when the protesters attacked the police with iron rods and tried to grab the service guns.
On 10 May 2006 an internal inquiry carried out by the federal Ministry of the Interior concluded that the police’s actions on 25 April 2006 had been appropriate. In particular, according to the final report of the inquiry, at 4.45 p.m. Colonel Iz. had ordered his officers to unblock the road, but the officers were attacked by a group of men armed with iron rods, stones and knives. Some of those men tried to grab the officers’ service guns. When the police entered Miskindzha, they discovered a lorry loaded with alcohol, cigarettes and foodstuff. Lieutenant-Colonel Mr Og. testified that his men had been fired at from the nearby gardens located on the left side of the road. Officer Il. (who had sustained a bullet wound to his thigh) testified that a hooded man had shot at him with a hunter’s gun. An appendix to the internal inquiry described restrictions on the use of gas grenades; in particular, it was prohibited to “shot gas grenades directly at humans”.
On an unspecified date in May 2006 the first applicant drafted and submitted to the investigator his account of the events of 25 April 2006 (a copy was submitted by the Government). He claimed that the demonstration had started peacefully, despite information that a group of Mr A.’s supporters had occupied the park in Usukhchay. During the negotiations with the authorities in the morning of 25 April 2006 the authorities’ representatives warned the protesters that if they insisted on holding the demonstration in Usukhchay, there would be bloodshed. In the afternoon, when the demonstrators refused to leave the road near Miskindzha, the police started to shoot and beat them with rubber truncheons. The first applicant submitted to the prosecutor a video recording of the start of the clash, and requested the questioning of several participants of the events.
On 19 October 2006 the RPO opened a criminal investigation under Article 286 § 3 (b) and (c) of the CC (“Abuse of office”) concerning the killing of Mr Ng. (case no. 668459).
On 4 December 2006 cases nos. 668459 and 67611 were joined.
According to the Government, within those two cases the investigators questioned more than seventy witnesses and conducted ballistic and medical forensic examinations. The relatives of the victims or the victims themselves were granted the status of victims in those proceedings.
However, the prosecution was unable to establish the persons responsible for the facts at the heart of the investigation. As a result, on 20 February 2007 the investigation was suspended. The investigator held that “in breach of the instruction on the use of special equipment ... No. 865dsp, officers of the Special Forces Unit ... fired twenty-three 23mm gas grenades ...” However, it was impossible to identify the police officers who had fired the fatal shot.
It appears that on an unidentified date the investigation was reopened and on 16 January 2010 it was suspended again.
Article 30 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation provides that everyone has the right to freedom of association. Article 55 § 3 provides that rights and freedoms may be restricted by federal laws for the protection of constitutional principles, public morals, health and the rights and lawful interests of others, and to ensure the defence and security of the State.
The Federal Law on Assemblies, Meetings, Demonstrations, Marches and Picketing (no. 54-FZ of 18 August 2004 – “the Public Gatherings Act”), as in force at the relevant time, provided for the rights and duties of the organisers of public events. The relevant provisions of the Public Gatherings Act were summarised in detail in the case of Alekseyev v. Russia (nos. 4916/07, 25924/08 and 14599/09, § 50, 21 October 2010). The relevant parts of the most important provisions are summarised below.
Section 5 of the Public Gatherings Act provided that the organiser of a public event had to submit to the municipal authority a written notice in accordance with section 7. The organiser had the right to hold a demonstration at the venue and time specified in the notice or as altered by agreement with the municipal authority; or to hold assemblies at a venue that had been specially allocated or adapted to ensure the safety of citizens while such assemblies were held. The organiser had to require the participants in the public event to observe public order and comply with the lawful requirements of the authorities.
Under section 5(5) of the Public Gatherings Act, the organiser of the public event had no right to hold it if the notice on holding the public event had not been submitted in due time or no agreement had been reached with the municipal authorities on their reasoned proposal as to the alteration of the venue and/or time of the public event.
Section 7 of the Public Gatherings Act provided that a written notice about a public event had to be lodged (подается) by the organiser with the municipal authority concerned not earlier than fifteen days and not later than ten days before the date of the event. Under Part 2 of the Public Gatherings Act the procedure for lodging such notices had to be defined in the regional legislation.
Under section 8, a public event could be held at any suitable venue provided that it did not threaten the safety of the participants. Under section 12, the municipal authorities, upon receiving notice of the public event, had to propose an alternative venue and/or time for the public event, if the original conditions set out in the notice did not correspond to the requirements of the law. The municipal authorities also had to ensure, within their competence and jointly with the organisers and the authorised representative of the Ministry of the Interior, that public order and the safety of citizens while holding the event were respected.
Under section 19 of the Act, decisions, acts or omissions of municipal authorities could be contested in court in accordance with the law.
Under the Code of Civil Procedure of 2002 (“the new CCP”), a person affected by an unlawful administrative act or omission by a State or municipal authority disposes of two types of remedy: a “complaint” or a “claim” (иск) against the State. Complaints are governed by Chapter 25 of the Code (“Challenging decisions, acts or omissions of State and municipal authorities and officials”).
The new CCP provides for judicial review of decisions and other acts of State or municipal officials if those acts breached the rights and freedoms of the interested person. Article 258 § 3 provides that a complaint must not be granted if the action challenged in court “is in compliance with the law, has been taken within the jurisdiction of the State body or official and the rights and freedoms of the citizen have not been violated”.
As follows from Article 258 of the new CCP, a successful plaintiff under Chapter 25 may obtain an injunction against the State body or official concerned. By that injunction the court must require “full elimination of the breach of the rights and freedoms”. The Code is silent on whether Chapter 25 allows the plaintiff to seek other reliefs provided for by the law, in particular, damages.
Article 257 of the CCP provides that complaints lodged under Chapter 25 of the Code must be examined within ten days from the date of their lodging. Under Article 338 the parties then have ten days to lodge an appeal. Under Article 348 the Court of Appeal has one month from the date of its receipt to consider it.