The case originated in three applications (nos. 63003/10, 20441/11 and 3931/14) against the Republic of Serbia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) on the various dates indicated in the appended table.
The applicants were all Serbian nationals and their further personal and other relevant details and are set out in the appendix to this judgment.
The Serbian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent at the time, Ms V. Rodić who was recently substituted by their current agent Ms N. Plavšić.
On 18 December 2014 the applications were communicated to the Government.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicants complained of the excessive length of different civil and criminal proceedings under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
All applicants obtained decisions of the Constitutional Court of Serbia, which found a violation of their right to a hearing within reasonable time (see appended table for details of each civil proceedings and Constitutional Court’s decisions). The court, additionally, declared that the applicants were entitled to the non-pecuniary damages sought, in accordance with Article 90 of the Constitutional Court Act (see paragraph 14, Article 90, below).
All the applicants filed requests with the Commission for Compensation for payment of non-pecuniary damages.
On 14 October 2010 the Commission for Compensation offered to pay Ms Prohaska Prodanić RSD 60,000 (at the time approximately EUR 600) for non-pecuniary damage incurred and RSD 25,000 for costs and expenses. She refused to accept that payment as the Commission did not specify the deadline by which the sum would be paid. On 15 September 2015, the Ministry of Justice paid her RSD 85,000.
The applicant V. Tomić contacted the Commission for Compensation on several occasions and requested the payment of non-pecuniary damage. It would appear that he had received no response.
On 16 March 2011 the Commission for Compensation offered to pay Mr D. Trpković RSD 35,000 (at the time approximately EUR 350), but he refused to accept this amount, deeming it insufficient.
Article 32 § 1 provides, inter alia, that everyone shall have the right to a fair hearing before a tribunal in the determination of his rights and obligations.
Article 170 provides that a “constitutional appeal may be lodged against individual decisions or actions of State bodies or organisations exercising delegated public powers which violate or deny human or minority rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution, if other legal remedies for their protection have already been exhausted or have not been prescribed.”
The relevant provisions of this Act read as follows:
“The decisions of the  shall be final, enforceable and binding.”
“A constitutional appeal may be lodged against an individual decision or an action of a State body or an organisation exercising delegated public powers which violates or denies human or minority rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution, if other legal remedies have already been exhausted or have not been prescribed or where the right to their judicial protection has been excluded by law.
A constitutional appeal may be lodged even if all available remedies have not been exhausted in the event of a breach of an applicant’s right to a trial within a reasonable time.”
“A constitutional appeal may be lodged by any individual who believes that any of his or her human or minority rights or freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution has been violated or denied by an individual decision or an action of a State body or an organisation exercising delegated public powers.”
“A constitutional appeal may be lodged within thirty days of receipt of the individual decision or the date of commission of the actions ... [in question] ...”
“When the Constitutional Court finds that an ... individual decision or action has violated or denied a human or minority right or a freedom guaranteed by the Constitution, it shall annul the ... decision in question or ban the continuation of such action or order the implementation of other specific measures as well as the removal of all adverse consequences within a specified period of time.
The decision of the  accepting a constitutional appeal shall constitute a legal basis for requesting compensation or the removal of other adverse consequences before a competent body, in accordance with the law.”
“... [An applicant who has obtained a  decision in his or her favour] .., may lodge a compensation claim with the Commission for Compensation in order to reach an agreement in respect of the amount ... [of compensation to be awarded] ...
If the Commission for Compensation does not rule favourably in respect of a compensation claim or fails to issue a decision within thirty days from the date of its submission, the applicant may file a civil claim for damages before the competent court. If only partial agreement has been achieved, a civil claim may be filed in respect of the remainder of the amount sought.
The composition and operation of the Commission for Compensation shall be regulated by the Minister of Justice.”