The case was referred to the Court by a Netherlands national, Mr Wilhelmus Hozee (“the applicant”) on 14 August 1997, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 § 1 and Article 47 of the Convention. It originated in an application (no. 21961/93) against the Kingdom of the Netherlands lodged by the applicant with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under Article 25 on 26 May 1993.
Mr Hozee’s application to the Court referred to Article 48 of the Convention as amended by Protocol No. 9, which the Netherlands have ratified. The object of the application was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.

2.  On 26 September 1997 the Court’s Screening Panel decided not to decline consideration of the case and to submit it to the Court (Article 48 § 2 of the Convention).
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 35 § 3 (d) of Rules of Court B, the applicant designated the lawyer, Mr P. Baauw of the Netherlands Bar, who would represent him (Rule 31). Having originally been designated by the initials W.H., the applicant subsequently agreed to the disclosure of his name.
The Chamber to be constituted included ex officio Mr P. van Dijk, the elected judge of Netherlands nationality (Article 43 of the Convention), and Mr R. Bernhardt, the Vice-President of the Court (Rule 21 § 4 (b)). On 25 October 1997, in the presence of the Registrar, the President of the Court, Mr R. Ryssdal, drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr L.-E. Pettiti, Mr A.N. Loizou, Sir John Freeland, Mr L. Wildhaber, Mr B. Repik, Mr P. Jambrek and Mr U. Lōhmus (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 § 5).
As President of the Chamber (Rule 21 § 6), Mr Bernhardt, acting through the Registrar, consulted Mr R.A.A. Böcker, the Agent of the Netherlands Government (“the Government”), the applicant’s lawyer and Mr E.A. Alkema, the Delegate of the Commission, on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 39 § 1 and 40). Pursuant to the orders made in consequence, the Registrar received the Government’s and the applicant’s memorials on 12 December 1997.
Having regard to the opinions expressed by the applicant, the Government and the Delegate of the Commission and having satisfied itself that the condition for derogation from its usual procedure had been met (Rules 27 and 40), the Chamber decided to dispense with a hearing in the case and Mr Bernhardt gave the applicant and the Government leave to file observations on the content of each other’s memorials.
The additional observations of the applicant were received by the registry on 16 February 1998 and those of the Government on 17 February 1998. On 25 February 1998 the Secretary to the Commission informed the Registrar that the Delegate had no observations to make on the memorials and observations filed.
The applicant was born in the Netherlands in 1943 and currently lives in Belgium.
In the late 1970s and early 1980s the applicant was the managing director of, inter alia, the cleaning agencies S. and S.N., both limited liability companies. In September 1980 the Netherlands tax authorities inspected the accounts of another cleaning company, W.N. This inspection showed that the latter company was a subcontractor of S. and S.N. Between 1981 and 1984 the tax authorities inspected the accounts of S. and S.N., and those of their subcontractors.
On 31 December 1981 the Tax Inspector issued the first of a number of supplementary tax assessments to the companies of which the applicant was the managing director. By way of a fiscal penalty these sums were increased by 100% as the tax authorities considered that the respective companies had returned incorrect tax statements (see paragraph 23 below). The companies challenged these supplementary tax assessments in proceedings which are of no direct relevance to the case before the Court.
On 28 June 1982 a discussion took place between two inspection officers of the Audit Division of the Department of Direct Taxes (Afdeling Controle der Directe Belastingen) of The Hague and the lawyer of S.N. In the course of this discussion Mr H., the company’s accountant, and the applicant were invited to answer a number of questions put by these officers.
In May 1984 the Audit Division of the Department of Direct Taxes of The Hague handed over to the Fiscal Intelligence and Investigation Department (Fiscale inlichtingen- en opsporingsdienst, “FIOD”) the investigation against, inter alia, the companies of which the applicant was the managing director.
On 14 June 1984 the FIOD interrogated the applicant as a suspect (verdachte). In the same month the FIOD seized his accounts for the purposes of the investigation. Between 27 February 1985 and 10 June 1986 the FIOD questioned about seventy persons in connection with the investigation against the applicant.
On 8 May 1985 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of fraud and detained on remand. He was conditionally released on 17 June 1985. The conditions for his release, which included the provision of a banker’s guarantee in an amount of 200,000 Netherlands guilders (NLG), were lifted on 11 December 1985.
On 10 May 1985 a preliminary judicial investigation (gerechtelijk vooronderzoek) against the applicant was opened, during which the

investigating judge heard the applicant on four occasions. The investigating judge further examined twenty-five witnesses and three experts, most of them at the applicant’s request.
The preliminary judicial investigation was closed in January 1989. The applicant was subsequently summoned to appear before the Regional Court of The Hague on 13 April 1989 on five counts of fraud and one count of participation in a criminal organisation.
The applicant lodged an objection (bezwaar) against the summons, which was rejected after a hearing in camera. On 18 May 1989 the Regional Court began its examination of the substance of the charges. Another hearing was held on 27 July 1989. On 10 August 1989 the Regional Court acquitted the applicant of participation in a criminal organisation but convicted him on five counts of fraud. It sentenced him to twenty-four months’ imprisonment, six months of which were suspended for a probationary period of two years, and a fine of NLG 500,000. The time the applicant had spent in pre-trial detention was credited against his prison sentence.
Both the applicant and the public prosecutor filed appeals against this judgment to the Court of Appeal (gerechtshof) of The Hague.
On 11 July 1991 the Court of Appeal quashed the Regional Court’s judgment, convicted the applicant on three counts of fraud and acquitted him on two other counts of fraud. Taking into account another conviction which had occurred in the meanwhile, as required by Article 63 of the Criminal Code (Wetboek van Strafrecht – see paragraph 26 below), it sentenced him to six months’ imprisonment, three months of which were suspended for a probationary period of two years, and a fine of NLG 25,000.
As to the argument that the prosecution should be declared inadmissible because the criminal charges had not been determined within a reasonable time, the Court of Appeal found that the criminal proceedings had started on 14 June 1984, when the applicant had been questioned for the first time as a suspect. It further held that:
“The case concerns the administration of a number of closely intertwined companies with limited liability which attempted to conceal that association from the outside world. At the outset of the investigation against the suspect this was still far from clear and it was also unclear that use had been made of false invoices... In view of the complexity of the investigation, the reasonable time within the meaning of Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights has not been exceeded at that stage of the present case... The defence attributes the length of the judicial investigation, inter alia, to the inferior quality of the investigation by the FIOD and the limited time at the investigating judge’s disposal. Be that as it may, the length of the investigation was primarily caused by the defence’s wish to have many witnesses, who had already been interrogated once, examined again very extensively. Even though the investigation by the FIOD may not have been flawless, the fact that this complex case has taken much time certainly cannot be entirely or even mainly blamed on the judicial authorities.

Nor has the reasonable time been exceeded in the appeal proceedings in the present criminal case, considering, on the one hand, the length of this period and, on the other hand, the seriousness of the facts at issue. Taking all the aforementioned circumstances into account, the total length of the proceedings up to the present day in this criminal case has not exceeded a reasonable time either. The Court refers to what it has stated above as regards the complexity of the case.”
As regards the sentence to be imposed, the Court of Appeal held inter alia:
“On the one hand, the Court is of the opinion that an unconditional prison sentence is in every respect justified, taking into account the seriousness of the proven facts. In actual fact the suspect was the managing director of S. and S.N. In that capacity the suspect has committed, for an extended period of time and on a large scale, evasion of paying due social-security contributions and due corporation taxes, in order to line the purses of these companies and/or benefit the people who were in charge of these companies, all to the detriment of third parties.
On the other hand, the Court takes into account the time that has elapsed since the commission of the offences the suspect was charged with. The Court will therefore now proceed to impose a prison sentence of a duration to be stated below, half of which will be suspended, and this in combination with a fine.”
The applicant’s subsequent appeal on points of law was rejected by the Supreme Court (Hoge Raad) on 1 December 1992. As to the applicant’s complaint that the criminal charges against him had not been determined within a reasonable time, the more so as – in his submission – the proceedings against him should be considered to have started on 31 December 1981, the Supreme Court accepted the reasoning of the Court of Appeal.
Pursuant to section 20(1) of the General Act on State Taxes 1959 (Algemene wet inzake rijksbelastingen) a demand for supplementary tax is made if a tax for which the taxpayer is under an obligation to file a declaration (die op aangifte behoort te worden voldaan of afgedragen) is not paid or is not paid in its entirety.
In such cases a fiscal penalty is additionally imposed (section 21(1)).
Section 68 of the General Act on State Taxes 1959 makes it an offence, inter alia, deliberately to file an incomplete tax return or to falsify or withhold from the tax authorities information that one is required under tax law to provide.
Forgery of documents is an offence under Article 225 of the Criminal Code.

26.  Article 63 of the Criminal Code provides that if a person, who has previously been convicted, is convicted of an offence committed before the first conviction, the sentence imposed following the first conviction shall be taken into consideration in the determination of the sentence following the second conviction as if the accused had been tried for both offences simultaneously. This means, inter alia, that the maximum fine that may be imposed is the sum of the fines that may be imposed for each offence, but the maximum term of imprisonment is that which may be imposed in respect of the offence carrying the longest sentence plus one-third thereof (Articles 57 and 58).
The public prosecutor is charged with investigating criminal offences that have been committed within the jurisdiction of the Regional Court to which he is attached (Article 148 § 1). He is empowered to order subordinate authorities to take investigative measures (Article 148 § 2). If he considers, on the basis of such investigations, that a prosecution is required, he takes the necessary action (Article 167 § 1).
A prosecution is considered to begin when the accused is summoned to the hearing (Article 258 § 1) or when the public prosecutor requests a preliminary judicial investigation (see paragraph 29 below).
The public prosecutor may lodge a request with the investigating judge to undertake a preliminary judicial investigation (Article 149). Such a request shall indicate the offence believed to have been committed and, if possible, the suspect (Article 181 § 1).
If the investigating judge accedes to the request, he must hear the suspect (Article 200). He is empowered to order the appearance of witnesses (Articles 210 and 213) and experts (Article 227), and to order the competent authorities to take other investigative measures (Article 177 § 1).
Article 180 of the Code of Criminal Procedure requires the trial court to ensure that the preliminary judicial investigation proceeds without undue delay. The trial court can order, of its own motion or at the request of the prosecution or the defence, that the case file be produced before it and the investigation brought to a close immediately or speedily.
If a tax fine has been imposed under section 21 of the General Act on State Taxes 1959 (see paragraph 23 above), it is open to the taxpayer to submit an administrative objection (bezwaarschrift) to the competent tax inspector (section 23).

An appeal against the latter’s decision lies to the Taxation Division of the Court of Appeal (section 26).
It is, however, also open to the taxpayer to lodge an appeal directly to the Taxation Division of the Court of Appeal without first submitting an administrative objection to the tax inspector (section 26(2)).
In addition, the General Act on State Taxes contains procedural provisions derogating from the Code of Criminal Procedure as lex specialis, which may be applied in cases where tax offences are believed to have been committed.
Although the public prosecutor retains his competence under the Code of Criminal Procedure, investigations into tax offences may also be ordered and carried out by the tax authorities. The latter may forward the case file to the public prosecutor if they consider a prosecution desirable, i.e. – for present purposes – if they do not wish to proceed on the basis of section 21 (see paragraph 23 above) but rather on the basis of section 68 (see paragraph 24 above). They are obliged to do so, inter alia, if they have seized any documents.
Mr Hozee applied to the Commission on 26 May 1993. He relied on Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, complaining of the length of the criminal proceedings against him.
The Commission (Second Chamber) declared the application (no. 21961/93) admissible on 28 February 1996. In its report of 9 April 1997 (Article 31), it expressed the unanimous opinion that there had been no violation of Article 6 § 1. The full text of the Commission’s opinion is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.
The applicant in his memorial requested the Court to find that the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
The Government for their part asked the Court in their memorial to conclude that the facts disclosed no breach of the Convention.