The case originated in an application (no. 7672/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Vladimir Vladimirovich Ponomarev (“the applicant”), on 22 May 2001.
The applicant was represented by Mr V.D. Yermeychuk, a lawyer practising in the . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, the former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 11 January 2006 the Court decided to communicate the complaint concerning the domestic courts’ failure to examine the applicant’s claim about his alleged infection with tuberculosis to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The Court dismissed an objection raised by the Government concerning the application of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention to the present case.
The applicant was born in 1975 and lives in Vorkuta, in the .
On 30 October 1996 police apprehended the applicant on suspicion of having committed theft from a garage, together with Sh. Upon arrival at the police station the applicant and Sh. admitted the charges. The applicant told the police the location of the garage they had robbed. It appears from the records of the applicant’s arrest and first questioning that his right to have legal assistance provided by the state or of his own choosing was explained to him. However, he declined the offer initially and said that he would appoint a counsel to defend him during the trial.
On 1 November 1996 the applicant was remanded in custody.
On 28 February 1997 the prosecution authorities referred the criminal case to the Vorkuta Town Court of the  (“the ”) for trial.
On 9 December 1997 the  found that during the pre-trial investigation the applicant had been deprived of an opportunity to appoint legal counsel of his own choosing. In the ’s view, the applicant’s defence rights had not been respected and the charges against him had been based to a large extent on his self-incriminating testimony. Furthermore, the  established that the applicant had been in custody for a year and that he had contracted tuberculosis. In those circumstances it decided to release the applicant on the undertaking not to leave his place of residence, and returned the case to the prosecution authorities for further investigation. The  ordered that all investigative measures, including questioning the applicant, should be conducted in the presence of the applicant’s legal counsel.
In July 1998 the investigating authorities discontinued the criminal proceedings against the applicant in the absence of any corpus delicti. However, in November 1998 the Deputy Prosecutor of  ordered them to be re-opened.
On 18 December 2000 the  examined the applicant’s case. The applicant was represented by K., a counsel appointed by him. The applicant and Sh. denied all charges. They submitted that they had confessed to theft to protect Sh.’s brother. The applicant refused to give any further testimony, relying on his right not to incriminate himself.
The  heard testimonies by a victim, several witnesses and the investigator in charge of the case, who stated that the applicant had been assisted by a lawyer throughout the proceedings, except at times when he had refused to call one. Each time his refusal had been noted in the records of questioning and endorsed by the applicant. The  held that the applicant had admitted the charges and that other evidence examined in the trial proved his guilt. It dismissed as unsubstantiated the applicant’s complaint that he had been questioned on occasion with no counsel present, finding that according to the records of questioning sessions signed by the applicant, he had declined to call a lawyer.
On the same date the  convicted the applicant as charged and sentenced him to two years’ imprisonment, but ordered the sentence to be lifted under the Amnesty Act of 26 May 2000. On 26 January 2001 the Supreme Court of the  (“the Supreme Court”) upheld the conviction on appeal.
On 22 December 1998 the applicant brought a court action against the Ministry of Finance of the , seeking to recover lost wages and obtain compensation for his allegedly unlawful detention. He also claimed damages for his alleged infection with tuberculosis while in detention. He relied on Articles 1070 and 1100 of the Civil Code of the  and claimed 150,000 Russian roubles (RUB). In the course of the proceedings, on 5 July 2001, the applicant increased his claim to RUB 300,000.
In support of his claims concerning his alleged infection with tuberculosis, the applicant provided the  with an extract of his medical record delivered by the hospital of the village of Severnyy on 23 October 1998, and medical certificates delivered by the tuberculosis dispensary of  on 23 December 1997 and 5 August 1998. According to those documents the applicant had been diagnosed with tuberculosis in 1997, while in pre-trial detention, and had to follow regular in-patient and sanatorium therapy.
The  delivered its judgment on 23 January 2003. It held that the applicant’s pre-trial detention had been lawful and dismissed his claim in respect of compensation for detention. It did not address the applicant’s complaint about his alleged infection with tuberculosis. On 17 March 2003 the Supreme Court upheld the judgment on appeal.
Constitution of the  of 12 December 1993
Article 53
“Everyone shall have the right to compensation by the state for harm caused by the unlawful action (or inaction) of State organs or their officials.”
Criminal Code of the  of 13 June 1996
Article 84 Amnesty
“An amnesty may be declared by the State Duma of the Federal Assembly of the  with regard to a broad range of persons.
Persons who have committed crimes may be relieved from criminal liability by an act of amnesty. Persons convicted of crimes may be released from punishment, or the punishment imposed on them may be reduced or replaced with a milder penalty, or such persons may be released from additional penalties. The criminal records of persons who have served punishment may be expunged by an act of amnesty.”
Part II of the Civil Code of the  of 26 January 1996, as worded at the material time
Article 1069 Liability for harm caused by State agencies, local self-government agencies and their officials
Article 1070 Liability for harm caused by the unlawful actions of agencies of inquiry, agencies of preliminary investigation, the prosecutor’s office and the courts
“1.  Harm caused to an individual as a result of unlawful conviction, unlawful criminal prosecution, unlawful application as a measure of restraint of remand in custody or a written undertaking not to leave a specified place, unlawful imposition of administrative sanctions in the form of an arrest or correctional labour, shall be compensated in full at the expense of the treasury of the Russian Federation and, in those instances provided for by law, at the expense of the treasury of the subject of the Russian Federation or the municipal authority concerned, regardless of any fault on the part of officials of agencies of inquiry, preliminary investigation, the prosecutor’s office and the courts, in the procedure established by law.
Harm caused to an individual or a legal person as a result of the unlawful activity of agencies of inquiry, preliminary investigation, prosecutor’s offices, which has not entailed the consequences specified in paragraph 1 of this Article, shall be compensated on the grounds and in accordance with the procedure set out in Article 1069 of this Code. Harm caused in the course of the administration of justice by the courts shall be compensated in cases where the fault of a judge has been established by a court judgment that has entered into legal force.”
Article 1100 Grounds for compensation for non-pecuniary damage
“Non-pecuniary damage shall be compensated, regardless of the fault of the person responsible for inflicting the damage, in the following instances:
where the damage to the life and health of an individual was caused by a source of extreme danger;
where the damage was caused to an individual as a result of his unlawful conviction, unlawful criminal prosecution, unlawful application as a measure of restraint of remand in custody or a written undertaking not to leave a specified place, unlawful imposition of an administrative sanction in the form of an arrest or correctional labour;
where the harm was caused as a result of the dissemination of defamatory information discrediting honour, dignity and business reputation;
in other instances specified by law.”