The case originated in an application (no. 36931/08) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Slovak nationals, Mr Oliver Varga and Mr Barnabáš Varga (“the applicants”), on 21 July 2008.
The applicants were represented by Mr R. Belanský, a lawyer practising in Košice. The Government of the  (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková.
The applicants alleged a breach of their right to a fair hearing in proceedings concerning their claim for restitution of a plot of land.
On 6 September 2011 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
Mr Oliver Varga (the first applicant), is a Slovakian national who was born in 1959 and lives in Veľké Kapušany. He is the brother of Mr Barnabáš Varga (the second applicant), a Slovakian national who was born in 1954 and died on 19 May 2009. After his death the first applicant, as his brother’s sole heir, expressed the wish to pursue the application in the second applicant’s stead.
In 1981 several plots of land situated in Veľké Kapušany were expropriated from the applicants’ family. Their ownership was later transferred to the Veľké Kapušany municipality. Under a contract of 25 July 1991 that municipality transferred the ownership of the plots to a gas distribution company. The applicants’ mother, and, after her death in 1993 the applicants, claimed restitution of the plots.
The municipality refused to restore one of the plots to the applicants’ mother under the Extra-Judicial Rehabilitations Act 1991, on the ground that it had been transferred to a legal person. She therefore brought an action with the Trebišov District Court.
On 24 April 1995 the District Court ordered the Veľké Kapušany municipality to conclude a contract with the applicants under which the plot in issue would be restored to them. The judgment transferred to the applicants ownership rights in respect of the plot with effect from the date it became final.
The District Court established that the municipality possessed the plot at the time of the entry into force of the Extra-Judicial Rehabilitations Act 1991, on 1 April 1991. The subsequent transfer of the plot to a company was void, as section 9(1) of the Extra-Judicial Rehabilitations Act 1991 prohibited transfer of property falling under that Act to third parties after its entry into force.
On 27 June 1996 the  upheld the District Court’s judgment.
As a result, the plot was restored to the applicants.
On 16 March 2004 the applicants claimed restitution of a different plot of land with a surface area of 593 square metres by virtue of Law no. 503/2003 on Restoration of Land Ownership (“the 2003 Act”).
On 27 July 2005 the District Land Office in Michalovce found, with reference to section 6(1)(a) of the 2003 Act, that ownership of the plot could not be restored to the applicants, as it was owned by a legal person. The decision acknowledged that under section 6(2) of the 2003 Act, the applicants were entitled either to have an alternative plot of land owned by the State transferred to them or to financial compensation. The redress was to be provided by the Slovak Land Fund.
The first applicant sought judicial review of the administrative decision. He argued that the administrative authority had not decided within the time-limit laid down in section 49 of the Administrative Proceedings Act 1967, and that section 6(1)(a) of the 2003 Act, excluding restitution of the plot on the ground that it was owned by a legal person, was enacted with effect from 1 May 2004, that is after the proceedings had been brought. That provision should not, therefore, have been applied to his claim with retroactive effect. Finally, the first applicant argued that the expropriation of the land in 1981 and its transfer to a company in 1991 had been unlawful.
On 21 February 2006 the  upheld the administrative decision of 27 July 2005. It held that the Land Office had decided in accordance with the law as in force at the material time. The  considered the argument that the plot was not being used for the purpose for which it had been expropriated irrelevant, as it was uncontested that the applicants were entitled to redress pursuant to the relevant provisions of the 2003 Act.
On 17 January 2007 the Supreme Court upheld the first-instance judgment. It held that the  had established all relevant facts and had applied the relevant law correctly. The judgment indicated that the thirty-day period set out in section 49 of the Administrative Proceedings Act 1967 was of a procedural nature. A failure by an administrative authority to respect it did not affect the legal position of parties to the proceedings. It was nevertheless open to parties who considered themselves affected to claim compensation in accordance with special law. The Supreme Court further confirmed the conclusion that, since the applicants were clearly entitled to redress under the 2003 Act, it was superfluous to take further evidence or to examine the lawfulness of the expropriation of the property in 1981 and its subsequent transfer to a different person in 1991.
The decision on the applicants’ claim became final on 21 February 2007.
On 23 April 2007 the applicants lodged a complaint with the . They alleged a breach of their constitutional right to judicial protection in the proceedings on their restitution claim of 16 March 2004. They claimed that the transfer of their land in the same area to a gas distribution company on 25 July 1991 had been found contrary to the Extra-Judicial Rehabilitations Act 1991. The courts, dealing with their first restitution claim, had declared that transfer void on that ground. The courts dealing with their second restitution claim had disregarded their argument in that respect. They further argued that the ordinary courts’ conclusion, that the newly enacted section 6(1)(a) of the 2003 Act was to be applied to their case, was contrary to the constitutional principle of legal certainty and prohibition of laws having retroactive effects.
On 6 December 2007 the  dismissed the applicants’ complaint. It found no appearance of unlawfulness or arbitrariness in the proceedings leading to the Supreme Court’s judgment. Reference by the applicants to the fact that the transfer of their land to a company had been found unlawful in the context of a different set of proceedings under the Extra-Judicial Rehabilitations Act 1991 was not capable of undermining the conclusion the Supreme Court had reached in the proceedings under consideration governed by a different piece of legislation. The administrative authority and ordinary courts had decided in accordance with the relevant law then in force. In the context of the proceedings introduced by the applicants the  lacked the power to examine whether that law was in conformity with the Constitution.
The ’s decision became final on 19 February 2008.
The applicants’ right to claim either an alternative plot of land or financial compensation from the Slovak Land Fund as foreseen by section 6(2) and (8) of the 2003 Act lapsed on 21 February 2010, as they had not availed themselves of that right before that date.
Law no. 503/2003 on Restoration of Land Ownership (“the Land Ownership Restoration Act 2003”, “the 2003 Act”) governs restitution of agricultural and forest land which was not restored under earlier legislation.
Section 4(1) specifies that the obligation to restore land covered by that law extends to legal persons who, at the moment of its entry into force, use or administer land in the ownership of the , and to agricultural cooperatives.
Until 30 April 2004 section 6(1)(a) provided that where the land in issue was owned by a natural person it could not be restored to the person entitled to claim it. With effect from 1 May 2004 that provision was amended, in that the exemption from the obligation to restore land extended also to cases where the land was in the ownership of legal persons who were different from those referred to in section 4(1).
Pursuant to section 6(2), in cases where land cannot be restored for reasons set out in sub-section 1, alternative land in State ownership of an appropriate area and quality should be transferred free of charge to the person concerned, where possible within the area of the same municipality. Where the person concerned disagrees with such a transfer, he or she is entitled to financial compensation. Its amount is to be determined in accordance with the Ministry of Justice Regulation 576/2003 on determination of general value of property.
Section 6(8), amended with effect from 1 January 2008, allowed for a request for an alternative plot or compensation to be lodged with the Slovak Land Fund before 1 January 2009 as regards decisions which became final before 1 January 2008, but in all cases at least three years from the date the relevant decision takes effect.
Section 49(1) obliges administrative authorities to decide on simple matters immediately.
Pursuant to section 49(2), in other matters administrative authorities are obliged to decide within thirty days, unless a different period has been fixed in a special law. The thirty-day period can be extended to sixty days in particularly complex cases. Any further extension has to be approved by a higher authority.