The case originated in an application (no. 26374/18) against the Republic of Iceland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Icelandic national, Mr Guðmundur Andri Ástráðsson (“the applicant”), on 31 May 2018.
The applicant was represented by Mr V.H. Vilhjálmsson, a lawyer practising in Reykjavik. The Icelandic Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Acting Agent, Ms F.R. Þorsteinsdóttir, the Acting State Attorney General.
The applicant complained that his criminal conviction had been upheld by a “tribunal” which was not “established by law” and which was not independent and impartial, in violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 19 June 2018 the Government were given notice of the application.
The application was allocated to the Second Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). On 12 March 2019 a Chamber of that Section, composed of Judges Paul Lemmens, President, Robert Spano, Işıl Karakaş, Valeriu Griţco, Ivana Jelić, Arnfinn Bårdsen and Darian Pavli, and also of Hasan Bakırcı, Deputy Section Registrar, delivered a judgment in which it unanimously declared the application admissible and held, by five votes to two, that there had been a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention as regards the right to a tribunal established by law. The joint dissenting opinion of Judges Lemmens and Griţco was annexed to the judgment.
On 14 May 2019 the Government requested the referral of the case to the Grand Chamber in accordance with Article 43 of the Convention. On 9 September 2019 the panel of the Grand Chamber granted that request.
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined according to the provisions of Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24.
The applicant and the Government each filed written observations on the merits of the case (Rule 59 § 1). In addition, third-party comments were received from the Government of Poland, the Commissioner for Human Rights of the Republic of Poland, the Public Defender (Ombudsman) of Georgia and the Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights, all of whom had been given leave by the President of the Grand Chamber to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3). The parties replied to these comments in the course of their oral submissions at the hearing (Rule 44 § 6).
The hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 5 February 2020.
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses, and replies to the questions from the judges, by Mr Vilhjálmsson, Ms Þorsteinsdóttir and Mr Otty.
On 14 and 20 February 2020, respectively, the applicant and the Government submitted further written replies to some of the questions put by the judges at the hearing.
As part of the efforts to restructure the judiciary in Iceland, on 19 May 1989 the Icelandic Parliament (Althingi) adopted Act no. 92/1989 on the Separation of the Executive and the Judiciary at the District Level. Amongst the provisions introduced by the Act was the establishment of an Evaluation Committee to evaluate the competencies and qualifications of candidates for the post of District Court judge. Originally proposed in 1976, the introduction of such a committee was – according to the preparatory material in respect of the relevant Act – meant to ensure judicial independence and to increase public confidence in an independent judiciary. The Committee, an independent administrative body, was advisory vis-à-vis the Minister of Justice and was to be composed of three members appointed by the Supreme Court, the District Courts and the Icelandic Bar Association, respectively.
As regards the appointment of Supreme Court justices, the Supreme Court had been designated to act as an advisory body for that purpose at an earlier stage under Act no. 75/1973 on the Supreme Court (Lög um Hæstarétt Íslands).
The Judiciary Act no. 15/1998 (“the former Judiciary Act”), which entered into force on 1 July 1998, originally maintained, as far as is relevant, the Evaluation Committee’s mandate, composition and advisory role. In a judgment delivered on 14 April 2011 in relation to a dispute on the appointment of a District Court judge, the Supreme Court stressed that despite the advisory role of the Evaluation Committee at the material time, the Minister of Justice, when making a proposal for a judicial appointment contrary to the Committee’s recommendation, was nevertheless bound by the principle of appointing the most qualified candidate to a public post and by the duty of “sufficient investigation” under section 10 of the Administrative Procedures Act (see paragraph 115 below for further information on this judgment).
The role of the Evaluation Committee in the judicial appointment process was further reinforced in 2010 through amendments made to section 4a of the former Judiciary Act by Act no. 45/2010 (see paragraph 103 below). Amongst other important changes concerning the composition and the mandate of the Evaluation Committee, including an increase in the number of members to five and the extension of its mandate to cover the appointment of Supreme Court justices, the amendments introduced the rule that when making judicial appointments the Minister of Justice could only appoint candidates who were considered by the Committee to be the most qualified for a given post. In order to appoint a candidate who had not been considered the most qualified by the Committee, the Minister of Justice needed to obtain the approval of Parliament. This was, according to the Act’s preparatory material, intended to further ensure the independence of the judiciary. That material referred to international legal instruments and recommendations on the appointment of judges, and underlined the importance of proper procedure in judicial appointments, in the light of the judiciary’s significant role in securing fair trial rights and maintaining the checks and balances inherent in the separation of powers. It furthermore referred to an unwritten fundamental principle of Icelandic administrative law, whereby appointments to public posts had to be based on objective considerations and the most qualified candidate had to be appointed to any public post (see paragraph 114 for further information on the aforementioned unwritten administrative law principle).
In view of the increased role conferred upon the Evaluation Committee in the judicial appointment process through these amendments, the Minister of Justice established a set of rules in 2010 (Rules no. 620/2010) to govern the Committee’s work (see paragraph 107 below for further information on the relevant Rules).
On 26 May 2016 the Icelandic Parliament enacted Judiciary Act no. 50/2016 (“the new Judiciary Act”). The new Judiciary Act came into force on 1 January 2018, whereas a number of its temporary provisions, including temporary provision IV concerning the appointment of judges to the Court of Appeal, had entered into force earlier on 14 June 2016.
The new Judiciary Act introduced a new court of second instance in the Icelandic judicial system, namely the Court of Appeal (Landsréttur), thereby replacing the former two-tier system – consisting of District Courts and the Supreme Court – with a three-tier system.
Under section 21 of the new Judiciary Act, the Court of Appeal would be composed of fifteen judges. The initial procedure for the selection and appointment of the judges to the new Court of Appeal was regulated under temporary provision IV of the new Judiciary Act. The first paragraph of temporary provision IV provided that the appointment process would be completed by 1 July 2017 and the appointed judges would take up their duties as of 1 January 2018, from which date the Court of Appeal would start operating. Referring to section 4a of the former Judiciary Act 15/1998 (see paragraph 14 above), the first paragraph of temporary provision IV further indicated that an Evaluation Committee would assess the qualifications of the individual candidates for the position of judge at the Court of Appeal and would provide the Minister of Justice with an evaluation report as to which candidates were considered to be best qualified to serve in that position. Pursuant to the relevant paragraph of the temporary provision, which largely reiterated section 4a of the former Judiciary Act (see paragraph 103 below), the Minister of Justice could not appoint a candidate whom the Evaluation Committee had not considered to be amongst the most qualified for the post. It also provided, however, that the Minister of Justice could depart from the assessment of the Evaluation Committee and propose a different candidate (or candidates) who had not been shortlisted by the Committee, on the condition that the proposed candidate(s) had nevertheless been found by the Evaluation Committee to fulfil all the minimum requirements set by section 21 of the new Judiciary Act (see paragraph 105 below) for appointment to the office of Court of Appeal judge, and that the proposal was accepted by Althingi.
The second paragraph of temporary provision IV then provided that for the first-round of appointments to the new Court of Appeal, the Minister of Justice would submit his or her proposals on each proposed candidate to Althingi. If Althingi accepted the Minister’s proposals, they would then be sent to the President of Iceland, who would formally appoint the relevant judges. If Althingi did not accept any one of the Minister’s proposals, the Minister would then have to submit new proposals to Althingi to replace the refused candidates.
On 10 February 2017 a call for applications was issued for the posts of fifteen judges at the Court of Appeal. The application deadline was set at 28 February 2017. According to the information obtained from the official website of the Icelandic Government, the prospective candidates were requested to provide information on the following matters as part of their applications:
“(1) Current occupation.
(2) Education and further education.
(3) Experience of judicial work.
(4) Experience of legal practice.
(5) Experience of administrative work.
(6) Experience of academic work, e.g. teaching and other academic work and information concerning published, peer-reviewed articles and books, academic lectures, etc.
(7) Experience of management.
(8) Experience of additional work which might be useful for judicial post candidates, e.g. preparation of legislation, etc.
(9) Information on general and special competencies.
(10) Information concerning character and independence at work.
(11) Information concerning two former or current colleagues or superiors who can give the committee both orally and in writing information about the work and co-working skills of the candidate.
(12) Other information which can show the candidate’s professional qualities and skills which are important for Court of Appeal judges.”
The prospective candidates were moreover informed that applications should be accompanied, as applicable, by:
“(1) Copies of degree certificates.
(2) Copies of judgments which the candidate has drafted in the last 12 months, in orally argued court cases.
(3) Copies of written submissions which the candidate has drafted and orally argued in the last 12 months in court cases.
(4) Copies of administrative decisions which the candidate has drafted in the last 12 months.
(5) Published academic books and copies of articles by the candidate. It is requested that peer-reviewed articles be labelled as such.
(6) Other documents which can demonstrate the candidate’s professional competence to work as a judge at the Court of Appeal.”
Thirty-seven applications were initially received, including one from a certain A.E. However, only thirty-three of those applications were ultimately assessed by the Evaluation Committee, because three candidates withdrew their applications and one candidate did not fulfil the legal requirements for the post.
At a meeting held on 2 March 2017, the Minister of Justice (who, at the material time, served in that capacity under the title of Minister of the Interior) submitted the applications to the Chairman of the Evaluation Committee. During the meeting, the Minister suggested to the Chairman that the Evaluation Committee provide her with a list of some twenty qualified candidates to choose from.
Following the meeting with the Minister of Justice, the Evaluation Committee set in motion the assessment process. According to the testimony provided by the Chairman of the Evaluation Committee in judicial proceedings brought in the aftermath of the appointment process by two of the shortlisted candidates, namely J.R.J. and Á.H., the Committee conducted its assessment on the basis of an evaluation table devised by it (see paragraphs 60-75 below for further information on these judicial proceedings). It appears from the Chairman’s testimony that each candidate was individually evaluated and given points on the basis of twelve specific assessment criteria noted on the evaluation table, which included education, judicial experience, and experience of legal practice or of public administration. The total number of points received by the candidates then determined their ranking.
The Evaluation Committee interviewed the candidates between 24 and 26 April 2017 and on 2 May 2017, and also sent questionnaires to the persons indicated by the candidates as referees.
On 11 May 2017 the Chairman of the Evaluation Committee submitted the Committee’s draft assessment report to the Minister of Justice. The report included a list of fifteen candidates who were considered by the Committee to be the most qualified for appointment to the Court of Appeal as judges. According to information obtained from the judicial proceedings mentioned in the previous paragraph, the Minister asked once again during this meeting whether the Committee could provide her with a list that contained more than fifteen qualified candidates, upon which the Chairman showed the Minister the evaluation table that they had worked on and from which the list of the fifteen most qualified candidates had been generated.
On the same day, the Committee sent the draft assessment report to the candidates for their comments.
Seventeen candidates sent in comments, which were discussed at the Committee’s meetings on 18 and 19 May 2017.
On 19 May 2017 the Evaluation Committee submitted its assessment report to the Minister of Justice, which had been finalised after the review of the comments received from the candidates in response to the draft report. According to the information provided in the report, while the comments received from the candidates had given rise to some changes in the Committee’s assessment, they had not affected its recommendations regarding the fifteen most qualified candidates.
According to the testimony provided by the Minister of Justice before the District Court in a different set of judicial proceedings brought in the aftermath of the appointment process by two other candidates, namely E.J and J.H., the Committee also submitted to the Minister on 19 May 2017, along with the assessment report, the evaluation table noted in paragraph 23 above, which showed the number of points allocated to each of the thirtythree candidates under each evaluation category and their rankings (see paragraphs 91-96 below for further information on these judicial proceedings). The Government argued in their observations that the assessment table had been submitted to the Minister of Justice at a later date – that is on 28 May 2017, together with the Evaluation Committee Chairman’s letter to the Minister of Justice (see paragraph 40 below) –, but they did not present any evidence in support of their argument.
The 117-page assessment report was divided into six chapters. The first chapter stated the names of the candidates, the second chapter set out the assessment criteria, the third chapter explained the procedure adopted by the Committee in conducting its assessment, the fourth chapter provided general information about the candidates, and the fifth chapter contained the evaluation of the candidates. The last chapter was divided into twelve sections – corresponding to the twelve different assessment criteria noted in paragraph 23 above –, where the candidates were evaluated at the end of each section according to their qualifications. In the conclusion part of the report, the Evaluation Committee provided the following explanations on its assessment process:
“... The Evaluation Committee’s conclusion is based on a comprehensive assessment of the applicants’ merits, in which the most important aspect is that the applicants have a broad, general legal education, knowledge and ability. In assessing the extent to which applicants’ professional experience is utilised in the work of judges of the Court of Appeal, it is most important that they have solid experience of judicial work, legal practice, and administrative work related to the resolution of disputes. It also matters whether the applicants’ experiences have been varied, such as whether they have experience in applying legal rules in different areas of law. In addition, the experience of the first few years of each job is given relatively the greatest weight in this regard, so there is less reason to differentiate between applicants with lengthy work experience because one of them has held a job longer than the other.
... In assessing general competence, and the ability to prepare and draft judgments and to preside in court, the Committee has given consideration to comments of referees, application documents, other relevant documents and the interviews held with the applicants.”
The Committee found in its report that all thirty-three candidates that it reviewed were legally qualified to serve as Court of Appeal judges. However, in the conclusion of the report, it proposed a list of fifteen candidates whom it deemed to be the most qualified for the post of judge at the Court of Appeal. The assessment report, as opposed to the evaluation table on which the assessment was based, did not provide any ranking of those fifteen candidates; yet it stated explicitly that they were all more qualified for the post of judge at the Court of Appeal than the remaining eighteen candidates. A.E. was not among the fifteen candidates that the Committee considered to be the most qualified. It appears from the evaluation table attached to the assessment report that A.E. was ranked 18th among the thirty-three candidates.
According to information that emerged during the first set of judicial proceedings brought by the candidates J.R.J. and Á.H. mentioned above (see paragraph 23), on 19 May 2017 the Evaluation Committee also submitted a memorandum to the Minister of Justice on the procedure by which it had evaluated the comments made by the candidates in response to the draft assessment report (see paragraphs 27 and 28 above).
Procedure before the Minister of Justice
By email of 12 May 2017, the Secretary-General of Parliament sent a memorandum to the Minister of Justice and the Speaker of Parliament on the procedure to be followed for the judicial appointments to the Court of Appeal and the role of Parliament in the process. The memorandum noted at the outset that the procedure before Parliament was without precedent and not entirely clear, but that it would be conducted in accordance with section 45(5) of the Parliamentary Procedures Act no. 55/1991 (see paragraph 109 below) and then provided further details in relation to the proposed procedure. Accordingly, the Minister of Justice would submit to Parliament one proposal for appointment to each of the fifteen posts. The Minister was expected to provide grounds for her proposals, stating in particular if she intended to deviate from the assessment of the Evaluation Committee. The Minister’s proposals would then be sent to the Constitutional and Supervisory Committee of Parliament (hereinafter “the CSC”), which would give its opinion on those proposals in a manner that enabled Parliament to decide on each proposed candidate. The memorandum stated that no changes could be made to the Minister’s proposals by Parliament; if any one of the proposals was not accepted by Parliament, then the procedure would have to be repeated.
By email of 16 May 2017, the ad hoc Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Justice informed legal advisors from the Prime Minister’s office, the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Finance that the Minister had approved the proposed procedure set out in the memorandum of the Secretary-General of Parliament.
In an email dated 26 May 2017, the Minister of Justice sent to two inhouse legal advisors the draft of the letter that she was planning to submit to Parliament concerning the appointments to the Court of Appeal and asked them to provide feedback. While the draft letter was not included in the case file for examination by the Court, it appears from further correspondence between one of the legal advisors and the ad hoc Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Justice (see paragraph 37 below) that the Minister intended to depart from the list prepared by the Evaluation Committee.
In their response on the same day, the legal advisors informed the Minister that they had inserted some comments and suggestions in the draft letter. According to this email, their main comment was that if the Minister intended to change the Committee’s list of proposed candidates, such change had to be specifically reasoned on the basis of the qualifications of the relevant candidates. They further suggested informing the candidates of the changes, at the latest before the list was submitted to Parliament or before it was processed by it.
On 28 May 2017 one of the legal advisors that the Minister had consulted sent an email to the ad hoc Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, reiterating the views noted above. He stated mainly that if the Minister of Justice considered that the Evaluation Committee’s assessment procedure or the outcome of its assessment had been flawed, then she (the Minister) had two options. The first option would be to refer the matter back to the Committee for reassessment. As a second option, the Minister could choose to remedy the flaws herself, which would require her to evaluate all the candidates in the light of the “Minister’s objectives” (the expression used in the email) and the relevant legal criteria. In such circumstances, a substantive assessment would have to be made of the qualifications of each applicant based on new grounds. In the legal advisor’s opinion, the standard procedure in these circumstances would be to request the Committee to conduct a new evaluation. He further noted that the Minister’s decision in respect of judicial appointments was an administrative act and therefore had to comply with the Administrative Procedures Act no. 37/1993 (see paragraph 108 below). He lastly proposed that it might be wise to inform the candidates about any change in the emphasis placed on one of the assessment criteria and to give them an opportunity to present new information that could be relevant for the fresh evaluation.
It appears from the text of the judgments delivered by the District Court on 25 October 2018 in respect of the candidates E.J and J.H. (see paragraphs 91-96 below) that on 28 May 2017, the ad hoc Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Justice sent an email to the Minister of Justice concerning the latter’s proposals for appointments to the Court of Appeal. According to the Permanent Secretary, who had reviewed the draft of the Minister of Justice’s proposal, the Minister had three options before her:
“1.  It is possible that the Minister may declare tomorrow [to Parliament] that she is unhappy with the criteria on which the Evaluation Committee based its conclusions, and propose that the entry into force of the [new Judiciary Act] be postponed until 1 October [2017]... and that the Evaluation Committee reassess the issue based on criteria which the Minister emphasises with proper reasoning ...
That the Minister may send a letter to Althingi tomorrow with proposals that envisage amendments [to the Evaluation Committee’s list] based on reasoning concerning the increased weight of judicial experience. The Minister [would thus be] repairing the faults with an independent assessment, which means that the same evaluation has to be carried out in respect of all the candidates based on the reasonable and legitimate criteria upon which the Minister proceeds. This means that a substantive evaluation has to be made of the competencies of each candidate based on the new criteria. It would be best to give increased weight to the judicial experience and refer to that in respect of the whole group ... We could also say that with this amendment, the gender balance is changed, without referring to those [particular] considerations in the [Minister’s] proposal.
The Minister may send [her] unamended list to Althingi (which requires work from the Minister to choose the new names, with legitimate reasoning) – not an attractive option –.”
In the meantime, on 27 May 2017 the Minister of Justice asked the Evaluation Committee to provide further information and documents on its evaluation of the thirty-three candidates, and inquired in particular as to whether the Committee had discussed the grounds on which the weight of each assessment criterion had been decided, and whether any documentation relating to that decision existed. She also requested information on whether the Committee had discussed its decision to find only fifteen candidates to be the most qualified for the fifteen posts, in the light of, inter alia, Act no. 10/2008 on Equality.
By a letter of 28 May 2017, the Chairman of the Evaluation Committee provided the Minister of Justice with details as to its evaluation procedure. He informed the Minister about the manner in which the Committee had given weight to each of the twelve pre-determined assessment criteria – which had been the same since the amendments introduced by Act no. 45/2010 (see paragraph 14 above) – and explained that the same method and approach had been used in all judicial appointments during his four years as Chairman of the Committee. He stated that, following the same approach, all candidates had been evaluated separately under each criterion, and the points they received were noted in the assessment table; these points then determined the candidates’ overall ranking. He stressed that the Committee had chosen to apply the same weight to each individual criterion as that applied in previous appointment procedures, noting in particular the importance of maintaining consistency in such matters. According to the Chairman, changing the weightings after the submission of candidatures, for the benefit of particular candidates and to the disadvantage of others, had to be avoided.
As regards the Minister’s second question as to why only fifteen names had been proposed in the Committee’ report, the Chairman explained that the Committee had not found that there had been several candidates of equal merit, nor had it encountered any difficulties in determining whether one candidate was more qualified than another. In this instance, fifteen positions had been advertised and the Committee had found that fifteen of the candidates under its review had been more qualified than the remaining ones for those positions. It had, therefore, not been necessary to propose a list of more than fifteen candidates in its report. The Committee’s evaluation table had clearly shown the ranking of the individual candidates. The Chairman continued that the Minister had asked to be able to choose from among, for example, twenty candidates for the fifteen vacant posts. If this approach were to be followed, the candidate ranked 20th in the Committee’s evaluation table could be chosen over candidates ranked 5th, 10th and so forth. According to the Chairman, this approach would contradict the purpose of Act no. 45/2010 as it had been described in the preparatory material (see paragraph 14 above). The intention behind the legislative framework requiring a separate expert committee to assess candidates for judicial posts, as opposed to leaving that assessment to the Minister of Justice alone, had been to safeguard judicial independence in the light of developments in other European countries.
Lastly, with regard to the reference made by the Minister to Act no. 10/2008 on Equality, the Chairman stated that the Committee did not evaluate qualifications according to the gender of the candidate. Moreover, Act no. 10/2008, which was of relevance to the Committee’s work under Rules no. 620/2010, did not allow discrimination based on gender, whether direct or indirect. Such genderbased considerations could be entertained by the Minister only if two or more candidates had been considered as equally qualified for the post by the Evaluation Committee, which was not the case in the present circumstances.
Procedure before Parliament
In a letter dated 29 May 2017, the Minister of Justice presented to the Speaker of Parliament her proposal of fifteen candidates for appointment as Court of Appeal judges. The proposal contained only eleven of the fifteen candidates whom the Evaluation Committee had found to be the most qualified for the post of judge at the Court of Appeal. The candidates ranked 7th, 11th, 12th and 14th in the Committee’s evaluation table had been removed from the list, and replaced with four other candidates ranked 17th, 18th, 23rd and 30th. The Minister’s proposal therefore included A.E., who had been ranked 18th by the Evaluation Committee (see paragraph 31 above).
In a separate letter sent on the same day, the Minister presented arguments for her proposals and the changes she had made in the Evaluation Committee’s list. The Minister stated at the outset that, in its comprehensive report, the Evaluation Committee had relied on the assessment factors set out in Rules no. 620/2010 (governing the work of the Committee), and the weight ascribed to each assessment factor by the Committee had had a decisive effect on the ranking of each applicant. The Minister was, however, of the opinion that the Evaluation Committee had not given “judicial experience” the weight that the post of judge at an appellate court required. The Minister further argued that the assessment of candidates for judicial posts was not an exact science; it would not be possible to separate a qualified candidate from an unqualified one by a difference of 0.025 points on a scale of 1 to 10, and nothing in Rules no. 620/2010 had called for such working practices. After reviewing the assessment report, the candidates’ comments on that report and the working documents presented to her, the Minister had concluded that a number of other candidates with many years of judicial experience should also have been included on the Evaluation Committee’s list. She thus stated that she considered a total of twenty-four candidates to be eligible for the judicial posts, including those proposed by the Committee, and that she had drawn up her list of fifteen candidates on the basis of the principles described above. The Minister did not provide any further explanation as to why she had decided specifically to replace the candidates ranked 7th, 11th, 12th and 14th with those ranked 17th, 18th, 23rd and 30th. Nor is there any information before the Court as to the names of the twenty-four candidates considered eligible by the Minister of Justice.
Upon receipt of the Minister’s proposals, the CSC held a meeting on 29 May 2017. It invited the Minister of Justice to the meeting, as well as the ad hoc Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, a number of experts, representatives from the Icelandic Bar Association and the Icelandic Judges’ Association, the Parliamentary Ombudsman and the Chairman of the Evaluation Committee. Although the Court is not in possession of the minutes of this meeting, it transpired from the judicial proceedings brought subsequently by J.R.J. and Á.H. that the Minister of Justice had met with some criticism during this meeting for having failed to provide justification for each of the candidates that she had proposed to Parliament.
On 30 May 2017 the CSC held three meetings on the proposal of the Minister of Justice for the appointment of judges to the Court of Appeal. At the first meeting, B.N., who was the Chairman of the CSC at the material time, declared that he was the husband of one of the proposed candidates, namely A.E., and therefore stood down.
At one of the meetings held on 30 May 2017, the Minister of Justice presented a memorandum to the CSC to further substantiate her proposals. In the memorandum, the Minister reiterated her view that more weight should be accorded to judicial experience in the assessment of the candidates for an appellate court, including successful courtroom experience, and stated that she had also taken into account the Equality Act (no. 10/2008) in her proposal. She continued to briefly outline the careers and qualifications of the four candidates whom she had added to the proposal. She concluded with the following remarks:
“As described above, it is the substantial judicial experience of these [four] candidates which motivated the Minister’s proposal, in addition to the consideration which must be given to the Equality Act.
The Minister is bound to propose those who are most qualified for the post of judge at the Court of Appeal. In this instance, the Minister considers that the aforementioned four candidates are also the most qualified for the post of judge at the Court of Appeal. The Minister’s assessment is based on a thorough examination of the documents of the case, including the applications, the Evaluation Committee’s report, the candidates’ comments, and the working documents of the Committee, and is made in light of the legitimate objectives discussed above.
The Minister has not raised any objections regarding the Evaluation Committee’s preparation of this matter. She believes that the Evaluation Committee has shed sufficient light on the matter and that a satisfactory investigation has been performed for the assessment of the factors that constitute the grounds for the conclusion. The Minister considers it appropriate that more weight be given to judicial experience than that given by the Evaluation Committee. The Committee has already evaluated the candidates on the basis of this criterion and all the information about the judicial experience of the candidates is contained in the file. No new information or data has served as a basis for the Minister’s proposal.”
On 30 May 2017 the CSC also met with the Chairman of the Evaluation Committee, as well as representatives from the Icelandic Bar Association and the Icelandic Judges’ Association and two academics, who answered questions put by the members of the CSC. At the close of the meeting, one of the members of the CSC – who was a member of parliament (MP) from an opposition party – requested the following statement to be entered in the official records: “In view of the limited time allowed to the Committee [the CSC], it is clear that the matter will not be dealt with in a sufficiently professional manner, and this will affect public confidence in the courts.”
On 31 May 2017 the majority of the CSC, divided along party lines, proposed a parliamentary resolution, recommending that Parliament approve the Minister’s proposal. The CSC held at the outset that under the Constitution, the role of the judiciary was to supervise the other holders of State powers, and that evaluation committees, such as that which had been set up in Iceland, served the purpose of limiting the power of the executive branch in the appointment of judges, by providing professional opinion on the qualification of candidates. If the Minister of Justice wished to depart from the list of candidates proposed by the Evaluation Committee, she had to present arguments for her proposal. Moreover, the choice had to be objective and the most qualified person had to be selected for the position. The CSC noted that the Evaluation Committee had considered that all thirty-three candidates fulfilled the legal requirements to be eligible for the relevant office. On this basis, and upon a discussion of the grounds underlying the Minister’s proposal for appointment of judges to the Court of Appeal, including the deviations from the Committee’s proposal, the CSC stated that it accepted the list proposed by the Minister. It stressed that Parliament’s role in this process should be limited to reviewing whether the proper procedure had been applied by the Minister, whether an appropriate comparison of the candidates had been undertaken and whether the Minister’s evaluations had been objective.
The minority, on the other hand, recommended that the proposal be dismissed, as they considered the reasons given by the Minister to be insufficient, in particular as to why she had chosen to depart from the Committee’s proposal. They argued inter alia that the Minister had not made it clear how the four candidates removed from the original list and the four added ones had been evaluated and compared. Moreover, the minority expressed serious reservations regarding the Minister’s compliance with principles of administrative law, including the requirement of sufficient investigation, the right of the candidates to comment and the general principle of domestic law that only the most qualified candidates should be selected for office, referring to the Supreme Court’s judgment of 14 April 2011 in case no. 412/2010 (see paragraph 13 above and 115 below). They furthermore claimed that the CSC had been unable to obtain sufficient expert opinion on the matter and had had insufficient time to review the proposal.
The resolution proposed by the majority of the CSC was scheduled to be discussed at the parliamentary session of 1 June 2017. It appears from the letter that the Secretary-General of Parliament sent to the President of Iceland on 7 June 2017 (see paragraph 57 below) that, prior to the start of the session, the Speaker of Parliament consulted with the chairpersons of the different parliamentary groups and some individual MPs regarding the voting procedure, and that the consultations revealed that all MPs would vote in the same manner on every single proposal.
After opening the session, the Speaker formally informed the MPs that the candidates proposed by the Minister of Justice for appointment as Court of Appeal judges could be voted on individually or, if there were no objections, the proposals in respect of all fifteen candidates could be put to a single vote. Since there were no objections from any MPs, it was decided to proceed to a single vote.
Accordingly, on 1 June 2017 Parliament first voted on and rejected the CSC minority’s proposal to dismiss the list prepared by the Minister of Justice by 31 votes to 30, strictly along partypolitical lines. This was followed by a vote on the majority’s proposal, which was adopted – also along party-political lines –, with 31 MPs in favour, all of whom were members of the political parties composing the majority in the coalition government, and 22 MPs against, all members of opposition parties. A total of 8 MPs abstained, none of whom were members of the governing parties.
In a letter of 2 June 2017, the Minister of Justice was informed that at its session on 1 June 2017 Parliament had approved the list of fifteen candidates that she had proposed to be appointed as Court of Appeal judges. The letter was signed by the Speaker and the Secretary-General of Parliament.
On the same day, the Minister of Justice sent a letter to the Permanent Secretary of the Prime Minister’s Office, who was acting at that time in her capacity as Secretary to the State Council, and requested that presidential letters of appointment be issued in respect of the candidates who had been selected as Court of Appeal judges.
On 6 June 2017 the Secretary to the President of Iceland requested information from Parliament on the procedure adopted by it for the selection of judges to be appointed to the Court of Appeal, the events leading up to the voting and the discussions held in Parliament, in the light of the relevant requirements of temporary provision IV to the new Judiciary Act and the Parliamentary Procedures Act.
By a letter of 7 June 2017 the Secretary-General of Parliament gave the President an account of the procedure before Parliament, and indicated that the voting had been lawful and in conformity with Parliament’s statutory and customary procedures. The letter also stated the following:
“... It should be emphasised that the provision [temporary provision IV] does not contain further instructions on how the matter should be handled in Althingi. The matter is therefore governed by parliamentary procedure and its customary implementation. However, it is clear from the temporary provision, ..., that Althingi will, or may, take a stand on each proposed candidate [separately] for the position of judge if it so wishes.
It is a customary practice and an old tradition for a number of issues to be taken together during a vote if it is clear that everyone will vote in the same manner or when there is no proposal for amendments on individual matters, ... This is referred to as the sections being ‘taken together’ and the voting, or its conclusion, applies to each section. Generally, the right of MPs to request a ‘separate vote’ for a specific article, articles, sections or even individual words is respected, ...
...
Particularly thorough preparation was made for the vote on Thursday, 1 June, ... The Althingi Secretariat prepared the vote, and before the parliamentary meeting commenced, the Speaker of Parliament sought the opinions of the leaders of the parliamentary groups and other MPs concerning the voting arrangements. The parliamentary document from the Constitutional and Supervisory Committee sets out a numbered proposal for each individual, so that the vote could be held for each person if this was desired. It was disclosed in conversations between the Speaker and leaders of parliamentary groups that MPs would all vote in the same way for each individual in the proposal and this view was confirmed by comments from various MPs when voting at the Althingi meeting. The Speaker of Althingi, furthermore, repeated formally at the meeting, at the time the voting commenced, that it [the vote] could be held for each candidate separately. There were, however, no objections to having the proposals presented as a whole, and no request for the Committee’s proposals to be voted on separately. For instance, it could have been expected that a separate vote would be requested for those four candidates who had been included in the [Minister’s proposal], ..., but that had not been the case.
...
The conclusion of the Secretariat is therefore that the voting is fully legitimate and in accordance with the statutory and customary procedures of Althingi, to reply specifically to the query from the Office of the President of Iceland. The principal intention and requirement of the aforementioned temporary provision ... is to enable Althingi to take a position on each prospective judge, reject individual proposals by the Minister, and not to be faced with the obligation of having to approve or reject all proposals. When dealing with this matter in Althingi, this intention was respected; ...”
On 8 June 2017 the President of Iceland signed the letters of appointment in respect of the fifteen judges of the Court of Appeal, as proposed by the Minister of Justice and accepted by Parliament. The letter of appointment sent to A.E. read as follows:
“The President of Iceland makes known: that in accordance with the Judiciary Act, I hereby appoint [A.E.] to the position of judge of the Court of Appeal, effective as of 1 January 2018. She shall respect the State’s constitutional law and Icelandic laws in general, all in accordance with a solemn declaration by her.
...”
On the same day, the President of Iceland issued a statement referring to the correspondence between Parliament and his Office (see paragraphs 56 and 57 above). The President stated that no errors had been committed in the preparation and arrangement of the voting on 1 June 2017 and that the voting procedure had been in conformity with the law, parliamentary conventions and procedures.
In June 2017 J.R.J. and Á.H. – who were among the fifteen candidates that the Evaluation Committee had considered as the most qualified to be appointed to the bench of the Court of Appeal, but had been removed from the final list proposed to Parliament by the Minister of Justice – brought separate judicial proceedings in the District Court of Reykjavik against the Icelandic State. J.R.J. and Á.H. both requested in the first place the annulment of the Minister’s decision of 29 May 2017 not to include them in the list of fifteen candidates proposed to Parliament for appointment to the Court of Appeal. They further requested the annulment of the decision not to include them on the list of fifteen candidates proposed to the President of Iceland for appointment after the vote in Parliament. In addition, they demanded compensation for pecuniary damage and 1,000,000 Icelandic krónur (ISK, approximately 9,000 euros (EUR) at the material time) for personal injury (non-pecuniary damage). They submitted that the Minister’s decision not to propose them as Court of Appeal judges had been unlawful, because she had failed to give sufficient grounds for her departure from the Evaluation Committee’s proposal and to demonstrate her proposal’s compliance with the requirement to appoint the most qualified candidate; they also claimed that she had not sufficiently investigated the matter. In their view, these violations could not be rectified by Parliament’s approval of the Minister’s proposal.
In both cases, the Icelandic State requested the District Court of Reykjavik to dismiss the claims of J.R.J. and Á.H. as inadmissible for being unsubstantiated, or in the alternative, to reject those claims on the merits. It reasoned that the administrative decision not to propose them as Court of Appeal judges was not of such a nature as to be subject to annulment, that the appointing power lay not with the Minister of Justice but with Parliament and the President, and that the plaintiffs’ claims for damages were insufficiently substantiated.
On 7 July 2017 the District Court dismissed the plaintiffs’ claims for annulment and pecuniary damage as inadmissible by way of a preliminary decision. The District Court held that the claim for annulment of the decision not to propose the plaintiffs as Court of Appeal judges was not one which could be adjudicated, as it was unclear what effects it would have if upheld, given that a finding for the plaintiffs in this respect would not annul the appointment of the fifteen judges proposed to Parliament. The District Court furthermore agreed with the State that the plaintiffs’ claims for pecuniary damage were insufficiently substantiated.
On 10 July 2017 both J.R.J. and Á.H. appealed against the decisions of the District Court before the Supreme Court. It appears that in their appeal requests, J.R.J. and Á.H. had explained that they did not as such demand any change to the situation of those fifteen judges already appointed to the posts, but only the invalidation of the Minister’s decision to sideline them. They stated that it was not for them to decide what such invalidation might lead to, in terms of its effects on the fifteen appointed judges.
On 31 July 2017 the Supreme Court upheld the District Court’s judgments in both cases, in so far as they concerned the plaintiffs’ requests for the annulment of the relevant decisions in which their names were not included among the list of fifteen candidates proposed to Parliament and the President, respectively, for appointment to the Court of Appeal. The Supreme Court held, in particular:
“... it is not in the power of the courts to decide who should be appointed to the office of judge of the Court of Appeal. Bearing this in mind, and having received the [appellants’] ... explanation as to [the nature of their] claim, which will serve as a basis here, the [appellants] have not demonstrated that [they] have a lawful interest in obtaining a court ruling on the invalidity of decisions by the Minister of Justice.”
The Supreme Court, however, annulled the District Court’s decisions to dismiss the claims of J.R.J. and Á.H. for pecuniary damage. The cases were therefore remitted to the District Court for a fresh examination of that matter.
On 15 September 2017 the District Court found in favour of the Icelandic State and rejected the claims of J.R.J. and Á.H. for pecuniary and nonpecuniary damage. According to the District Court, the plaintiffs had sufficiently proven that the procedure employed by the Minister had not been in accordance with the law. That said, the plaintiffs had failed to prove that they would necessarily have been appointed as Court of Appeal judges had the proper procedure been applied and that they had, therefore, sustained damage. The District Court also found that the voting procedure in Parliament had not breached the law.
On 19 September 2017 J.R.J. and Á.H. appealed to the Supreme Court against the judgments of the District Court.
On 19 December 2017 the Supreme Court upheld the District Court’s conclusions regarding the claims for pecuniary damage. However, it granted the applicants ISK 700,000 each (approximately EUR 5,700 at the material time) in compensation for non-pecuniary damage.
In its judgments the Supreme Court addressed at the outset the Icelandic State’s argument that the plaintiffs had been misguided in challenging the decisions of the Minister of Justice in respect of the judicial appointments at issue, as it was the Icelandic Parliament, and not the Minister, which had the final say in deciding which candidates would be presented to the President of Iceland for appointment. In this connection, the Supreme Court reiterated that although the President of Iceland was formally the highest State official under the Constitution, in practice the Ministers were the supreme holders of executive power according to a wellrooted constitutional tradition. The arrangements made under the former and the new Judiciary Acts entailing the involvement of the Evaluation Committee and Parliament in the process of the appointment of judges did not change this constitutional tradition. Accordingly, it was the Minister of Justice, and not Parliament, which held the power to determine who would be proposed to the President of Iceland for appointment as judge to the Court of Appeal. The Icelandic State’s argument to the contrary was therefore rejected.
The Supreme Court further reiterated in both judgments the general principle of Icelandic administrative law that when making appointments to public posts, the executive was bound by the rule that only the most qualified candidates had to be selected. It referred in this connection to two of its earlier judgments, delivered on 14 April 2011 and 5 November 1998, respectively. According to the first of those judgments, which concerned a dispute over the lawfulness of an appointment of a District Court judge, section 10 of the Administrative Procedures Act on the rule of investigation required the authorities to ensure that decisions concerning appointments to public posts were not made until all the relevant and necessary information had been obtained. In the second judgment, the Supreme Court had held that the power of a Minister in respect of appointments to public posts was limited by the applicable laws and general principles of administrative law concerning such appointments and the evaluation of the competencies of the candidates. The Supreme Court stated that in the context of judicial appointments, the rule of investigation under section 10 of the Administrative Procedures Act had been transferred from the Minister to the Evaluation Committee following the establishment of such committee by Act no. 92/1982.
Turning to the specific facts before it, the Supreme Court observed at the outset that in the proposal that she had made to Parliament, the Minister of Justice had decided to retain eleven of the fifteen candidates which the Evaluation Committee had deemed to be the most qualified to be appointed as Court of Appeal judge. The Supreme Court noted that the qualifications of those eleven candidates had been assessed by the Evaluation Committee, which clearly possessed the expertise to assess such matters, and had conducted its assessment in accordance with the relevant domestic laws. In these circumstances, the procedure followed in respect of those eleven candidates, including the single vote held before Parliament, did not present any irregularities, provided that an opportunity had been made available to vote separately on each candidate upon request.
The Supreme Court went on to find, however, that to the extent that the Minister of Justice had decided to propose to Parliament to depart from the Evaluation Committee’s assessment in respect of four candidates, as the law had permitted, her proposal had to be based on an independent investigation of all the elements necessary to substantiate it in accordance with section 10 of the Administrative Procedures Act (see paragraph 108 below). Accordingly, the Minister had to ensure that her own investigation and assessment were based on expert knowledge, on a par with that of the Evaluation Committee, and that the instructions concerning the evaluation procedure as set out under Rules no. 620/2010 on the work of the Evaluation Committee – rules that had been put in place by the Ministry of Justice to guide the work of the Committee (see paragraph 107 below) – were taken into account in her assessment. According to the Supreme Court, this was all the more important given that under the relevant law, the assessment report prepared by the Evaluation Committee limited the powers of the Minister of Justice and prohibited her from proposing a candidate who was not considered by the Committee to be the most qualified to the post of judge, unless the Minister obtained the consent of Parliament. The Supreme Court stressed that when making appointments to judicial posts, the decision taken by the Minister did not involve a post accountable to the Minister, but rather concerned members of a different branch of the State’s government which had a monitoring role vis-à-vis the other branches and whose independence was guaranteed by Article 61 of the Constitution and section 24 of the former Judiciary Act.
On the basis of these considerations, the Supreme Court held that, having regard to her duty of investigation under section 10 of the Administrative Procedures Act, the Minister of Justice should, at the very least, have compared the competencies of the four candidates that she had added to the list with the four that she had removed. Depending on the outcome of such comparison, the Minister should then have given due reasons for her decision to seek Parliament’s approval for her proposal to depart from the Committee’s conclusions. Only in this manner could Parliament have sufficiently served its role in the process and taken a position on the Minister’s assessment. Accordingly, and in keeping with the requirements of temporary provision IV of the Judiciary Act no. 50/2016, the Minister of Justice had been bound to present an independent proposal for each of the four candidates who had not been among the fifteen listed by the Evaluation Committee. In the Supreme Court’s opinion, this view was also supported by the second paragraph of temporary provision IV, under which the non-acceptance by Parliament of any of the candidates proposed by the Minister of Justice would require the Minister to submit new proposals for Parliament’s acceptance.
Having regard to the information and documents presented before it, the Supreme Court found that the Minister of Justice had not conducted an independent investigation and assessment comparable to that of the Evaluation Committee when departing from that Committee’s opinion. The inadequate character of the investigation conducted by the Minister of Justice prevented her from reaching a different decision on the competencies of the candidates from that previously reached by the Evaluation Committee on the basis of the same data. Furthermore, she could not rely on considerations of gender under the Equality Act no. 10/2008 as those were only applicable in cases where two candidates of different genders had been considered equally qualified. The Supreme Court noted that neither in its initial letter addressed to Parliament on 29 May 2017, nor in the memorandum sent to the CSC the next day, had the Minister substantiated her proposals in a manner that had satisfied the minimum requirements noted above. The Minister of Justice had therefore breached the requirements of section 10 of the Administrative Procedures Act in the context of the procedure for appointment of Court of Appeal judges.
The Supreme Court added that the deficiencies in the procedure before the Minister of Justice had in turn resulted in a flawed procedure before Parliament, as those deficiencies were not rectified when the matter came to a vote in Parliament.
As to the plaintiffs’ claims for nonpecuniary damage under section 26 of the Tort Act no. 50/1993 (see paragraph 113 below), the Supreme Court stated that although nothing suggested that the Minister had acted with the intention of causing injury to their reputation and personal honour, she should nevertheless have been aware that her actions could be to the detriment of the plaintiffs’ reputation and thus cause them personal injury. The Minister had, however, acted “in complete disregard of this obvious danger” (“Þrátt fyrir þetta gekk ráðherrann fram án þess að skeyta nokkuð um þessa augljósu hættu”).
The applicant was born in 1985 and lives in Kópavogur.
On 31 January 2017 the applicant was indicted for a violation of the Traffic Act no. 50/1987, on the charges of driving without a valid driving licence and driving under the influence of drugs.
On 23 March 2017 the District Court of Reykjanes convicted the applicant on the charges against him. The case was processed summarily as the applicant accepted the charges and pleaded guilty. The applicant was sentenced to seventeen months’ imprisonment and his driving licence was revoked for life.
On 6 April 2017 the applicant appealed against the judgment to the Supreme Court. He did not as such challenge his conviction, but requested his sentence to be reduced. The public prosecutor requested that the judgment of the District Court be upheld. Since the case was not examined by the Supreme Court before the end of 2017, it was transferred to the newly established Court of Appeal in accordance with section 78(1) of Act no. 49/2016 on Amendments to the Criminal Procedure Act and Civil Procedure Act.
On 29 January 2018 the Court of Appeal notified the applicant and the prosecution of the date of the trial (6 February 2018), as well as the composition of the court that would be hearing the case. According to this letter, the Court of Appeal would be composed of three judges, including A.E., who was one of the four judges who had been proposed by the Minister of Justice for appointment to that court (see paragraph 43 above).
On 2 February 2018 the applicant’s defence counsel requested that A.E. withdraw from the case, on account of the irregularities in the procedure by which she, and the other three candidates in question, had been appointed as judges to the Court of Appeal.
On 6 February 2018, at a preliminary hearing before the Court of Appeal, the applicant formally lodged a procedural motion requesting that A.E. stand down from the case as required by section 6 (g) of the Criminal Procedure Act no. 88/2008 (see paragraph 110 below). Referring to his right to have his case adjudicated by a qualified, impartial, independent and lawfully constituted court, and to the relevant requirements in this respect under Articles 59 and 70 (1) of the Icelandic Constitution and Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, the applicant claimed that he would not be given a fair trial before an impartial and independent tribunal established by law if A.E. were to participate in the proceedings, owing to the irregularities in the procedure leading to her appointment as judge of the Court of Appeal. In support of his claim, the applicant referred to the decision of the Court of Justice of the European Free Trade Association States (EFTA Court) of 14 February 2017 in case E-21/16 and the judgment of the General Court of the European Union (EU) of 23 January 2018 in case no. T639/16 P (see paragraphs 142 and 132 below, respectively). He argued that according to those rulings, a judge whose appointment had not been in conformity with the law could not be considered to have been fully vested with judicial powers and his or her judgments would therefore have no validity. Having regard to the Supreme Court’s findings of 31 July and 19 December 2017 on the irregularities in the procedure for the appointment of Court of Appeal judge (see paragraphs 64-75 above), any judgment delivered by the Court of Appeal in his case with the participation of A.E. would therefore lack validity.
On 22 February 2018 the Court of Appeal, with the participation of A.E., rejected the applicant’s motion for A.E. to withdraw from the case. The court reasoned that A.E. had fulfilled the general eligibility criteria for appointment, had been appointed for an indefinite term and had enjoyed independence in that post as guaranteed by the Constitution and the new Judiciary Act. The Court of Appeal did not, therefore, agree that there were any events or circumstances, as indicated in section 6 (g) of the Criminal Procedure Act, that would give rise to a justifiable doubt as to the eligibility of A.E. to properly handle the case. The applicant appealed against that decision on 24 February 2018.
On 8 March 2018 the Supreme Court dismissed the appeal on the ground that the conditions for appeal had not been fulfilled for procedural reasons. It held that, whereas the applicant’s main request was that A.E. should withdraw because of her unlawful appointment, he had incorrectly presented that claim as a “recusal request”.
Following the Supreme Court’s dismissal of the applicant’s request for the withdrawal of A.E., the proceedings before the Court of Appeal continued with the participation of A.E.
In a letter of 13 March 2018, the applicant changed his pleadings before the Court of Appeal. His primary claim was that he be acquitted, on the grounds that the appointment of Court of Appeal judges had been in violation of Articles 59 and 70 of the Constitution and Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. In the alternative, he requested that his sentence be reduced.
On 23 March 2018 the Court of Appeal upheld the District Court’s judgment on the merits.
On 17 April 2018 the Supreme Court granted leave to appeal and on 20 April 2018 the applicant appealed against the judgment to the Supreme Court, by way of an appeal lodged by the prosecutor at his request.
The applicant’s main submission before the Supreme Court was to seek the quashing of the Court of Appeal’s judgment and the remittal of his case for retrial. Alternatively, he requested to be acquitted or to be given a reduced sentence. His submissions were based on the following arguments:
“Independent and impartial tribunals are a fundamental pillar of the rule of law. A prerequisite for the precluding of doubt regarding the independence and impartiality of tribunals is the strict observance of the laws and rules that apply to the appointment of judges.
...
It is of particular importance to ensure the independence of the courts of law from the executive branch of government. The fact that politicians, political parties, a certain majority of parliament, the current government or a certain minister might be owed a favour by certain judges undermines their independence and can justifiably weaken public trust in the judiciary.
It is therefore of key importance for it to be ensured beyond reasonable doubt that the appointment of judges is determined on the basis of the professional competence of candidates and not the political views and political connections of the candidate or the arbitrary decision of the Minister of Justice ...
Pursuant to Article 59 of the Constitution, the organisation of the judiciary can only be established by law. According to the second sentence of Article 6 § 1 of the European Convention on Human Rights, a tribunal must be established by law. This entails not only a mandatory condition that general rules on appointments to the judiciary must be clearly enshrined in statute law, but also, and no less importantly, a mandatory condition that the appointment of judges in each instance must be in compliance with the law.
In fact, it can be maintained that the former condition, [that is] the condition on the general rules of statute law, would be worth little if the above conditions did not entail a requirement of compliance with all applicable laws and rules in each instance.”
Relying on these arguments, as well as on the decisions of the EFTA Court and the General Court of the EU as noted above (see paragraph 82 above), and on the previous findings of the Supreme Court regarding the irregularities in the procedure leading to the appointment of A.E. as a Court of Appeal judge (see the relevant judgments noted in paragraphs 67-75 above), the applicant claimed that he had been denied the right to a fair hearing before an independent and impartial tribunal established by law, as provided under Article 70 (1) of the Constitution and Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. He stressed in this connection that the appointment of A.E. to her post had not been in accordance with the law, as required by Article 59 of the Constitution and Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. He further contended that during the parliamentary elections held in October 2017, A.E.’s husband B.N. – an MP belonging to the same political party as the Minister of Justice, namely the Independence Party (Sjálfstæðisflokkurinn) (also mentioned in paragraph 46 above) – had given up the first place on the party’s constituency list in Reykjavik in favour of the Minister, after the latter’s decision to include his wife in her proposal to Parliament. By that action, B.N. had effectively foregone the possibility of serving as a Minister in the new coalition government formed after the elections. In the applicant’s opinion, the deal between the Minister and B.N. had undermined, from an objective perspective, the Court of Appeal’s appearance of independence.
On 24 May 2018 the Supreme Court rejected the applicant’s claims and upheld the judgment of the Court of Appeal. After setting out the facts and the procedure leading to the appointment of A.E. to the Court of Appeal, and recalling its conclusions in the judgments of 19 December 2017 in related proceedings brought by J.R.J. and Á.H., the Supreme Court made the following findings, as relevant:
 “[The applicant’s] arguments for his primary and secondary claims before the Supreme Court are inter alia that under Article 59 of the Constitution and Article 6 of [the Convention], an appointment of a judge has in all respects to be in accordance with the law. Where that is not the case and the appointment is thus unlawful ‘the judge in question is not a lawful holder of judicial power and a court’s judicial rulings in which he has participated constitute a dead letter’, as is argued in [the applicant’s] observations before the Supreme Court. The conclusion drawn from the cited words cannot be sustained unless it is considered that a person’s appointment as a judge under these circumstances would be vitiated by nullity (‘markleysa’), thus not only that flaws in the appointment process would result in its annulment. It must be taken into account that in the aforementioned assessment report of the Evaluation Committee of 19 May 2017, it was concluded that all the 33 candidates fulfilled all the requirements provided for by law to hold the office of judge in the Court of Appeal, a fact that has not been challenged. The appointment of the judges was conducted in accordance with the formal procedural rules of Chapter III of Act no. 50/2016, as well as temporary provision IV of the same Act, albeit with the exception that, during the parliamentary procedure on the Minister of Justice’s proposals on the appointment of the judges, the requirements of the second paragraph of the temporary provision were not followed in that Parliament should have voted on each and every judge separately, but not all the judges at the same time, as was in fact done. This issue, however, has already been addressed in the aforementioned judgment of the Supreme Court [of 19 December 2017], where it was concluded that this was a defect of no significance. Taking this into account, as well as the fact that all the fifteen judges were appointed to office by letters signed by the President of Iceland on 8 June 2017, co-signed by the Minister of Justice, it cannot be concluded that the appointment of [A.E.] was vitiated by nullity, nor is it accepted that judicial rulings of the Court of Appeal, which she has delivered along with others, are for that reason a ‘dead letter’.
When it is assessed whether the accused, due to [A.E.’s] participation, did not enjoy the right to a fair trial before an independent and impartial tribunal in accordance with the first paragraph of Article 70 of the Constitution (cf. Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights), it must be recalled that in the aforementioned judgments of the Supreme Court [of 19 December 2017] it was concluded that such flaws were in the procedure at the level of the Minister of Justice preceding the appointment of the fifteen Court of Appeal judges and that the State was liable for damages. In this case, this finding has in no way been challenged and these judgments have, therefore, evidential value in this respect in accordance with section 116(4) of the Civil Procedure Act. In this regard, it must also, in particular, be emphasised that it cannot be accepted, as was argued in the aforementioned memorandum of the Minister of Justice of 30 May 2017, that by only increasing the weight ascribed to judicial experience from that which such experience was ascribed by the Evaluation Committee in its internal table, relied upon in its assessment report of the 19th of the same month, but relying in other respects on the ‘sufficient investigation’ of the Committee as to each assessment factor, the finding could be made that four named candidates for the post of judge in the Court of Appeal, but not others, would be removed from the group of the fifteen most qualified, and four specific named candidates would be moved up into that group rather than others [sic]. When assessing the consequences of the said flaws in the Minister of Justice’s procedure, account must be taken of the fact that the appointment of all the fifteen judges of the Court of Appeal for an indefinite term, which has in no way been annulled by a court, became a reality upon the signing of their letters of appointment, dated 8 June 2017. As stated above, they all fulfilled the requirements of section 21(2) of Act no. 50/2016 for appointment to the office of judge, including the requirement of item 8 of the said paragraph, that is, being considered to be qualified to hold such office in the light of their professional experience and legal knowledge. From that time, the judges have held positions (cf. Article 61 of the Constitution) which preclude them from being discharged from office except by a judicial decision. From the time the appointment of these judges took effect, they have, according to the same provision of the Constitution (see section 43 (1) of Act no. 50/2016) been under the main obligation in the performance of their official duty to follow only the law. They have also been afforded, in accordance with the last mentioned provision of law, independence in their judicial work but also the duty to perform it under their own responsibility and never to follow instructions from others in their work. With reference to all of the above, there is no sufficient reason to justifiably doubt that [the applicant] enjoyed a fair trial before independent and impartial judges, in spite of the flaws in the procedure at the level of the Minister of Justice.”
The Supreme Court did not specifically address the applicant’s arguments regarding the lack of independence of the Court of Appeal on account of the allegedly political motives behind the Minister of Justice’s proposals.
In February and March 2017 E.J. and J.H. – the two other candidates who were among the fifteen candidates that the Evaluation Committee had considered to be the most qualified, but had been removed from the final list proposed to Parliament by the Minister of Justice – brought judicial proceedings in the District Court of Reykjavik against the Icelandic State. E.J. requested a declaratory judgment to the effect that the State was obliged to compensate him for pecuniary damage in view of his non-appointment to the post of Court of Appeal judge on account of an unlawful decision on the part of the Minister of Justice. J.H. demanded awards in respect of pecuniary damage and non-pecuniary damage on the same grounds. He requested, in particular, an explanation as to what aspect of the assessment of qualifications had been reduced at the expense of increased weighting of judicial work and how the assessment of individual applicants was altered as a result of those changes. He also questioned why some candidates, who had less judicial experience than him or no judicial experience at all, had been added to the list or kept on the list by the Minister.
In two separate judgments of 25 October 2018, the District Court of Reykjavik found for the plaintiffs. In the first judgment the District Court acknowledged E.J.’s right to compensation for pecuniary damage on the grounds that he had put forth. The District Court concluded, inter alia, that the candidate had sufficiently established that, had the procedure been conducted in a lawful manner with a reasonable assessment being made of his application and a comparison performed of his merits in relation to other candidates, it would have resulted in his appointment as judge of the Court of Appeal. In the other judgment, the District Court referred to the related Supreme Court judgments of 19 December 2017 (see paragraphs 67-75 above) and awarded the plaintiff, J.H., ISK 1,100,000 (approximately EUR 7,300 at the material time) in compensation for personal injury (nonpecuniary damage). As to pecuniary damage, the District Court awarded him ISK 4,000,000 (approximately EUR 29,200 at the material time) on the basis of the same argument as that made in respect of E.J.
In both cases, the District Court referred to the Supreme Court’s finding in the 19 December 2017 judgments that when deviating from the Evaluation Committee’s list, the Minister should at least have made a comparison between the qualifications of the four candidates that she removed from the list and the four that she added. According to the District Court, this finding could not be understood to mean that the Minister was limited in her comparison to those particular candidates directly concerned by her decision; if the Minister considered it appropriate to grant increased weight to judicial experience, then she should have duly assessed all candidates on the basis of that consideration. Otherwise, she would be prevented from claiming that she had selected the fifteen most qualified candidates on the basis of their experience of judicial work. The court held that neither the evidence in the case file, nor the Minister’s submissions before it, offered a clear picture as to the nature of the comparison made by the Minister between the candidates in terms of their judicial experience.
Following the appeals lodged by the Icelandic State, on 27 March 2020 the Court of Appeal overturned both District Court judgments – partly in J.H.’s case and entirely in E.J.’s – by a two-to-one majority.
The Court of Appeal quashed the District Court’s judgments to the extent that they concerned the claims for pecuniary damage. It held that the plaintiffs could not have taken it for granted that they would be appointed as judges to the Court of Appeal. The procedure set out under temporary provision IV had clearly provided the Minister with the possibility of deviating from the Committee’s proposal and appointing other candidates, provided that they fulfilled the basic qualifications. In these circumstances, and despite the proposal by the Evaluation Committee for their appointment, J.H. and E.J. could not be considered to have had a legal right to be appointed as judges to the Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal upheld, however, the District Court’s findings in respect of J.H.’s claims for non-pecuniary damage. It stressed that while J.H. had been removed from the list on the grounds of the need to attach more weight to judicial experience, he actually had more judicial experience than at least four of the candidates whom the Minister had retained from the Evaluation Committee’s list.
By two decisions dated 8 May 2020, a three-judge panel of the Supreme Court granted E.J. and J.H. leave to appeal against the Court of Appeal’s judgments, having regard to the precedential value of the cases. According to the latest information available to the Court, the cases are currently pending before the Supreme Court.
On 5 March 2018 a motion of no confidence was tabled in Parliament against the Minister of Justice by several members of two opposition parties, on the grounds of the breaches committed by her in the process of the appointment of Court of Appeal judges.
On 6 March 2018 Parliament rejected the motion by a vote of thirtythree MPs voting against the motion and twenty-nine in favour, with one MP abstaining. The thirty-three MPs rejecting the motion were all members of parties composing the majority in the coalition government. However, two other members of those parties voted in favour of the motion.
On 13 March 2019, following the judgment delivered by the Chamber in the instant case (see Guðmundur Andri Ástráðsson v. Iceland, no. 26374/18, 12 March 2019), the Minister of Justice resigned from office and the operation of the Court of Appeal was completely suspended for one week. Subsequently, the Court of Appeal resumed operation with only eleven of the fifteen appointed judges – since the four judges whose appointments had been called into question decided not to sit. It appears from publicly available information that provisional arrangements were made to temporarily appoint four judges to the Court of Appeal to serve until 30 June 2020.
On 17 April 2020 a new call for applications was made for a post of judge at the Court of Appeal, in response to which A.E. applied. It appears that following her recommendation for the post by the Evaluation Committee, A.E. made a request to the new Minister of Justice to be discharged from her existing (inactive) post at the Court of Appeal. On 16 June 2020 the new Minister of Justice announced that she would follow the Evaluation Committee’s opinion and would propose to the President of Iceland that A.E. be appointed to the advertised post at the Court of Appeal, with effect from 1 July 2020. It appears from publicly available information that A.E. was appointed by the President of Iceland as proposed. It further appears that following vacancies advertised on 19 June 2020, two more judges have been appointed to the Court of Appeal.
The relevant provisions of the Icelandic Constitution (Stjórnarskrá lýðveldisins Íslands) read as follows:
Article 2
“Althingi and the President of Iceland jointly exercise legislative power. The President and other governmental authorities referred to in this Constitution and elsewhere in the law exercise executive power. Judges exercise judicial power.”
Article 59
“The organisation of the judiciary can only be established by law.”
Article 60
“Judges settle all disputes regarding the competence of the authorities. No one seeking a ruling thereon can, however, temporarily evade obeying an order from the authorities by submitting the matter for judicial decision.”
Article 61
“In the performance of their official duties, judges shall be guided solely by the law. Those judges who do not also have administrative functions cannot be discharged from office except by a judicial decision, nor may they be transferred to another office against their will, except in the event of reorganisation of the judiciary ...”
Article 70
“Everyone shall, for the determination of his rights and obligations or in the event of criminal charge against him, be entitled, following a fair trial and within a reasonable time, to the determination of an independent and impartial court of law. A hearing by a court of law shall take place in public, unless the judge decides otherwise as provided for by law in the interest of morals, public order, the security of the State or the interests of the parties.
Everyone charged with criminal conduct shall be presumed innocent until proven guilty.”
The Judiciary Acts
Section 5 of Act no. 98/1989 on the Separation of the Executive and the Judiciary at the District Level (Lög um framkvæmdarvald ríkisins í héraði), which concerned the appointment of a committee to evaluate the competencies of candidates for posts of judge at District Courts, provided as follows:
“...
The Minister of Justice shall appoint a committee every four years, to evaluate the competencies of candidates for the post of District Court judge. The committee shall be composed of three members, one of whom shall be nominated by the Supreme Court and shall serve as chair of the committee. The Association of Judges shall nominate another member of the committee from amongst District Court judges and the Bar Association shall nominate the third from amongst practising lawyers. The same parties shall nominate reserve members of the committee. The committee shall give written and reasoned evaluations of the candidates to the Minister of Justice.
The Minister of Justice shall set out more detailed rules on the work of the committee.”
The relevant provisions of the former Judiciary Act (no. 15/1998) (Lög um dómstóla), as amended by Act no. 45/2010, read as follows:
Section 4a
“The Minister shall appoint an Evaluation Committee of five members to examine the qualifications of candidates for the office of Supreme Court judge or District Court judge. Two members shall be nominated by the Supreme Court, of whom one shall serve as chair; at least one of the two shall not be in active service as a judge. The third member shall be appointed by the Judicial Council and the fourth by the Icelandic Bar Association. The fifth member shall be elected by Althingi. ...
The Evaluation Committee shall provide the Minister with a written and reasoned report concerning candidates for the office of Supreme Court judge. The report of the Evaluation Committee shall state the board’s view as to which candidate is best qualified for the post; the board may rank two or more candidates equally. In other respects, the Minister shall establish further rules on the functions of the board.
No candidate may be appointed to the office of judge whom the Evaluation Committee has not designated as the most qualified of the candidates, whether alone or equally ranked with others. However, derogation from this condition is permitted if Althingi adopts a motion of the Minister to appoint another named candidate who, in the opinion of the Evaluation Committee, meets all the requirements laid down in the second and third paragraphs of section 4. The Minister shall in such circumstances place the motion before Althingi within two weeks from the time of submission of the Evaluation Committee’s opinion or within two weeks from the time when Althingi is next convened following submission of the opinion; the motion must be approved within one month from the time when it is placed before Althingi, otherwise the Minister will be bound by the opinion of the Evaluation Committee.”
Section 12
“3. The provisions of section 4a shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to appointments to District Court judge posts.”
As already noted in paragraph 14 above, the preparatory material in respect of Act no. 45/2010 indicates that the amendments to the judicial appointment system in Iceland had aimed to further ensure the independence of the judiciary, having regard to the significant role played by the judiciary in securing fair trial rights and maintaining the checks and balances inherent in the separation of powers. The preparatory material also provides the following information on the assessment of the work experience of candidates for judicial posts, in so far as relevant:
“... When evaluating the competencies of candidates, several factors have to be taken into account, including experience of legal work, be it judicial work, litigation, other legal practice, academic work or work in the administration, but in general a candidate should possess a broad, general legal education and expertise. Other work undertaken by the candidates on the side should also be taken into account, such as membership of administrative committees or other related experience which will come into good use for a candidate. In general, it should be considered an asset for a candidate to have varied work experience, although that has to be assessed in each case. The committee should also look to and specifically seek out testimonials of a candidate’s work and whether he or she is efficient and hard-working, whether he or she has the ability to identify key issues and to present his or her opinion in an understandable way, both in writing and verbally. In this regard, it is possible to look to academic writing, a candidate’s experience with litigation or any judgments which a candidate may have written ...”
The relevant provisions of the new Judiciary Act no. 50/2016 (Lög um dómstóla) read as follows:
Section 11
Evaluation Committee on the Qualifications of Candidates for Posts as Judges
“The Minister shall appoint five principal members and as many reserve members to an evaluation committee to examine the qualifications of applicants for the office of Supreme Court judge, Court of Appeal judge or District Court judge. One member shall be nominated by the Supreme Court and shall serve as chair of the committee. One member shall be nominated by the Court of Appeal. The third member, who shall not be a serving judge, shall be nominated by the Judicial Administration and the fourth member shall be nominated by the Icelandic Bar Association. The fifth member shall be elected by Althingi. Each nominating party shall nominate a man and a woman, both as member and as reserve member, but this may be deviated from if objective reasons prevent the nomination of both a man and a woman. The nominating party shall then substantiate such impossibility. The Minister shall, when appointing members to the committee, ensure compliance with the Equality Act’s provisions on appointment to councils and committees. The term of appointment to the evaluation committee is five years, with the proviso that the term of one member shall expire each year. The same member cannot be appointed as a principal member of the board for more than two consecutive terms.
The evaluation committee shall be based on the premises of the Judicial Administration.”
Section 12
The Evaluation Committee’s Opinion and the Appointment of Judges
“The evaluation committee shall provide the Minister with a written and reasoned opinion concerning applicants for the office of judge. The opinion of the evaluation committee shall state the board’s position regarding which applicant is best qualified for the post; the board may rank two or more applicants equally. In other respects, the Minister shall establish further rules on the functions of the committee.
No applicant may be appointed to the office of judge which the evaluation committee has not designated as the most qualified of the applicants, whether alone or equally ranked with others. However, derogation from this condition is permitted if Althingi accepts a proposal by the Minister to appoint another identified applicant, provided that, in the opinion of the evaluation committee, they meet all the requirements for appointment to the post. The Minister shall in such circumstances put the motion before Althingi within two weeks from the time of submission of the evaluation committee’s opinion or within two weeks from the time when Althingi is next convened following submission of the opinion; the motion must be approved within one month from the time when it is put before Althingi, otherwise the Minister will be bound by the opinion of the evaluation committee.”
Section 21
General Qualification Requirements
“The Court of Appeal shall be composed of 15 judges, appointed for an indefinite period of time by the President of Iceland as proposed by the Minister.
Only a person who fulfils the following conditions may be appointed to the office of Court of Appeal judge; he or she must:
have attained the age of 35 years;
be an Icelandic national;
have the necessary mental and physical capacity;
be legally competent to manage his or her personal and financial affairs, and never have been deprived of the control of his or her finances.
have not committed any criminal act considered to be dishonourable in public opinion, or evinced any conduct detrimental to the trust that persons holding judicial office generally must enjoy;
have completed the can.jur. examination or B.A. examination in law together with a master’s degree;
have for a term of no less than three years been a district court judge, attorney before the Supreme Court, full professor or associate professor of law, commissioner of police, district commissioner, public prosecutor, permanent secretary of a ministry, director general of a department of the Minister or Althingi’s Ombudsman, or have for such period discharged a similar function providing similar legal experience;
be deemed capable of holding the office in the light of his or her career and knowledge of law.
A person who is, or has been, married to an Appeal Court judge already in office, or a person related to such judge by blood or marriage by ascent or descent, or to the level of second cousin, may not be appointed to the Court of Appeal.”
Section 43
Independence of Judges
“Judges are independent in their judicial work and shall perform such work under their own responsibility. In their resolution of a case they shall be guided solely by the law and never act under instructions from others. A judicial act will not be reviewed by others except through an appeal to a higher court.
...”
Section IV (temporary provision)
“Nomination of judges of the Court of Appeal shall be completed no later than 1 July 2017 and the judges shall be appointed to office with effect from 1 January 2018. As provided for in section 4a of Act no. 15/1998 on the Judiciary, a committee shall be established to investigate for the first time the qualifications of candidates for the office of judge of the Court of Appeal. The committee shall provide the Minister with its opinion about the candidates in conformity with the second subsection of the same section and of the regulation that applies to the committee. The Minister is not authorised to appoint an individual to the office of judge whom the Evaluation Committee has not deemed to be the most qualified amongst the candidates, either separately or among others. This provision may be departed from, however, if Althingi accepts a proposal by the Minister on an authorisation to appoint to the office of judge another named candidate who, in the opinion of the Evaluation Committee, meets all the conditions of the second and third paragraphs of section 21 hereof.
When the Minister proposes appointments to the office of judge of the Court of Appeal for the first time, he/she shall submit her proposal regarding every appointment to Althingi for approval. If Althingi accepts the Minister’s proposals, he/she shall send them to the President of Iceland, who formally appoints the judges (see section 21). If Althingi does not accept the Minister’s proposal regarding a particular appointment, the Minister shall present a new proposal to Althingi for approval.
...”
The preparatory material regarding temporary provision IV provides the following, as relevant:
“...Secondly, it is proposed that before the Minister appoints judges to the Court of Appeal for the first time, he/she should make a proposal regarding each appointment to Parliament for approval. In the light of the fact that 15 judges will be appointed simultaneously, it is natural to ensure the participation of more than one of the public powers in that process.”
The relevant provisions of the Minister of Justice’s Rules No. 620/2010 on the work of the Evaluation Committee, which assesses the competencies of applicants for judicial posts (Reglur um störf dómnefndar sem fjallar um hæfni umsækjenda um dómaraembætti), read as follows:
Section 3
“When the application deadline has expired the Minister examines whether the candidates fulfil all the general conditions of qualification for the judicial office which was published in accordance with the Judiciary Act no 15/1998. Then the applications fulfilling the conditions are sent to the Evaluation Committee for assessment.”
Section 4
“In its opinion the Committee shall decide who is/are the most qualified candidate/s to be appointed to the judicial office. The Committee shall make sure that in its evaluation equality is respected. The conclusion shall stem from an overall assessment based on objective considerations and on the candidates’ merits, taking account of the candidates’ education, experience, integrity, competence and professional efficiency, as described, inter alia, in more detail below:
Education, career, theoretical knowledge. When evaluating the candidate’s education, career and theoretical knowledge, the Committee shall lay emphasis on the fact of the candidate having a varied background in the fields of law such as experience as a judge, litigation or other type of legal practice work, work in administration or academic work. The candidate should have general and comprehensive legal knowledge and education. It should also be considered whether the candidate has undergone further education.
Secondary activities and social activities. The Committee shall also take into account the candidate’s secondary activities, such as activities in appeals committees or other activities which could be useful for a judge. The Committee can also take into account extensive participation in social activities.
General competence. The Committee shall take into account whether the candidate has shown independence, impartiality, initiative and efficiency in his or her work and whether the candidate can easily extrapolate upon the key issues. It is optimal for the candidate to have management experience. The candidate shall have good knowledge of the Icelandic language and ability to communicate easily both verbally and in writing.
Special competence. It is important for the candidate to have good knowledge of civil and criminal procedures and to follow the provisions of law when drafting judgments, which also requires good use of language. The candidate has to be able to conduct hearings firmly and fairly and process the cases he/she is assigned quickly and with confidence.
Mental capabilities. The candidate has to be able to communicate easily, both with colleagues and other people he/she encounters at work. The candidate must have a good reputation both from his or her previous work and from outside work and must be dependable.”
Section 5
“The candidate’s application for the judicial office advertised, along with the rules that apply to it, shall be the basis upon which the Committee makes its evaluation.
The Committee shall make sure that the matter is in all other aspects sufficiently investigated before giving its opinion on a candidate’s qualifications.
In its evaluation, in accordance with section 4, the Committee can take into account all published works of the candidates, such as scholarly writing, judgments, decisions and the like, even where they have not been submitted with the application. The candidate does not need to be specifically notified in advance.
The Committee can invite the candidates for an interview and request necessary documents in addition to those submitted with their application and the Committee can base its evaluation, under section 4, on the documents.
The Committee can obtain knowledge of the candidate’s career from his/her former employer or others who have been in professional contact with him/her. The candidate shall have seven days to comment on the information that is collected.”
Section 6
“The Committee shall submit a written and reasoned report on the candidates including the following:
(a)  reasoned opinion on each candidate’s qualification;
(b)  reasoned opinion as to which candidate/s the Committee considers the most qualified for the judicial office.”
Section 7
“The Committee shall share its draft assessment report with the candidates and give them seven days to comment thereon. The candidates are bound by confidentiality as to the content of the draft report.”
Section 8
“After the Committee has reviewed the candidates’ comments and amended the report, as appropriate, it finalises the report, signs it and sends it to the Minister along with the case documents. Furthermore, the Committee sends its report to the candidates.
Three days after the Minister and the candidates have been sent a copy of the report it shall be published on the Ministry of Justice’s website.”
Section 9
“The Committee shall submit a report on the candidates within six weeks after receiving the applications. This deadline can be extended under special circumstances such as in the event of a high number of candidates, etc.
...”
The relevant provision of the Administrative Procedures Act No. 37/1993 (Stjórnsýslulög) reads as follows:
Section 10
Rule of investigation
“An authority shall ensure that a case is sufficiently investigated before a decision thereon is reached.”
The relevant provisions of the Parliamentary Procedures Act No. 55/1991 (Lög um þingsköp Alþingis) read as follows:
Section 45
“Motions for parliamentary resolutions shall take the form of resolutions. They shall be printed and distributed to Members at a sitting of Althingi. As a rule, motions for resolutions shall be accompanied by an explanation of their substance. Deliberations may not take place until at least two nights after the distribution of the motion.
A resolution cannot pass until it has received two readings. However, motions of no confidence in the Government or a minister, motions on the appointment of committees under Article 39 of the Constitution and motions from committees submitted pursuant to section 26(2) shall be debated and brought to a conclusion in a single debate in accordance with the rules on second readings of parliamentary resolutions. The same applies to motions for adjournment of sittings of Althingi pursuant to the second sentence of Article 23 (1) of the Constitution.
At the end of the first reading the motion will pass to the second reading and the committee proposed by the Speaker. However, a vote shall be taken at the request of any Member, and also if another motion is made regarding the committee to which the matter should be submitted.
The second reading shall not take place until one night after the first reading or distribution of a committee report. At this reading, individual Articles of the proposal shall be debated along with amendments to such Articles. At the close of this reading a vote shall be taken on each Article of the proposal and any amendments thereto, and finally on the proposal in its entirety. However, if there are no motions to amend, the proposal may be put to the vote in its entirety.
If Althingi receives a submission relating to a matter on which Althingi is required to take a position under the Constitution or by law, but the submission does not constitute parliamentary business pursuant to Chapter III, the Speaker shall report the submission at a sitting. The matter is then submitted without debate to a committee on the recommendation of the Speaker. When the committee has completed its examination of the matter, the committee shall express its opinion in a report, which shall be distributed at a sitting, together with a motion for a resolution, which shall be debated and brought to a conclusion in a single sitting pursuant to the rules on second readings of parliamentary resolutions.
Parliamentary resolutions which are distributed after the end of November may not be placed on the agenda before the Christmas recess except with the consent of Althingi, obtained in compliance with section 74. Furthermore, parliamentary resolutions which are distributed later than 1 April may not be placed on the agenda before the summer recess except with the consent of Althingi, obtained in compliance with section 27. However, this consent can only be sought when five days have passed from the distribution of the resolution; derogation from this requirement is permitted with the support of three fifths of the Members voting on the resolution.
Constitutional requirements pursuant to Article 103 of the Agreement on the European Economic Area shall be derogated from by a parliamentary resolution, whose presentation shall comply with rules established by the Speaker.
The Prime Minister shall in October of each year submit to Althingi a report on the implementation of resolutions passed by Althingi in the preceding year and requiring action by a Minister or the government, unless a different form of reporting to Althingi is provided for by law. The report shall furthermore address the process of matters referred by Althingi to the Government or a Minister. When the report has been submitted, it shall be referred to the Constitutional and Supervisory Committee for discussion. The committee may submit to Althingi its opinion regarding the Minister’s report at its discretion and submit proposals to Althingi regarding individual matters in the report.”
The relevant provisions of the Criminal Procedure Act no. 88/2008 (Lög um meðferð sakamála) read as follows:
Section 6
“A judge, including a lay judge, shall be disqualified from sitting as judge in a case where:
(a) he is an accused, a victim or a representative thereof;
(b) he has represented the interests of an accused or the victim in the case;
(c) he has testified or been called as a witness in the case for legitimate reasons or has served as an assessor or examiner in the case [with regard to the charges in question];
(d) he is or has been the spouse of the accused or the victim, is related to them by blood or marriage in a direct line or to the level of second cousin, or related to them to the same degree by adoption;
(e) he is related or has been connected to the representative of the accused or the victim, or counsel, in the manner stipulated in point (d);
(f) he is connected or has been connected to a witness in the case, or to an assessor or examiner, in the manner stipulated in point (d); or
(g) there are other circumstances or conditions that may justifiably raise questions about his impartiality.”
According to the Criminal Procedure Act, judicial proceedings can be reopened under certain conditions. Section 228 of the Act states that when a District Court judgment has not been appealed against or the time limit for appeal has passed, the Committee on Reopening of Judicial Proceedings (Endurupptökunefnd) can approve a request of a person, who considers that he or she has been wrongly convicted or convicted of a more serious offence than he or she committed, to reopen the judicial proceedings before the District Court, if certain conditions are fulfilled. The conditions are, inter alia, that new evidence has come to light which could have had great significance for the outcome of the case if it had been available before the judgment was announced (point (a)), or that there were serious defects in the processing of the case which affected its outcome (point (d)). The State Prosecutor can also request reopening for the benefit of the convicted person if he considers that the conditions in section 228(1) of the Act are fulfilled. In accordance with section 229 of the Act, the request for reopening shall be made in writing and sent to the Committee on Reopening of Judicial Proceedings. It shall include detailed reasoning as to how the conditions for reopening are considered to be fulfilled. Pursuant to section 231 of the Act, the Committee on Reopening of Judicial Proceedings decides whether proceedings will be reopened. If a request for reopening is approved the first judgment remains in force until a new judgment is delivered in the case. Section 232 of the Act states that the Committee on Reopening of Judicial Proceedings can accept a request for the reopening of a case which has been finally decided in the Court of Appeal or the Supreme Court and a new judgment will be delivered if the conditions of section 228 are fulfilled. A case will not be reopened in the Court of Appeal unless the time-limit to request leave to appeal to the Supreme Court has expired or the Supreme Court has rejected leave to appeal.
In a recent judgment it delivered on 21 May 2019, the Supreme Court held that neither section 228(1) (d) of the Criminal Procedure Act, nor any other laws, created an automatic right to reopening to persons whose criminal convictions had resulted in findings of a violation by the European Court of Human Rights and that each case would have to be assessed on its facts. The defendants in the relevant case had been convicted of tax offences, which the Court had found to be in violation of Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention (see the case of Jóhannesson and Others v. Iceland, no. 22007/11, 18 May 2017). Noting that the defendants had been heard by an independent and impartial tribunal and that their case was incomparable to those where fundamental fair trial principles had been breached, the Supreme Court found that their request did not fulfil the requirements for reopening under Section 228(1) (d) of the Criminal Procedure Act.
Section 26(1) of the Tort Act no. 50/1993 (Skaðabótalög) reads:
“A person who
(a)  deliberately or through gross negligence causes physical injury or
(b)  is responsible for unlawful injury against the freedom, peace, honour or person of another party,
may be ordered to pay an amount in respect of non-pecuniary damage to the injured party.”
It is an unwritten general principle of Icelandic administrative law that, in the appointment of persons to public posts, the appointing party is under a duty to appoint the most qualified candidate. It is furthermore considered that such appointments must be based on objective considerations. This principle has been confirmed by the Supreme Court in many of its judgments, including the judgments dated 5 November 1998 and 14 April 2011 (see paragraph 69 above), and the judgments of 19 December 2017 concerning the candidates J.R.J. and Á.H. (see paragraphs 67-75 above).
As mentioned briefly in paragraph 13 above, the Supreme Court judgment of 14 April 2011 (no. 412/2010) concerned a dispute over the appointment of a District Court judge, where the Supreme Court had found the then ad hoc Minister of Justice and the Icelandic State liable for damages in relation to the appointment at issue. The appointment having been made prior to the introduction of Act no. 45/2010, at which time the Evaluation Committee’s recommendations on judicial appointments were not yet binding on the Minister of Justice, the latter had disregarded the recommendation of the Evaluation Committee and had proposed a candidate who had only been considered “qualified”, instead of one of the three who had been considered “very well qualified”. When one of the three candidates who were not appointed brought proceedings to claim damages for injury to his reputation and personal honour, the Supreme Court upheld that candidate’s claims on the basis of the following principles:
“Under section 10 of the Administrative Procedures Act no. 37/1993, an authority making an appointment to a position or office of the State is required to ensure that issues of significance are sufficiently elucidated before a decision is made on the appointment. The previously applicable third and fourth paragraphs of section 12 of Act no. 15/1998 relieved the Minister of Justice ... to a significant extent of this duty of investigation when making appointments to positions of District Court judge, instead placing it in the hands of the Evaluation Committee, which was appointed with a view to ensuring that specialised expertise would be available there to assess the qualifications of applicants for a position as District Court judge ... Although the Evaluation Committee’s opinion was not binding on the Minister, ..., it must be kept particularly in mind that its investigation replaced by law an investigation which the Minister would otherwise have been obliged to carry out. As a result, if the Minister considered there to be a reason to deviate from the opinion of the Evaluation Committee when appointing a District Court judge, then his/her decision would have to be based on further investigation under section 10 of the Administrative Procedures Act, taking into account among other things his own instructions in Rules no. 693/1999 on matters relating to the assessment of the applicants’ qualifications, while at the same time ensuring that comparable expert knowledge was exercised as in the case of the Evaluation Committee’s work. In this regard, it needed also to be taken into consideration that when making an appointment to the office of judge, the Minister was not deciding on a post under the Minister’s own authority, but an office pertaining to another branch of government and subject to special rules on independence, as provided in the first sentence of Article 61 of the Constitution and section 24 of Act no. 15/1998.”
In his annual report for 2016, the Icelandic Parliamentary Ombudsman made the following remarks on the evaluation procedures followed by the authorities in appointments to public posts, as pertinent:
“3.1.2  Matters concerning public servants
...
According to an unwritten principle of administrative law, it is a general obligation to recruit the most competent candidate for a public post. Thus, an evaluation of candidates must be carried out on the basis of their professional competencies in the light of the legitimate criteria applicable, consideration being given to the law and to the nature of the post. The principle also entails that, in general, it is impermissible to take into account unrelated criteria such as political views or amity/animosity. In cases where public servants are to be recruited or appointed, authorities – or the recruitment companies they employ – increasingly appear to use a method whereby the criteria through which candidates are to be evaluated are enumerated and each criterion given a certain weight. Candidates are then awarded points for each criterion and their total score is calculated. The candidate who achieves the highest score is generally considered the most competent by the appointing authority. Deciding on the applicable criteria and their weight before evaluating candidates is in general in compliance with the appointing authority’s task to evaluate candidates based on their professional competencies.
However, I have noticed in recent years that the above-described method is employed too strictly and absolutely, without properly assessing substantively the candidates’ knowledge and experience. Thus, the candidates’ experience is assessed only in terms of years, how many courses they have finished or how many academic articles they have published, without that experience apparently being substantively assessed, including as to how well the candidate has performed and how the experience will assist the candidate in the performance of the post in question. In other instances, the criteria have been divided into categories, i.e. different categories of professional experience, where each category can only give a certain maximum number of points. The result is often that the candidate who has done the highest number of jobs, and thus obtains points from the most categories, achieves a higher score than a candidate who has mastered a certain professional experience, without any substantive assessment as to whether the long experience of the latter candidate constitutes better preparation for the post than the varied experience of the former.
While noting that it is not, in general, illegitimate to look for varied professional experience when recruiting candidates for a post, the above-described methods often seem automatically to lead to a lack of substantive comparison of the qualities of candidates and thus of their competencies. This results in genuine uncertainty about whether the most qualified candidate for a post obtained the highest score and thus is eliminated from consideration [sic]. In this regard, I emphasise that the evaluation procedures followed by the authorities should enable them to meaningfully and substantively evaluate candidates, in order to recruit the most qualified candidate for each post. In general, I believe that in the light of the evaluative nature of the choice of candidate for a public post and the criteria on which such a choice can be based, care should be taken when making that choice on the basis of points, as described above.”
The United Nations (UN) Basic Principles on the Independence of the Judiciary, adopted by the Seventh UN Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders held at Milan from 26 August to 6 September 1985 and endorsed by General Assembly resolutions 40/32 of 29 November 1985 and 40/146 of 13 December 1985, provide as follows, in so far as relevant:
“Qualifications, selection and training
Persons selected for judicial office shall be individuals of integrity and ability with appropriate training or qualifications in law. Any method of judicial selection shall safeguard against judicial appointments for improper motives.”
In its General Comment no. 32 on Article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) – which was ratified by Iceland on 22 August 1979 – concerning the right to equality before courts and tribunals and to a fair trial (CCPR/C/GC/32 published on 23 August 2007), the UN Human Rights Committee stated as follows:
“4.  Article 14 contains guarantees that States parties must respect, regardless of their legal traditions and their domestic law. While they should report on how these guarantees are interpreted in relation to their respective legal systems, the Committee notes that it cannot be left to the sole discretion of domestic law to determine the essential content of Covenant guarantees.
...
The requirement of competence, independence and impartiality of a tribunal in the sense of article 14, paragraph 1, is an absolute right that is not subject to any exception. The requirement of independence refers, in particular, to the procedure and qualifications for the appointment of judges, and guarantees relating to their security of tenure until a mandatory retirement age or the expiry of their term of office, where such exist, the conditions governing promotion, transfer, suspension and cessation of their functions, and the actual independence of the judiciary from political interference by the executive branch and legislature. States should take specific measures guaranteeing the independence of the judiciary, protecting judges from any form of political influence in their decision-making through the constitution or adoption of laws establishing clear procedures and objective criteria for the appointment, remuneration, tenure, promotion, suspension and dismissal of the members of the judiciary and disciplinary sanctions taken against them. A situation where the functions and competencies of the judiciary and the executive are not clearly distinguishable or where the latter is able to control or direct the former is incompatible with the notion of an independent tribunal. It is necessary to protect judges against conflicts of interest and intimidation. In order to safeguard their independence, the status of judges, including their term of office, their independence, security, adequate remuneration, conditions of service, pensions and the age of retirement shall be adequately secured by law.
Judges may be dismissed only on serious grounds of misconduct or incompetence, in accordance with fair procedures ensuring objectivity and impartiality set out in the constitution or the law. The dismissal of judges by the executive, e.g. before the expiry of the term for which they have been appointed, without any specific reasons given to them and without effective judicial protection being available to contest the dismissal is incompatible with the independence of the judiciary. The same is true, for instance, for the dismissal by the executive of judges alleged to be corrupt, without following any of the procedures provided for by the law.”
The relevant parts of the thematic report by the UN Special Rapporteur on the Independence of Judges and Lawyers, Mr Leandro Despouy, on “Guarantees of judicial independence / Major developments in international justice” (UN Human Rights Council, document A/HRC/11/41 of 24 March 2009), read as follows:
“III.  GUARANTEES OF JUDICIAL INDEPENDENCE
Institutional independence: elements having an impact on the independence of the judiciary
In this chapter, the Special Rapporteur will analyse features having an impact on the independence of the judiciary as an institution.
...
Selection and appointment
The Basic Principles on the Independence of the Judiciary prescribe that judges be selected on the basis of integrity and ability and that any method of judicial selection should include safeguards against judicial appointments for improper motives [footnote: Principle 10]. This key principle is also established by a number of regional standards [Recommendation No. R (94) 12 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, principle I (2) (c); Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Fair Trial and Legal Assistance in Africa, A (4) (h); Beijing Statement of Principles of the Independence of the Judiciary in the LAWASIA region, principles 11, 12 and 15]. Furthermore, the Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Fair Trial and Legal Assistance in Africa highlight the importance of transparency and accountability in the selection and appointment procedures [footnote: Principles and Guidelines in Africa, A (4) (h)].
The Special Rapporteur takes note of the variety of existing systems for the selection and appointment of judges worldwide. One can broadly distinguish political appointments (selection by the legislative or executive branches of power), appointments by popular elections, corporative appointments (by bodies composed of judges only), selection by judicial councils with plural representation, or a variety of mixed systems where the nominating body is of one type (e.g. judicial council) and the one in charge of appointments is of a different nature (e.g. a political appointing body)...
...
In addition to the composition of the selecting body, it is also important to determine the extent of powers given to this organ, as this element has a great impact on the degree of independence of judges, not only from political power, but also from the selecting body itself... In order to secure the independence of judges and the selection of the most suitable candidates, the Special Rapporteur highlights the importance of the establishment and application of objective criteria in the selection of judges. The principle of objective criteria was also highlighted by the Human Rights Committee and by the Committee against Torture. These objective criteria should relate particularly to qualifications, integrity, ability and efficiency. The Special Rapporteur emphasizes that selection of judges must be based on merit alone, a key principle also enshrined in Recommendation No. R (94) 1228 and the Statute of the Ibero-American Judge...
…
Where an organ of the executive or legislative branch is the one formally appointing judges [footnote omitted] following their selection by an independent body, recommendations from such a body should only be rejected in exceptional cases and on the basis of well-established criteria that have been made public in advance. For such cases, there should be a specific procedure by which the executive body is required to substantiate in a written manner for which reasons it has not followed the recommendation of the above-mentioned independent body for the appointment of a proposed candidate. Furthermore, such written substantiation should be made accessible to the public. Such a procedure would help enhance transparency and accountability of selection and appointment.”
In accordance with its obligation under Article 40 of the ICCPR, the Government of Iceland submitted its fifth periodic report on the implementation of the ICCPR to the UN Human Rights Committee on 27 April 2010 (UN Doc. CCPR/C/ISL/5). The relevant parts of the report, concerning the procedure for the appointment of judges, read as follows:
“130.  In the recent years there has been growing concern that the rules relating to the selection and appointment of judges, both in the district courts and the Supreme Court, do not sufficiently guarantee the independence of the judiciary. This debate has centred on the role of the ministers, who have sole responsibility for appointing judges, and have on occasions disregard[ed] the recommendations of a special evaluation committee concerning the appointment of district court judges and the opinion of the Supreme Court concerning the appointment of Supreme Court Judges. A response has now been made to this criticism, and the Minister of Justice has submitted a bill to the Althingi on amendments to the Judiciary Act, No. 15/1998. Under the amendments proposed, the aim is that the Minister of Justice would appoint a five-man selection committee to examine the qualifications and competence of applicants for the position of both Supreme Court and district court judges ... This selection committee would submit to the Minister of Justice written and reasoned comments on applicants for positions as Supreme Court judges. In its comments, the committee would adopt a position as to which applicant was the best qualified to be appointed to the position, but would be able to name two or more as being equally well qualified.
The most significant element in these proposals is that the minister would not be able to appoint as a judge a person that the evaluation committee did not consider to be the best qualified, either absolutely or tying with one or more others, among the applicants. Exemptions could be made from this rule, however, if the Althingi approved an application by the Minister of Justice for permission to appoint to the position another applicant, whose name was specified, who in the opinion of the selection committee met all the [relevant] conditions ...”
The Recommendation adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 17 November 2010 (CM/Rec(2010)12) on “Judges: independence, efficiency and responsibilities” provides, in so far as relevant:
“Chapter I – General aspects
Judicial independence and the level at which it should be safeguarded
…
The purpose of independence, as laid down in Article 6 of the Convention, is to guarantee every person the fundamental right to have their case decided in a fair trial, on legal grounds only and without any improper influence.
The independence of individual judges is safeguarded by the independence of the judiciary as a whole. As such, it is a fundamental aspect of the rule of law.
…
Chapter II − External independence
The external independence of judges is not a prerogative or privilege granted in judges’ own interest but in the interest of the rule of law and of persons seeking and expecting impartial justice. The independence of judges should be regarded as a guarantee of freedom, respect for human rights and impartial application of the law.
…
Chapter VI - Status of the judge
Selection and career
Decisions concerning the selection and career of judges should be based on objective criteria preestablished by law or by the competent authorities. Such decisions should be based on merit, having regard to the qualifications, skills and capacity required to adjudicate cases by applying the law while respecting human dignity.
…
The authority taking decisions on the selection and career of judges should be independent of the executive and legislative powers. With a view to guaranteeing its independence, at least half of the members of the authority should be judges chosen by their peers.
However, where the constitutional or other legal provisions prescribe that the head of state, the government or the legislative power take decisions concerning the selection and career of judges, an independent and competent authority drawn in substantial part from the judiciary (without prejudice to the rules applicable to councils for the judiciary contained in Chapter IV) should be authorised to make recommendations or express opinions which the relevant appointing authority follows in practice.
The membership of the independent authorities referred to in paragraphs 46 and 47 should ensure the widest possible representation. Their procedures should be transparent with reasons for decisions being made available to applicants on request. An unsuccessful candidate should have the right to challenge the decision, or at least the procedure under which the decision was made.”
The Explanatory Memorandum to this recommendation further provides as follows:
“13.  The separation of powers is a fundamental guarantee of the independence of the judiciary whatever the legal traditions of the member states.”
In its Report on Judicial Appointments (CDL-AD(2007)028), adopted at its 70th Plenary Session (16-17 March 2007), the European Commission for Democracy Through Law (Venice Commission) held as follows (footnotes omitted):
“3.  International standards in this respect are more in favour of the extensive depolitisation of the [judicial appointment] process. However no single non-political “model” of appointment system exists, which could ideally comply with the principle of the separation of powers and secure full independence of the judiciary.
…
In some older democracies, systems exist in which the executive power has a strong influence on judicial appointments. Such systems may work well in practice and allow for an independent judiciary because the executive is restrained by legal culture and traditions, which have grown over a long time.
New democracies, however, did not yet have a chance to develop these traditions, which can prevent abuse. Therefore, at least in new democracies explicit constitutional provisions are needed as a safeguard to prevent political abuse by other state powers in the appointment of judges.
In Europe, methods of appointment vary greatly according to different countries and their legal systems; furthermore they can differ within the same legal system according to the type of judges to be appointed.”
The relevant extracts from the Rule of Law Checklist (CDLAD(2016)007), adopted by the Venice Commission at its 106th Plenary Session (11-12 March 2016), read as follows:
“45.  A basic requirement of the Rule of Law is that the powers of the public authorities are defined by law. In so far as legality addresses the actions of public officials, it also requires that they have authorisation to act and that they subsequently act within the limits of the powers that have been conferred upon them, and consequently respect both procedural and substantive law [footnote omitted].
...
Although full enforcement of the law is rarely possible, a fundamental requirement of the Rule of Law is that the law must be respected. This means in particular that State bodies must effectively implement laws. The very essence of the Rule of Law would be called in question if law appeared only in the books but were not duly applied and enforced [footnote omitted]. The duty to implement the law is threefold, since it implies obedience to the law by individuals, the duty reasonably to enforce the law by the State and the duty of public officials to act within the limits of their conferred powers.
...
Abuse of discretionary power should be controlled by judicial or other independent review. Available remedies should be clear and easily accessible.
...
The obligation to give reasons should also apply to administrative decisions [footnote omitted].
...
The judiciary should be independent. Independence means that the judiciary is free from external pressure, and is not subject to political influence or manipulation, in particular by the executive branch. This requirement is an integral part of the fundamental democratic principle of the separation of powers. Judges should not be subject to political influence or manipulation.
...
It is important that the appointment and promotion of judges is not based upon political or personal considerations, and the system should be constantly monitored to ensure that this is so.”
In its Opinion no. 1 (2001) on “standards concerning the independence of the judiciary and the irremovability of judges” the Consultative Council of European Judges (CCJE) made the following observations, in so far as relevant (footnotes omitted):
“The rationales of judicial independence
Judicial independence is a pre-requisite to the rule of law and a fundamental guarantee of a fair trial... Their [judges’] independence is not a prerogative or privilege in their own interests, but in the interests of the rule of law and of those seeking and expecting justice.
This independence must exist in relation to society generally and in relation to the particular parties to any dispute on which judges have to adjudicate. The judiciary is one of three basic and equal pillars in the modern democratic state. It has an important role and functions in relation to the other two pillars. It ensures that governments and the administration can be held to account for their actions, and, with regard to the legislature, it is involved in ensuring that duly enacted laws are enforced, and, to a greater or lesser extent, in ensuring that they comply with any relevant constitution or higher law (...). To fulfil its role in these respects, the judiciary must be independent of these bodies, which involves freedom from inappropriate connections with and influence by these bodies. Independence thus serves as the guarantee of impartiality. This has implications, necessarily, for almost every aspect of a judge’s career: from training to appointment and promotion and to disciplining.
... judicial independence is an elaboration of the fundamental principle that ‘no man may be judge in his own cause’. This principle also has significance well beyond that affecting the particular parties to any dispute. Not merely the parties to any particular dispute, but society as a whole must be able to trust the judiciary. A judge must thus not merely be free in fact from any inappropriate connection, bias or influence, he or she must also appear to a reasonable observer be free therefrom. Otherwise, confidence in the independence of the judiciary may be undermined.
The rationale of judicial independence, as stated above, provides a key by which to assess its practical implications – that is, the features which are necessary to secure it, and the mean by which it may be secured, at a constitutional or lower legal level, as well as in day-to-day practice, in individual states.
...
Basis of appointment or promotion
... There is, therefore, general acceptance both that appointments should be made ‘on the merits’ based on ‘objective criteria’ and that political considerations should be inadmissible.
...
Any ‘objective criteria’, seeking to ensure that the selection and career of judges are ‘based on merit, having regard to qualifications, integrity, ability and efficiency’, are bound to be in general terms. Nonetheless, it is their actual content and effect in any particular state that is ultimately critical. The CCJE recommended that the authorities responsible in member States for making and advising on appointments and promotions should now introduce, publish and give effect to objective criteria, with the aim of ensuring that the selection and career of judges are ‘based on merit, having regard to qualifications, integrity, ability and efficiency’.  Once this is done, those bodies or authorities responsible for any appointment or promotion will be obliged to act accordingly, and it will then at least be possible to scrutinize the content of the criteria adopted and their practical effect.
...
Even in legal systems where good standards have been observed by force of tradition and informal self-discipline, customarily under the scrutiny of a free media, there has been increasing recognition in recent years of a need for more objective and formal safeguards [regarding appointments and promotions of judges]. In other states, (...), the need is pressing...
...
Tenure - irremovability and discipline
It is a fundamental tenet of judicial independence that tenure is guaranteed until a mandatory retirement age or the expiry of a fixed term of office: ...”
The Magna Carta of Judges (Fundamental Principles) was adopted by the CCJE in November 2010. The relevant paragraphs read as follows:
“Rule of law and justice
The judiciary is one of the three powers of any democratic state. Its mission is to guarantee the very existence of the Rule of Law and, thus, to ensure the proper application of the law in an impartial, just, fair and efficient manner.
Judicial Independence
Judicial independence and impartiality are essential prerequisites for the operation of justice.
Judicial independence shall be statutory, functional and financial. It shall be guaranteed with regard to the other powers of the State, to those seeking justice, other judges and society in general, by means of national rules at the highest level. The State and each judge are responsible for promoting and protecting judicial independence.
Judicial independence shall be guaranteed in respect of judicial activities and in particular in respect of recruitment,
Guarantees of independence
Decisions on selection, nomination and career shall be based on objective criteria and taken by the body in charge of guaranteeing independence.
...
Initial and in-service training is a right and a duty for judges. It shall be organised under the supervision of the judiciary. Training is an important element to safeguard the independence of judges as well as the quality and efficiency of the judicial system.”
In another opinion on the “Position of the judiciary and its relation with the other powers of state in a modern democracy” dated 16 October 2015 (Opinion no. 18/2015), the CCJE made the following findings, as relevant (footnotes omitted):
“III.  Independence of the judiciary and separation of the powers
The judiciary must be independent to fulfil its role in relation to the other powers of the state, society in general, and the parties to litigations. The independence of judges is not a prerogative or privilege granted in their own interest, but in the interest of the rule of law and of all those who seek and expect justice. Judicial independence is the means by which judges’ impartiality is ensured. It is therefore the precondition for the guarantee that all citizens (and the other powers of the state) will have equality before the courts. Judicial independence is an intrinsic element of its duty to decide cases impartially. Only an independent judiciary can implement effectively the rights of all members of society, especially those groups that are vulnerable or unpopular. Thus, independence is the fundamental requirement that enables the judiciary to safeguard democracy and human rights.
...
The legitimacy of judicial power and its elements
...
Different elements of legitimacy of judicial power
...
(2)  Constitutional or formal legitimacy of individual judges
In order to perform the judicial functions legitimised by the constitution, each judge needs to be appointed and thus become part of the judiciary. Each individual judge who is appointed in accordance with the constitution and other applicable rules thereby obtains his or her constitutional authority and legitimacy. It is implicit in this appointment in accordance with constitutional and legal rules that individual judges are thereby given the authority and appropriate powers to apply the law as created by the legislature or as formulated by other judges. The legitimacy conferred on an individual judge by his appointment in accordance with the constitution and other legal rules of a particular state constitutes an individual judge’s ‘constitutional or formal legitimacy’.
The CCJE has noted the different methods of appointment of judges in the member states of the Council of Europe. These include, for example: appointment by a council for the judiciary or another independent body, election by parliament and appointment by the executive. As the CCJE has pointed out, each system has advantages and disadvantages. It can be argued that appointment by vote of Parliament and, to a lesser degree, by the executive can be seen to give additional democratic legitimacy, although those methods of appointment carry with them a risk of politicisation and a dependence on those other powers. To counter those risks, the CCJE has recommended that every decision relating to a judge’s appointment or career should be based on objective criteria and be either taken by an independent authority or subject to guarantees to ensure that it is not taken other than on the basis of such criteria. The CCJE has also recommended the participation of an independent authority with substantial representation chosen democratically by other judges in decisions concerning the appointment or promotion of judges...”
On 7 February 2018 the CCJE published a report on “Judicial independence and impartiality in the Council of Europe member States in 2017”. The relevant parts of this report read as follows (footnotes omitted):
“II.  Overview of relevant European standards
Functional independence: appointment and security of tenure of judges
The above-mentioned European and international documents underline that candidates for judicial office should be selected according to objective criteria based on merit, and that the selection should be undertaken by an independent body. If a person or body outside the judiciary, such as the head of state, has the authority to appoint judges, the proposal of the independent body should generally be followed by the appointing authority.
The independence of judges requires the absence of interference by other state powers, in particular the executive power, in the judicial sphere ...
The ECtHR and the CCJE have recognised the importance of institutions and procedures guaranteeing the independent appointment of judges. The CCJE has recommended that every decision relating to a judge’s appointment, career and disciplinary action should be regulated by law, based on objective criteria and be either taken by an independent authority or subject to guarantees, for example judicial review, to ensure that it is not taken other than on the basis of such criteria. Political considerations should be inadmissible irrespective of whether they are made within Councils for the Judiciary, the executive, or the legislature.
There are different appointment procedures of judges in the member States. These include, for example: appointment by a Council for the Judiciary or another independent body, election by parliament and appointment by the executive. Formal rules and Councils for the Judiciary have been introduced in the member States to safeguard the independence of judges and prosecutors. However, as welcome as such developments may be, formal rules alone do not guarantee that appointment decisions are taken impartially, according to objective criteria, and free from political influence. The influence of the executive and legislative powers on the appointment decisions should be limited in order to prevent appointments for political reasons ...”
At its 59th plenary meeting held from 18 to 22 March 2013 in Strasbourg, the Council of Europe Group of States Against Corruption (GRECO) adopted its Fourth Evaluation Report on Iceland, concerning corruption prevention in respect of members of parliament, judges and prosecutors (Greco Eval IV Rep (2012)8E). The report published on 28 March 2013 made the following relevant remarks on the appointment of judges:
“75.  Generally speaking, the GET [GRECO evaluation team] found the judiciary in Iceland to be of a high standard. Steps have been taken to address public criticism as regards appointment and recruitment to the judiciary, an area where misgivings have been expressed in the past as to appointments to office being politically motivated rather than based on merit ... The GET wishes to highlight that judges must not only be independent, but also seen to be independent. This is of particular relevance in Iceland where opinion polls in recent years have shown that only about 30% of the public expresses confidence in the judicial system as a whole [footnote: Sustainable Governance Indicators (SGI) (2011) Iceland Report by Bertelsmann Stiftung] – a striking figure, all the more so since the professionalism and competence of judges do not appear to be questioned by the population. Further consideration could be paid by the judiciary to the additional measures which could be developed to tackle this negative public perception and thereby strengthen public trust and confidence in this sector ...
The rules for the appointment of judges were changed in May 2010, pursuant to Act No. 45/2010 amending Act No. 15/1998 ...
Appointment criteria are examined for each applicant by an evaluation committee consisting of five members ... The most suitable candidate is then appointed as a judge by the Minister of the Interior ... No applicant may be appointed to the office of judge without the endorsement of the evaluation committee. However, the provisions allow an exception to this rule: the Minister of the Interior can appoint a candidate from the list of suitable candidates, who meets all the requirements but has not been ranked as the most suitable candidate by the evaluation committee, if the Althingi adopts, by simple majority, such a motion by the Minister.
However, the exception described above, which requires an appropriate justification by the Minister, has not applied since the new rules on judicial appointments came into force in 2010. The GET heard that, before the new system applied, the Minister was not bound to follow the advice of the relevant judicial bodies when appointing a person to judicial office and indeed it happened in the past that appointments were made arbitrarily raising criticism as to political influence having filtered in the process... The GET was also told that the exception provided by law is meant to work more as a safety measure to ensure some sort of review mechanism for the decisions made by the evaluation committee (in the event, for example, of criticisms of corporatism).
...
The GET welcomes the measures taken in recent years to further regulate and strengthen the appointment and recruitment procedures in the judiciary (see paragraphs 77 and 78) to respond to concerns that had been raised previously in Iceland... The interlocutors met on-site agreed that the reforms undertaken in this field have provided greater safeguards against improper political influence and have decisively improved the general transparency of the system...”
The relevant extract from the European Charter on the Statute for Judges of 8-10 July 1998 reads as follows:
“2.  SELECTION, RECRUITMENT, INITIAL TRAINING
1.  The rules of the statute relating to the selection and recruitment of judges by an independent body or panel, base the choice of candidates on their ability to assess freely and impartially the legal matters which will be referred to them, (...).
2.  The statute makes provision for the conditions which guarantee, by requirements linked to educational qualifications or previous experience, the ability specifically to discharge judicial duties.”
The European Charter on the Statute for Judges provides as follows in its Explanatory Memorandum:
“1.1  The Charter endeavours to define the content of the statute for judges on the basis of the objectives to be attained: ensuring the competence, independence and impartiality which all members of the public are entitled to expect of the courts and judges entrusted with protecting their rights. The Charter is therefore not an end in itself but rather a means of guaranteeing that the individuals whose rights are to be protected by the courts and judges have the requisite safeguards on the effectiveness of such protection.
These safeguards on individuals’ rights are ensured by judicial competence, in the sense of ability, independence and impartiality ...”
The European Commission’s 2011 Progress Report on Iceland published on 12 October 2011 (SEC(2011) 1202 final) made the following observations regarding the independence of the judiciary in Iceland:
“The independence of the judiciary was strengthened. In May 2011, the process of appointing three judges in the Supreme Court took place according to the rules of the amended Judiciary Act. However, the implementation of the new rules on appointing judges and prosecutors still requires further monitoring.”
Case-law of the European Union courts
The case concerned an appeal brought by F.V., an official of the Council of the European Union at the material time, against a judgment delivered on 28 June 2016 by the Civil Service Tribunal of the European Union. F.V. claimed, inter alia, that the judgment under appeal had been delivered by a Chamber which had been improperly constituted, having regard to the flaws in the procedure for the appointment of one of the judges on the bench. He complained, in particular, that the judge in question had been appointed to the Civil Service Tribunal through an appointment procedure that had been initiated to fill two other positions in that tribunal.
By a decision dated 23 January 2018, the General Court found that the Chamber of the Civil Service Tribunal which delivered the judgment in question had been improperly constituted. It held, in particular, that the Council had failed to comply with the legal framework laid down by the relevant public call for applications, because it had used the list of candidates drawn up following that call – which had been made for the appointment of two judges only – to fill a third post. As the constitution of the relevant Chamber of the Civil Service Tribunal was considered improper on this ground alone, the judgment under appeal was set aside in its entirety. The relevant parts of the General Court’s judgment read as follows:
 “65.  ..., it is therefore necessary to examine whether the flaws in the procedure for the appointment of the judge at issue are such as to affect the proper composition of the Second Chamber of the Civil Service Tribunal which delivered the judgment under appeal.
In that context, it must be borne in mind that, according to the case-law of the Court, when the proper constitution of the court which delivered the judgment at first instance is contested and the challenge is not manifestly devoid of merit, the appeal court is required to verify that the court was properly constituted. A ground alleging the irregular constitution of the panel of judges is a ground involving a question of public policy, which must be examined by the appeal court of its own motion, even if this irregularity was not invoked at first instance (see, to that effect, judgments of 1 July 2008, Chronopost and La Poste v UFEX and Others, C341/06 P and C342/06 P, EU:C:2008:375, paragraphs 44 to 50).
As is apparent from the first sentence of the second paragraph of Article 47 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, one of the requirements concerning the composition of the Chamber is that courts must be independent, impartial and previously established by law.
The principle of the lawful judge, the objective of which is to guarantee the independence of judicial power with respect to the executive, stems from that requirement, which must be interpreted as meaning that the composition of the court and its jurisdiction must be regulated beforehand by legal provisions (see, to that effect, judgment of 13 December 2012, Strack v Commission, T199/11 P, EU:T:2012:691, paragraph 22).
...
According to the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights (‘the ECtHR’), the principle of the lawful judge enshrined in the first sentence of Article 6(1) of the ECHR reflects the principle of the rule of law, from which it follows that a judicial body must be set up in accordance with the intention of the legislature (see, to that effect, ECtHR, 27 October 2009, Pandjikidzé and Others v. Georgia, ..., paragraph 103, and 20 October 2009, Gorguiladzé v. Georgia, ..., Paragraph 67).
According to the ECtHR, a court must thus be established in accordance with the legal provisions on the establishment and competence of judicial bodies and with any other provision of national law that would render, if it is not complied with, the involvement of one or more judges in the examination of the case improper. This includes in particular provisions relating to the mandates, incompatibilities and disqualification of judges (see, to that effect, ECtHR, 27 October 2009, Pandjikidzé and Others v. Georgia, ..., paragraph 104, and 20 October 2009, Gorguiladzé v. Georgia, ..., paragraph 68).
As it is apparent from the case-law of the ECtHR, the principle of the lawful judge requires compliance with the provisions governing the procedure for the appointment of judges (see, to that effect, ECtHR, 9 July 2009, Ilatovskiy v. Russia, ..., paragraphs 40 and 41).
Indeed, it is not only essential that judges are independent and impartial, but also that the procedure for their appointment appears to be so. It is for that reason that the rules for the appointment of a judge must be strictly adhered to. Otherwise, the confidence of litigants and the public in the independence and impartiality of the courts might be eroded (see, to that effect, decision of the EFTA Court of 14 February 2017, Pascal Nobile v DAS Rechtsschutz-Versicherungs, E-21/16, paragraph 16).
The question whether the flaws in the procedure for the appointment of the judge at issue are such as to affect the proper composition of the Second Chamber of the Civil Service Tribunal which delivered the judgment under appeal must be considered in the light of those principles.
In that regard, it must be stated that it is apparent [...], that the Council was fully aware that the list of candidates at issue had not been established with a view to appointing a judge to the post held by Ms [R.P.]. It nevertheless decided to use the list for that purpose. It therefore follows from the appointment itself that the Council deliberately disregarded the legal framework laid down by the public call for applications of 3 December 2013 and the rules governing the appointment of judges to the Civil Service Tribunal.
Accordingly, having regard to the importance of compliance with the rules governing the appointment of a judge for the confidence of litigants and the public in the independence and impartiality of the courts, the judge at issue cannot be regarded as a lawful judge within the meaning of the first sentence of the second paragraph of Article 47 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights.”
The proposal for the review of this judgment made by the First Advocate General was dismissed by the Court of Justice (Reviewing Chamber) on 19 March 2018 (C-141/18 RX), as the formal conditions under the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union on whether a judgment should be reviewed were not met in this case.
The cases of Simpson v Council and HG v Commission concerned appeals lodged with the General Court in September 2016 against judgments delivered by the Civil Service Tribunal in respect of Mr Simpson and Mr H.G., staff members at the Council of the European Union and the European Commission, respectively, at the material time. Both judgments of the Civil Service Tribunal had been delivered by the same panel of judges whose composition had been considered to be irregular by the General Court in the judgment in FV.
Relying on its findings in the case of FV, on 19 July 2018 the General Court held that the judgments of the Civil Service Tribunal under review had to be set aside in their entirety on the grounds of infringement of the principle of the right to a judge assigned by law.
Upon a request from the First Advocate General, on 17 September 2018 the Reviewing Chamber of the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) decided that the General Court’s judgments in the cases of Simpson and HG should be reviewed, in order to determine whether, having regard, in particular, to the general principle of legal certainty, they affected the unity or consistency of European Union law. The Reviewing Chamber held that:
“The review should involve, in particular, the question whether, ..., the appointment of a judge may form the subject matter of a review of indirect legality or whether such a review of indirect legality is – by principle or after the passage of a certain period of time – excluded or limited to certain types of irregularity in order to ensure legal certainty and the force of res judicata”.
On 26 March 2020 the Grand Chamber of the CJEU delivered its judgment in the cases of Simpson and HG. While the CJEU upheld the General Court’s finding regarding the irregularity in the judicial appointment procedure at issue, it disagreed with that court’s conclusion as to the effect of that irregularity on the parties’ right to a “tribunal established by law”. The relevant extracts from the judgment read as follows:
“50  As regards the answer to the question to be reviewed in this case, it is necessary to begin by examining whether, having regard, in particular, to the general principle of legal certainty, the General Court erred in law by setting aside the contested decisions on the ground that the composition of the panel of judges of the Civil Service Tribunal which had delivered those decisions had been irregular because of an irregularity affecting the procedure for the appointment of one of the members of that panel of judges, leading to a breach of the principle of the lawful judge, laid down in the first sentence of the second paragraph of Article 47 of the Charter.
51  In the context of that examination, it is necessary to determine, first, in what circumstances the appointment of a judge may, like acts covered by Article 277 TFEU, form the subject matter of an incidental review of legality. Secondly, the Court must verify whether, in so far as the irregularity concerning the appointment procedure is established, as determined by the General Court, that irregularity did indeed lead to an infringement of the first sentence of the second paragraph of Article 47 of the Charter, justifying the setting aside of those decisions.
...
72  Since the first sentence of the second paragraph of Article 47 of the Charter corresponds to the first sentence of Article 6(1) of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, signed in Rome on 4 November 1950 (‘ECHR’), its meaning and scope are, in accordance with Article 52(3) of the Charter, the same as those laid down by that convention. The Court must therefore ensure that the interpretation which it gives to the second paragraph of Article 47 of the Charter safeguards a level of protection which does not fall below the level of protection established in Article 6 ECHR, as interpreted by the European Court of Human Rights (judgment of 19 November 2019, A. K. and Others (Independence of the Disciplinary Chamber of the Supreme Court), C‑585/18, C‑624/18 and C‑625/18, EU:C:2019:982, paragraph 118 and the case-law cited).
73  According to the settled case-law of the European Court of Human Rights, the reason for the introduction of the term ‘established by law’ in the first sentence of Article 6(1) ECHR is to ensure that the organisation of the judicial system does not depend on the discretion of the executive, but that it is regulated by law emanating from the legislature in compliance with the rules governing its jurisdiction. That phrase reflects, in particular, the principle of the rule of law and covers not only the legal basis for the very existence of a tribunal, but also the composition of the bench in each case and any other provision of domestic law which, if breached, would render the participation of one or more judges in the examination of a case irregular, including, in particular, provisions concerning the independence and impartiality of the members of the court concerned (see, to that effect, ECtHR, 8 July 2014, Biagioli v. San Marino, CE:ECHR:2014:0708DEC000816213, §§ 72 to 74, and ECtHR, 2 May 2019, Pasquini v. San Marino, CE:ECHR:2019:0502JUD005095616, §§ 100 and 101 and the case-law cited).
74  Likewise, the European Court of Human Rights has already had an opportunity to observe that the right to be judged by a tribunal ‘established by law’ within the meaning of Article 6(1) ECHR encompasses, by its very nature, the process of appointing judges (ECtHR, 12 March 2019, Ástráðsson v. Iceland, CE:ECHR:2019:0312JUD002637418, interim judgment, § 98).
75  It follows from the case-law cited in paragraphs 71 and 73 of the present judgment that an irregularity committed during the appointment of judges within the judicial system concerned entails an infringement of the first sentence of the second paragraph of Article 47 of the Charter, particularly when that irregularity is of such a kind and of such gravity as to create a real risk that other branches of the State, in particular the executive, could exercise undue discretion undermining the integrity of the outcome of the appointment process and thus give rise to a reasonable doubt in the minds of individuals as to the independence and the impartiality of the judge or judges concerned, which is the case when what is at issue are fundamental rules forming an integral part of the establishment and functioning of that judicial system.
76  It is in the light of those principles that the Court must examine whether the irregularity committed in the appointment procedure at issue resulted in this instance in an infringement of the parties’ right to a hearing by a tribunal previously established by law, as guaranteed by the first sentence of the second paragraph of Article 47 of the Charter.
...
79  In that context, the mere fact that the Council used the list drawn up following the public call for applications of 3 December 2013 to fill the third post is not sufficient to establish an infringement of a fundamental rule of the procedure for appointing judges to the Civil Service Tribunal that is of such a kind and of such gravity as to create a real risk that the Council made unjustified use of its powers, undermining the integrity of the outcome of the appointment process and thus giving rise to a reasonable doubt in the minds of individuals as to the independence and the impartiality of the judge appointed to the third post, or of the Chamber to which that judge was assigned.
80  In that respect, the irregularity in the appointment procedure at issue is distinguishable from that at issue in the decision of the EFTA Court of 14 February 2017, Pascal Nobile v DAS Rechtsschutz-Versicherungs (E‑21/16), mentioned in paragraph 75 of the judgment of 23 January 2018, FV v Council (T‑639/16 P, EU:T:2018:22). The latter irregularity consisted in the appointment of a judge to the EFTA Court for, exceptionally, a three-year term of office instead of a six-year term, and thus concerned, unlike the irregularity examined in the present cases, the infringement of a fundamental rule in relation to the duration of judges’ mandates at that court which was intended to protect their independence.
81  It follows from the foregoing that the Council’s disregard for the public call for applications of 3 December 2013 does not constitute an infringement of the fundamental rules of EU law applicable to the appointment of judges to the Civil Service Tribunal that entailed an infringement of the applicants’ right to a tribunal established by law, as guaranteed by the first sentence of the second paragraph of Article 47 of the Charter.
82  Consequently, and since the judgments under review do not contain anything else that might cast doubt on compliance with the first sentence of the second paragraph of Article 47 of the Charter, it must be held that the General Court made an error of law in ruling, in those judgments, that that provision had been infringed. The irregularity referred to in the preceding paragraph could not, therefore, by itself justify the setting aside of a judicial decision adopted by the panel of judges to which the judge appointed to the third post was assigned.”
On 19 November 2019 the Grand Chamber of the Court of Justice of the European Union delivered a preliminary ruling in response to requests from the Labour and Social Insurance Chamber of the Supreme Court of Poland. The requests mainly concerned the question whether the newly established Disciplinary Chamber of the Supreme Court of Poland satisfied, in the light of the circumstances in which it was formed and its members appointed, the requirements of independence and impartiality required under Article 47 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. Recalling that the interpretation of Article 47 of the Charter was borne out by the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights on Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, the Court of Justice underlined the following principles, as relevant:
“120  [The] requirement that courts be independent, which is inherent in the task of adjudication, forms part of the essence of the right to effective judicial protection and the fundamental right to a fair trial,...
...
123  Those guarantees of independence and impartiality require rules, particularly as regards the composition of the body and the appointment, length of service and grounds for abstention, rejection and dismissal of its members, in order to dispel any reasonable doubt in the minds of individuals as to the imperviousness of that body to external factors and its neutrality with respect to the interests before it ...
124  Moreover, in accordance with the principle of the separation of powers which characterises the operation of the rule of law, the independence of the judiciary must be ensured in relation to the legislature and the executive ...
125  In that regard, it is necessary that judges are protected from external intervention or pressure liable to jeopardise their independence. The rules set out in paragraph 123 above must, in particular, be such as to preclude not only any direct influence, in the form of instructions, but also types of influence which are more indirect and which are liable to have an effect on the decisions of the judges concerned ...
…
127  According to settled case-law of [the European Court of Human Rights], in order to establish whether a tribunal is ‘independent’ within the meaning of Article 6(1) of the ECHR, regard must be had, inter alia, to the mode of appointment of its members and their term of office, the existence of guarantees against outside pressures and the question whether the body at issue presents an appearance of independence (ECtHR, 6 November 2018, Ramos Nunes de Carvalho e Sá v. Portugal, CE:ECHR:2018:1106JUD005539113, § 144 and the case-law cited), it being added, in that connection, that what is at stake is the confidence which such tribunals must inspire in the public in a democratic society (see, to that effect, ECtHR, 21 June 2011, Fruni v. Slovakia, CE:ECHR:2011:0621JUD000801407, § 141).
128  As regards the condition of ‘impartiality’, within the meaning of Article 6(1) of the ECHR, impartiality can, according to equally settled case-law of the European Court of Human Rights, be tested in various ways, namely, according to a subjective test where regard must be had to the personal convictions and behaviour of a particular judge, that is, by examining whether the judge gave any indication of personal prejudice or bias in a given case; and also according to an objective test, that is to say by ascertaining whether the tribunal itself and, among other aspects, its composition, offered sufficient guarantees to exclude any legitimate doubt in respect of its impartiality. As to the objective test, it must be determined whether, quite apart from the judge’s conduct, there are ascertainable facts which may raise doubts as to his or her impartiality. In this connection, even appearances may be of a certain importance. Once again, what is at stake is the confidence which the courts in a democratic society must inspire in the public, and first and foremost in the parties to the proceedings (see, inter alia, ECtHR, 6 May 2003, Kleyn and Others v. Netherlands, CE:ECHR:2003:0506JUD003934398, § 191 and the case-law cited, and 6 November 2018, Ramos Nunes de Carvalho e Sá v. Portugal, CE:ECHR:2018:1106JUD005539113, §§ 145, 147 and 149 and the case-law cited).
...
133  In that regard, as far as concerns the circumstances in which the members of the Disciplinary Chamber were appointed, the Court points out, as a preliminary remark, that the mere fact that those judges were appointed by the President of the Republic does not give rise to a relationship of subordination of the former to the latter or to doubts as to the former’s impartiality, if, once appointed, they are free from influence or pressure when carrying out their role (see, to that effect, judgment of 31 January 2013, D. and A., C175/11, EU:C:2013:45, paragraph 99, and ECtHR, 28 June 1984, Campbell and Fell v. United Kingdom, CE:ECHR:1984:0628JUD000781977, § 79; 2 June 2005, Zolotas v. Greece, CE:ECHR:2005:0602JUD003824002 §§ 24 and 25; 9 November 2006, Sacilor Lormines v. France, CE:ECHR:2006:1109JUD006541101, § 67; and 18 October 2018, Thiam v. France, CE:ECHR:2018:1018JUD008001812, § 80 and the case-law cited).
134  However, it is still necessary to ensure that the substantive conditions and detailed procedural rules governing the adoption of appointment decisions are such that they cannot give rise to reasonable doubts, in the minds of individuals, as to the imperviousness of the judges concerned to external factors and as to their neutrality with respect to the interests before them, once appointed as judges (see, by analogy, judgment of 24 June 2019, Commission v Poland (Independence of the Supreme Court), C619/18, EU:C:2019:531, paragraph 111).
135  In that perspective, it is important, inter alia, that those conditions and detailed procedural rules are drafted in a way which meets the requirements set out in paragraph 125 above.”
On 24 June 2019 the Grand Chamber of the CJEU delivered its judgment in the case of Commission v. Poland, which mainly concerned the lowering of the retirement age for Supreme Court judges to 65 and which applied to judges of the court appointed before the date on which the relevant law had entered into force. Under the law in question, it would be possible for Supreme Court judges to continue in active judicial service beyond the age of 65 subject to certain conditions, including an authorisation by the President of the Republic of Poland, who would not be bound by any criterion and whose decision would not be subject to any form of judicial review. After emphasising the cardinal importance of maintaining the independence of national courts in order to ensure effective judicial protection, the Court of Justice made the following remarks regarding the role played by the principle of irremovability of judges in guaranteeing the independence of the judiciary:
“75  In particular, that freedom of the judges from all external intervention or pressure, which is essential, requires, as the Court has held on several occasions, certain guarantees appropriate for protecting the individuals who have the task of adjudicating in a dispute, such as guarantees against removal from office (see, to that effect, judgment of 25 July 2018, Minister for Justice and Equality (Deficiencies in the system of justice), C216/18 PPU, EU:C:2018:586, paragraph 64 and the case-law cited).
76  The principle of irremovability requires, in particular, that judges may remain in post provided that they have not reached the obligatory retirement age or until the expiry of their mandate, where that mandate is for a fixed term. While it is not wholly absolute, there can be no exceptions to that principle unless they are warranted by legitimate and compelling grounds, subject to the principle of proportionality...
...
78  In the present case, it must be held that the reform being challenged, which provides that the measure lowering the retirement age of judges of the Sąd Najwyższy (Supreme Court) is to apply to judges already serving on that court, results in those judges prematurely ceasing to carry out their judicial office and is therefore such as to raise reasonable concerns as regards compliance with the principle of the irremovability of judges.
79  In those circumstances, and having regard to the cardinal importance of that principle, recalled in paragraphs 75 to 77 above, such an application is acceptable only if it is justified by a legitimate objective, it is proportionate in the light of that objective and inasmuch as it is not such as to raise reasonable doubt in the minds of individuals as to the imperviousness of the court concerned to external factors and its neutrality with respect to the interests before it.”
Following an examination of the facts at issue on the basis of the foregoing principles, the Court of Justice found that the application of the measure lowering the retirement age of the Supreme Court judges to the judges currently serving in that court had undermined the principle of irremovability of judges, which was essential to their independence.
The Court of Appeal of the Principality of Liechtenstein requested an advisory opinion from the EFTA Court in respect of the Agreement on the European Economic Area (EEA Agreement) and the Solvency II Directive 2009/138/EC, and referred three questions to the EFTA Court in that regard. The third question, which was conditional on the entertainment of the first two questions by the EFTA Court after 16 January 2017, concerned the principle of loyalty laid down in Article 3 of the EEA Agreement and the possibility for the EFTA States to question the validity of the decisions of the EFTA Court. In essence the question raised the issue as to whether, from 17 January 2017, the EFTA Court would be lawfully composed in a manner that ensured its independence and impartiality. The reason for the question was that by an ESA/Court Committee Decision of 1 December 2016, the regular judge of the EFTA Court in respect of Norway had been reappointed for a three-year term of office as of 17 January 2017. However, Article 30(1) of the Agreement between the EFTA States, on the Establishment of a Surveillance Authority and Court of Justice (SCA), provided that the judges of the EFTA Court would be appointed for a term of six years.
On 13 January 2017 the ESA/Court Committee delivered a new decision, whereby it reappointed the judge in respect of Norway for a term of six years and repealed its first decision.
On 14 February 2017 (case no. E-21/16) the EFTA Court replied to the Court of Appeal’s third question in the following terms, as relevant:
 “16.  Any assessment of the lawfulness of the Court’s composition, particularly concerning its independence and impartiality, requires that due account is taken of several important factors. First, the principle of judicial independence is one of the fundamental values of the administration of justice. (...) Second, it is vital not only that judges are independent and fair, they must also appear to be so. Third, maintaining judicial independence requires that the relevant rules for judicial appointment, as set out in Article 30 SCA, must be strictly observed. Any other approach could lead to the erosion of public confidence in the Court and thereby undermine its appearance of independence and impartiality.”
The EFTA Court concluded that it had to take into account the new decision repealing the previous decision and re-appointing the judge in respect of Norway for a term of six years. The new decision was unambiguous and provided for a term that was in accordance with Article 30 of the SCA. Therefore, there could be no doubt as to the lawfulness of the court’s composition as from 17 January 2017.
In the case of the Supreme Court of Justice (Quintana Coello et al.) v. Ecuador, judgment of 23 August 2013, concerning the removal of twenty-seven judges of the Supreme Court of Justice of Ecuador through a parliamentary resolution, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights made the following remarks on the independence of the judiciary:
“144.  In its case law, the Court has indicated that the scope of judicial guarantees and effective judicial protection for judges must be examined in relation to the standards on judicial independence. In the case of Reverón Trujillo v. Venezuela, the Court emphasized that judges, unlike other public officials, enjoy specific guarantees due to the independence required of the judiciary, which the Court has understood as ‘essential for the exercise of the judiciary.’ The Court has reiterated that one of the main objectives of the separation of public powers is to guarantee the independence of judges. The purpose of protection is to ensure that the judicial system in general, and its members in particular, are not subject to possible undue restrictions in the exercise their duties by bodies outside the Judiciary, or even by judges who exercise functions of review or appeal. In line with the case law of this Court and of the European Court of Human Rights, and in accordance with the United Nations Basic Principles on the Independence of the Judiciary (hereinafter ‘Basic Principles’), the following guarantees are derived from judicial independence: an appropriate process of appointment, guaranteed tenure and guarantees against external pressures.
...
Finally, the Court has emphasized that the State must guarantee the independent exercise of the judiciary, both in its institutional aspect, that is, in terms of the judicial branch as a system, and in its individual aspect, that is, in relation to a particular individual judge. The Court deems it pertinent to point out that the objective dimension is related to essential aspects for the Rule of Law, such as the principle of separation of powers, and the important role played by the judiciary in a democracy. Consequently, this objective dimension transcends the figure of the judge and collectively affects society as a whole...”
The Latimer House Guidelines for the Commonwealth on Parliamentary Supremacy and Judicial Independence, adopted on 19 June 1998 at a meeting of the representatives of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, the Commonwealth Magistrates and Judges Association, the Commonwealth Lawyers’ Association and the Commonwealth Legal Education Association, provided as follows:
“II.  Preserving Judicial Independence
Judicial appointments
Jurisdictions should have an appropriate independent process in place for judicial appointments. Where no independent system already exists, appointments should be made by a judicial services commission... or by an appropriate officer of state acting on the recommendation of such a commission.
The appointment process, whether or not involving an appropriately constituted and representative judicial services commission, should be designed to guarantee the quality and independence of mind of those selected for appointment at all levels of the judiciary.
Judicial appointments to all levels of the judiciary should be made on merit...”
The Universal Charter of the Judge was approved by the International Association of Judges on 17 November 1999. Its Article 9 on appointments reads as follows:
“The selection and each appointment of a judge must be carried out according to objective and transparent criteria based on proper professional qualification. Where this is not ensured in other ways, that are rooted in established and proven tradition, selection should be carried out by an independent body, that include substantial judicial representation.”
In May 2012 the General Assembly of the European Network of Councils for the Judiciary adopted a declaration (the Dublin Declaration), setting minimum standards regarding the recruitment, selection, appointment and promotion of members of the judiciary. The relevant extracts of the declaration read as follows:
“1.  Judicial appointments should only be based on merit and capability.
There requires to be a clearly-defined and published set of selection competencies against which candidates for judicial appointment should be assessed at all stages of the appointment process.
Selection competencies should include intellectual and personal skills of a high quality, as well as a proper work ethic and the ability of the candidates to express themselves.
...
Diversity in the range of persons available for selection for appointment should be encouraged, avoiding all kinds of discrimination, although that does not necessarily imply the setting of quotas per se, adding that any attempt to achieve diversity in the selection and appointment of judges should not be made at the expense of the basic criterion of merit.
The entire appointment and selection process must be open to public scrutiny, since the public has a right to know how its judges are selected.
An unsuccessful candidate is entitled to know why he or she failed to secure an appointment; and there is a need for an independent complaints or challenge process to which any unsuccessful applicant may turn if he or she believes that he/she was unfairly treated in the appointment process.
If the Government or the Head of State plays a role in the ultimate appointment of members of the judiciary, the involvement of a Minister or the Head of State does not in itself contend against the principles of independence, fairness, openness and transparency if their role in the appointment is clearly defined and their decision-making processes clearly documented, and the involvement of the Government or the Head of State does not impact upon those principles if they give recognition to decisions taken in the context of an independent selection process. Besides, it was also defined as a Standard in this field that where whoever is responsible for making the ultimate appointment (the Government or Head of State) has the right to refuse to implement the appointment or recommendation made in the context of an independent selection process and is not prepared to implement the appointment or recommendation it should make known such a decision and state clearly the reason for the decision.”
The Court has considered it appropriate to conduct a comparative survey with regard to the domestic law and practice in 40 States Parties to the Convention (namely Albania, Andorra, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine and the United Kingdom) on the Convention requirement of a “tribunal established by law”.
According to the information available to the Court, the concept of a “tribunal established by law” is recognised in the legal systems of all States surveyed, although the terminology used to designate it and the methods of its recognition differ. For instance, while in some States the concept is explicitly recognised in basically identical terms, some other States use the concept of a “lawful” or a “natural” judge or court.
The scope of the requirement of a “tribunal established by law” differs amongst the member States surveyed: in almost all the States concerned, the “established by law” requirement clearly involves the question of the composition of a court or tribunal; in 37 member States that requirement relates to the jurisdiction and competence of a court or tribunal to rule in a particular case (in Belgium, Luxembourg and Malta the “established by law” requirement does not seem to cover this matter specifically); and in 29 member States, it specifically relates to the consideration as to whether there is a legal basis for the existence of a court or tribunal.
The Court notes, as particularly relevant to the present case, that in 19 (out of 40) of the States surveyed (namely Andorra, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, France, Georgia, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, Norway, Russia, Sweden and the United Kingdom), it is sufficiently established in domestic law and/or practice that the requirement of a “tribunal established by law” also covers the consideration as to whether the legal procedure for the appointment – to the post of judge – of its judges was complied with. As for the remaining 21 member States, it appears that it is not sufficiently clear under their domestic law and practice whether the “established by law” requirement also extends to the process of the appointment of judges.
The Court further notes that in those 19 States where the requirement of a “tribunal established by law” clearly extends to the rules relating to the appointment of judges, the legal consequences regarding a judgment given by (or with the participation of) a judge who was appointed in breach of the relevant rules vary. In most of those States, it is possible in certain circumstances to request the annulment or quashing of the judgments adopted by such a judge: nevertheless, in a number of States, such as Austria, Belgium, Georgia, Norway, and Sweden, it is clear from the caselaw of the domestic courts that the breach of the domestic law at issue has to be of a particular gravity – the degree of which differs from State to State – for the relevant judgments to be annulled or quashed. Similarly, in certain States, such as Croatia, France, Italy and the United Kingdom, it appears from the domestic law and/or practice that if judicial appointments are quashed or annulled due to the irregularities in the appointment procedure, it would not necessarily mean that all acts or judgments adopted by the judge in question would be annulled or quashed.
Lastly, in almost all member States where the requirement of a “tribunal established by law” extends to the procedure for the appointment of judges (that is, 19 out of 40 States as mentioned in paragraph 151 above), the reopening of proceedings is a possibility, and in some instances an obligation, where a judgment has been annulled or quashed due to an irregularity in the appointment of a judge who participated in its delivery (see paragraph 152 above).
We agree, albeit to a qualified extent, with the finding of a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, in so far as the panel of the appellate court which heard the applicant’s appeal was not a “tribunal established by law”.
With regret, however, we cannot agree with the majority’s refusal to examine the applicant’s second complaint under Article 6 § 1 in relation to the same court’s alleged lack of independence when hearing his appeal. We are of the opinion that the majority should have addressed both complaints, not least because this would have provided an explanation as to why no reopening of the applicant’s trial at domestic level has been requested by the Grand Chamber.
Before explaining further why we support the finding of a violation of Article 6, while nevertheless partly dissenting, a brief deconstruction of the judgment in relation to this violation is called for. The Grand Chamber has sought to refine and clarify the meaning of the concept of “a tribunal established by law” and to analyse its relationship with the requirements of independence and impartiality under Article 6 § 1 in order to provide an interpretation of that concept which “best reflect(s) its purpose and ... ensure(s) that the protection it offers is truly effective” (see paragraph 218 of the judgment). The right to a tribunal established by law is elevated to a stand-alone right under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention (paragraph 231) and treated as “a distinct Article 6 safeguard” (paragraph 280), albeit that the basis of and need for this characterisation are not fully explained. Nor, in our view, have its consequences been sufficiently considered. In order to accommodate the principles of legal certainty, res judicata and the irremovability of judges, the Grand Chamber finds that only the gravest of breaches of the judicial appointment rules would amount to a violation of the right to a tribunal established by law (paragraphs 236-41). The majority’s finding of a violation is based, firstly, on the nature of the now stand-alone right to a “tribunal established by law” and, secondly, on the participation in the applicant’s appeal of a judge “whose appointment procedure was vitiated by grave irregularities that impaired the very essence of that right” (paragraph 289).
We support the conclusion that the panel of judges which heard the applicant’s appeal was not a “tribunal established by law” given certain irregularities in the appointment procedure. Thus the finding of a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention is unanimous. However, our approach to the three inter-related requirements in Article 6 § 1 of the Convention – “established by law”, “independence” and “impartiality” – differs from that of our colleagues, as does our reason for finding a violation. In our view, there was no need to transform the first requirement into a stand-alone right in order to find a violation in this case; nor was it necessary to “supercharge” the different defects in the appointment procedure in order to ensure that they met the threshold test of the Grand Chamber’s own making. It was sufficient in this case for the Grand Chamber to find that a series of defects, of variable importance and gravity, which occurred when establishing a new appellate court for which the Icelandic legislature had provided a clear appointment procedure, and in the context of heightened awareness of the various forms which “rule of law” problems may take in different European States, violates the Article 6 § 1 “established by law” requirement. In addition, we consider that, having declared in paragraph 210 of the judgment that the Grand Chamber’s task was to determine the consequences of breaches of domestic law on judicial appointments in terms of Article 6 § 1, it has failed to do just that. The judgment risks sowing confusion rather than clarity with the new test summarised above and, moreover, the Court’s failure to examine whether the panel which heard the applicant’s appeal was in fact, in his case, independent and impartial should give rise to considerable concern. In the individual case of the applicant, it is through this examination of his second complaint that the consequences of any appointment irregularities should have been assessed.
The applicant’s trial for a traffic offence at domestic level. The relevant facts can be summarised as follows. The applicant was tried for a road traffic offence (driving without a valid licence and under the influence of drugs) before a criminal court. He pleaded guilty and was given a hefty sentence. He appealed against the sentence imposed. As the appeal proceedings progressed, he altered his grounds of appeal and raised two distinct issues: first, the question of the regularity of the appointment of one of the judges, namely A.E., to the Court of Appeal and, secondly and separately, the fairness of the proceedings in view of that judge’s alleged lack of independence and impartiality.
The institutional background to the applicant’s case. The background to this complaint is the creation, in 2016, of an appellate court which transformed the Icelandic judicial system from a two-tier (district courts and Supreme Court) into a three-tier system with the new Court of Appeal, composed of fifteen judges, in between. According to the domestic legal provisions governing the initial selection and appointment of the first fifteen appellate judges, an Evaluation Committee (EC) had to select the candidates who were considered to fulfil the conditions for serving as judges at that new court and propose to the Minister of Justice a list of fifteen candidates deemed to be the most suitable. In addition, the relevant legislation provided that the Minister had the possibility of departing from the EC’s proposal and of submitting to the Icelandic Parliament different names of judges to be chosen from the list of candidates who fulfilled the legal conditions for appointment. The Icelandic Parliament, by means of a separate vote on each of these candidates, had to approve the Minister’s amended proposal.
The Minister made use of her ability to depart from the EC’s proposal in respect of four judges, among whom she proposed A.E. It transpired that the Minister wished to attach greater weight than the EC to judicial experience, a criterion which favoured A.E. given her long experience as a judge, and also wished to address questions of gender balance. Her amended list of candidates was endorsed by a global vote of Parliament, rather than by an individual vote for each candidate proposed, and the President of Iceland then signed the relevant letters of appointment.
In separate proceedings, entirely unrelated to those involving the applicant, four of the judges whose names had been on the list of the fifteen most qualified candidates established by the EC challenged the decision to appoint the judges who had not been on that short list, among whom was A.E. The Icelandic Supreme Court recognised in that context that there had been irregularities in the appointment procedure. Although it refrained from invalidating the Minister’s decision, approved by Parliament, to replace the claimants in those proceedings, it granted two of them compensation for non-pecuniary damage.
The applicant’s request for the withdrawal or recusal of A.E. In the criminal proceedings against the applicant, the Court of Appeal, with the participation of A.E., rejected the procedural motion requesting that she should withdraw, since there was nothing which gave rise to a justifiable doubt as to her eligibility to handle the case. An attempt by the applicant to have the Supreme Court resolve this issue before the Court of Appeal proceeded with the merits of his appeal was dismissed on purely procedural grounds. The Court of Appeal then upheld the judgment under appeal on the substance.
The proceedings before the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court, seised of the applicant’s request for the judgment of the Court of Appeal to be quashed and his case retried, based on his right to a fair trial and doubts as to the independence and impartiality of one if its members stemming from a flawed appointment procedure, upheld the judgment of the court below. It found that it could uphold the applicant’s claim only if the judge was not a lawful holder of judicial power, thus if the flaws in the appointment process had entailed the nullity (“markleysa”) of that appointment. Referring to its previous judgment in relation to the shortlisted candidates whose names had been removed, as mentioned above, it repeated that in spite of the flaws in the procedure at the level of the Minister of Justice, they did not entail such a nullity. It stressed in that context, inter alia, that all the judges so appointed were qualified to hold judicial office in the light of their professional experience and legal knowledge. This had not been contested by the applicant. Furthermore, the Supreme Court reiterated that recourse to a single vote in Parliament was a “defect of no significance”. Taking also into account the fact that all the new judges had been appointed to office by letters signed by the President of Iceland, there were insufficient reasons to doubt that the applicant had enjoyed a fair trial before independent and impartial judges. All the judges had, pursuant to Icelandic law, been appointed for an indefinite term, were afforded independence in their judicial work and had a duty to perform their work under their own responsibility and never to follow instructions from others in the exercise of their duties.
Two complaints. According to the application, and as clearly stated in the Chamber judgment, the applicant raised two complaints:
(i) that the inclusion of an irregularly appointed judge on the appeal panel which heard his case had violated the requirement of a “tribunal established by law”; and
(ii) that the composition of that Court of Appeal panel had violated his right to be heard by an independent and impartial tribunal.
The essence of the applicant’s case is thus not about the irregular appointment of A.E., but about the fairness of the proceedings in which his conviction for a traffic offence was upheld on appeal. Of course, the appointment procedure plays an incidental role, as it could have been at the origin of the unfairness that he alleged.
However, the present case is most certainly about the possible consequences of the alleged and indeed identified flaws in the appointment procedure as submitted by the applicant – i.e. the lack of a lawful and independent tribunal – concerning the trial for a traffic offence in which he was convicted.
The majority’s response to the two complaints. The majority acknowledge that the task of the Grand Chamber is “to determine the consequences of the ... breaches of domestic law in terms of Article 6 § 1” (paragraph 210 of the judgment). However, they have chosen to address only one of the complaints about the proceedings which led to the applicant’s conviction, i.e. the manner of A.E.’s appointment and whether this meant that the Court of Appeal panel was not a “tribunal established by law”.
As explained above, the majority have transformed the “established by law” requirement into a “stand-alone right” (paragraph 231 of the judgment). Thus, they do not consider it necessary to look into the other requirements of a fair trial pursuant to Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and, moreover, indirectly deny the interrelationship between the three requirements which has characterised the Court’s case-law to date. When doing so, however, they stop half way, failing to explain sufficiently why there should or should not have been a reopening of the proceedings. Only an assessment of the fairness of the applicant’s trial in its entirety, which necessarily implies an examination of the interrelationship between the three requirements for the fairness of a trial, can produce an answer to that question.
It is therefore necessary, in our view, to examine the relationship between the three requirements of Article 6 § 1 (II.) and its impact on the methodology of the assessment in a specific case (III.)
The question of the relationship between the three requirements (A.) is important, as it may have a bearing on the consequences of the finding that one of the requirements is not or is only partially met (B.).
The majority’s unclear statements as to the interrelationship between the three requirements of Article 6 § 1. Are the three elements one finds in Article 6 § 1 – “... everyone is entitled to a fair ... hearing ... by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law ...” – self-standing requirements or are they interrelated or even interdependent? Are they rights or requirements?
In respect of either the self-standing or interrelated character of the “established by law” requirement under Article 6 § 1, the Grand Chamber judgment is unclear, if not inconsistent. It affirms that it “is a stand-alone right under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention” but later acknowledges that “a very close interrelationship has been formulated in the Court’s case-law between that specific right and the guarantees of ‘independence’ and ‘impartiality’” (paragraph 231 of the judgment). In some other paragraphs, the interrelationship between “established by law” and independence is also clearly stated. In particular, the judgment stresses (paragraph 234, emphasis added) that:
“the examination under the ‘establishment by law’ requirement must not lose sight of its common purpose and must systematically enquire whether the alleged irregularity in a given case was of such gravity as to undermine the [fundamental principles of the rule of law and separation of powers] and to compromise the independence of the court in question.”
The choice made by the majority: “established by law” now has a stand-alone character. It appears that the majority do not really consider the three requirements to be interrelated but rather see them as a succession of requirements whereby shortcomings in relation to the first may irremediably compromise the others, thus making it unnecessary, perhaps even pointless, once the first requirement (“established by law”) is not fulfilled, to enter into an assessment of the other two. Thus, in paragraph 295 of the judgment, the applicant’s two separate complaints are characterised as stemming from the same underlying problem, and since the irregularities are considered to be of such gravity that they undermined the very essence of the new stand-alone right:
“the Court concludes that the remaining question as to whether the same irregularities have also compromised the independence and impartiality of the same tribunal does not require further examination”.
The judgment thus finds that since the panel of the Icelandic Court of Appeal which heard the applicant’s appeal does not fulfil the “established by law” requirement, it cannot even be considered a tribunal within the meaning of Article 6 § 1. Accordingly, the requirement has not only been transformed into a self-standing right, it is also one with an absolute character, such that a judicial body which was not established by law, like the panel in question, can in no way enjoy independence or conduct a trial which, overall, qualifies as fair.
To sum up, in the eyes of the majority, establishment by law is not merely one of the requirements of the fairness of a trial, together with independence and impartiality, but a prerequisite, a conditio sine qua non of the fairness of proceedings which, if not fulfilled, makes it unnecessary to examine the other conditions.
An important qualification in the form of the gravity test. It is true that the majority attempt to provide an important qualification so that not every shortcoming in a judicial appointment procedure irremediably leads to a violation of the “established by law” condition under Article 6 § 1.
They introduce a threshold or gravity test with three tiers and acknowledge a dilemma to which the elevation of this requirement to a stand-alone right gives rise: an excessively strict application of the “established by law” requirement would impair other important principles, such as legal certainty, res judicata and the irremovability of judges (paragraphs 238-40 of the judgment). They consequently accept that there can be infringements of the “established by law” requirement that do not impair independence and impartiality, do not violate Article 6 § 1 and do not negate the characterisation of a judicial body as a “tribunal”.
The ultimate aim of the gravity test: ensuring independence and impartiality. However, on closer inspection, the entire three-tier test according to which the identified flaws must be significant is ultimately aimed at identifying those that impair independence and impartiality. Thus, in paragraph 246 of the judgment it is stated that an alleged breach must be assessed in the light of the object and purpose of the “established by law” requirement, namely to “ensure the ability of the judiciary to perform its duties free from undue interference”. This object and purpose is the same as that pursued by the requirement of independence.
It can be concluded that, despite the fact that the judgment bestows a self-standing character on the “established by law” requirement, now a right in itself, the reasoning adopted nevertheless evolves in a logic dictated by the interrelationship between the three requirements under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention; an interrelationship which we consider essential and which the Grand Chamber should have preserved.
The inconclusive nature of the case-law relied on to support this stand-alone character. It is important, when referring to the Court’s caselaw, to note that it has, on occasion, recognised that “fundamental defects in the composition of the bench” which had tried an applicant undermined the fairness of the proceedings against him. However, it has done so in proceedings involving the appointment of lay and not professional judges. Moreover, the Court has always underlined the close connection between the “established by law” requirement and the guarantees of independence and impartiality, both also being integral parts of the principle of the rule of law in a democratic society.
It is also true that in some cases, such as DMD Group, A.S., the Court has held that “in principle, a violation by a tribunal of domestic legal provisions relating to the establishment and competence of judicial organs gives rise to a violation of Article 6 § 1”. However, there is no support in the case-law – until the present judgment – for the proposition that finding a violation of the “established by law” requirement precludes an additional assessment of whether an applicant’s right to a fair trial was also violated due to a lack of independence or impartiality. In Kontalexis, for example, having found a violation of Article 6 § 1 on the basis of the absence of a “tribunal established by law”, the Court examined separately the impartiality of the same tribunal in relation to the applicant’s trial, finding no violation in this regard. To find a violation of Article 6 § 1 in relation to the first, institutional requirement, and no violation in relation to the other two, is not necessarily contradictory.
Some important factors neglected. Despite the indirect acknowledgement by the majority of the aforementioned interrelationship, their approach to the case ignores a series of weighty factors, in particular the overall fairness of proceedings principle that is well established in the Court’s case-law and, even more importantly, the distinction that has to be made between general institutional problems, as far as the “established by law” requirement is concerned, and the concrete consequences of such shortcomings for a given trial. In this context, they omit to examine the need for legal certainty with regard to judicial appointments and the appointed judges’ own right not to be dismissed from office, except pursuant to a specific procedure provided for by law. Finally, as indicated previously, the reason why the judgment does not require the reopening of the applicant’s proceedings at domestic level is not really explained.
Overall fairness of the proceedings. It is common ground – and yet important to remember – that this case, like all others brought under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, is about the overall fairness of proceedings as guaranteed by that Article. According to its wording, everyone is entitled to a “fair” hearing “by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law”. It clearly lists three requirements and not only this Court, but also domestic courts, have generally considered each requirement in the light of the others. This, by way of consequence, leads to the finding that if one of the requirements is not fulfilled, the proceedings in question are not automatically considered unfair.
We are of the firm belief that, in conformity with the long-standing case-law of the Court, when assessing whether proceedings are fair, one has to consider the overall fairness of those proceedings, in criminal as well as in civil matters.
Distinction between the general and individual violations on which the applicant relies. On reflection, it appears obvious that the “established by law” requirement is not an end in itself. It has an indirect character as it is ultimately aimed at securing the independence and impartiality of the judge. In our view, a fault line running through the approach of the majority is the failure to distinguish between a general institutional problem and its concrete consequences in a given individual’s trial. We consider it of the utmost importance to examine, on the one hand, the general problem created by flaws in the appointment of a judge and, on the other, the concrete consequences which the irregularities, leading to an infringement of the “established by law” requirement, might have had on the fair trial of an individual who claims that the irregularly appointed judge lacked independence and impartiality. This will only be possible by going into the other elements as listed in Article 6 § 1.
Having found a violation of Article 6 § 1 in respect of the “established by law” requirement, but refusing to go further into the alleged unfairness of the applicant’s own trial due to – in his submission – a lack of independence, the majority have ignored the distinction between a general and perhaps systemic problem and its concrete consequences, if any, in an individual case. This is not only what the applicant requested the Court to do, but it is also, looking at examples of cases at member State level and from the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU), what falls naturally to a court to do in this type of case.
The need to identify the consequences of a concrete infringement. As stated before, the fact that the “established by law” requirement has no self-standing, absolute character and has to be seen in the light of the other requirements of Article 6 § 1 is consistent with the well-established case-law of the Court to the effect that what is required in civil and criminal cases is the overall fairness of the trial.
What are the consequences of the concrete infringement of the “established by law” requirement on the fairness of the proceedings in the specific case? There can be instances of minor, absolutely irrelevant flaws which have no bearing at all and, conversely, some that indeed deprive the impugned person of any capacity or legitimacy to be a judge and entail the nullity of his or her appointment. The majority acknowledge that the flaws must be significant in order to generate a violation of Article 6 § 1, hence the three-tier gravity test. However, they fail to differentiate between the effects of procedural irregularities for fellow judicial candidates and for parties to court proceedings and do not examine the consequences of the identified flaws for a specific trial. This latter approach, however, finds support in some Council of Europe member States and in the case-law of the CJEU.
Comparative law elements. Examples from different Council of Europe member States (e.g. Austria, Norway, Sweden, the United Kingdom) demonstrate that the unlawful or irregular appointment of judges does not automatically lead to the annulment of the judgments in which they have taken part. Although such systems also consider the right to a lawfully established tribunal as an essential guarantee for a fair trial, they do not provide for unconditional protection against a decision by a judge who has been appointed following a flawed procedure. An irregularity in the appointment of a judge will only undermine the lawful establishment of a court in a narrow set of circumstances. A high threshold is set and it will not be met in cases of flaws of a purely technical nature which were incapable of having had any influence on the appointment decision itself. In some countries, regard will be had to whether the irregular appointment of a judge was material to the proceedings, and also to the damage that would be caused to each party if the hearing of the case were to be nullified. This protects the judge’s constitutionally guaranteed irremovability against unwarranted attacks and the validity of the trial from immaterial flaws in the judicial appointment procedure. Unfortunately, the majority take no position on this approach.
CJEU case-law. We are perfectly aware of the extremely delicate “rule of law” problems facing different European States, against which background the present judgment is being handed down. Pending before this Court are numerous Article 6 cases in which questions arise relating to the existence or absence of the objective guarantees necessary to safeguard the independence and impartiality of judges. In Brussels, questions relating to compliance by certain European Union (EU) member States with their EU law obligations under, inter alia, Articles 2 and 7 of the Treaty on European Union (TEU) are pending, and concrete manifestations of a member State’s failure to so comply in the judicial sphere have been a running theme in cases before the CJEU for several years now. Some of those judgments, and other less prominent ones, which have raised the question of the right to a “juge légal” in the more mundane context of EU staff disputes, are quite rightly cited in detail in the present Grand Chamber judgment.
However, we do not consider that the CJEU judgments necessarily support the logic underpinning the majority’s position – namely the existence of a stand-alone right to a “tribunal established by law” detached from a concrete assessment of independence and impartiality and the automatic consequences which flow from irregularities in a judicial appointment procedure as presented by the majority. Take, for example, the preliminary ruling of the CJEU in a 2019 case known as A.K., where it examined whether the new Disciplinary Chamber of the Polish Supreme Court was independent (see the extract in paragraph 138 of the Grand Chamber judgment). The CJEU explained when a court could be considered to lack the independence and impartiality required by Article 47 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights. As regards the circumstances in which the members of a tribunal were appointed, executive involvement in the appointment procedure was clearly stated to be unproblematic, however, reflecting established Strasbourg case-law: “if, once appointed, they [would be] free from influence or pressure when carrying out their role”. Furthermore, turning to the substantive conditions and detailed procedural rules governing the adoption of appointment decisions, the CJEU held that it was necessary to ensure that they could not give rise to reasonable doubt, in the minds of individuals, “as to the imperviousness of the judges concerned to external factors and as to their neutrality with respect to the interests before them”. With all due respect, it is difficult to see much difference between the reasoning of the Icelandic Supreme Court, which led it to conclude in concreto that A.E. clearly did not lack the requisite independence to sit in the three-judge panel hearing the applicant’s appeal, and that of the CJEU.
Turning to a staff case which features in the Grand Chamber judgment – Simpson v. Council of the EU – this is a case which at first sight might be read as lending support to the majority’s approach. On closer inspection, however, we consider that it does not. The background to the case was similar to that of the applicant in the present case. The Council, when constituting the members of the European Civil Service Tribunal (ECST), had used a list of candidates established to appoint two judges in order to appoint a third one. The participation of the latter in Mr Simpson’s case was challenged. In relation to the consequences of this appointment irregularity – a question identical to that before the Grand Chamber – the General Court of the EU held that as the constitution of the ECST was improper, the judgment under appeal automatically had to be set aside in its entirety. The judge at issue could not “be regarded as a lawful judge”. In that case the Court of Justice held, however, that the General Court had erred in law. The impugned appointment irregularity was not of such a kind or of such gravity as to create a real risk that the Council had made unjustified use of its powers, undermining the integrity of the outcome of the appointment process and thus giving rise to a reasonable doubt in the minds of individuals as to the independence and impartiality of the judge whose appointment had been challenged. There had been no infringement of a fundamental rule in relation to judges which was intended to protect their independence. The CJEU did not reject the logic of the Chamber’s departure in Ástráðsson, but in our view clearly sought to work around it. In particular, it relied on the principle of legal certainty, which it regarded as necessary to ensure the stability of the judicial system, in order to avoid any automaticity in terms of consequences (the setting aside of a judicial decision in which the impugned judge had participated) which the new departure in this Court’s case-law risked – and now risks – entailing.
A third CJEU judgment, not mentioned in the Grand Chamber judgment, marks even more clearly the crucial distinction between a general and perhaps systemic problem in relation to the appointment of judges and its concrete consequences, if any, in an individual case. The judgment – known as LM or Celmer – originated in a preliminary reference from the Irish High Court, which asked whether it could execute a European Arrest Warrant (EAW) issued by the Polish courts in relation to an individual accused of drug trafficking. The applicant, who was the subject of the EAW, had argued that since Poland, and its courts, had departed so completely from the common values of the rule of law, he ran a real risk in his individual case, if surrendered, of a breach of his right to an independent tribunal. The CJEU enjoined the referring court, and courts confronted with the same problem in other EU member States, to carry out a two-stage process when deciding whether to execute an EAW in such circumstances: first assessing systemic or generalised deficiencies with regard to the independence of courts in the issuing member State and then ascertaining, specifically and precisely, whether there are substantial grounds for believing that the individual concerned will run such a risk if he is surrendered to that State. The latter assessment in concreto of the alleged risk of a fair trial breach must have regard to the individual’s personal situation, as well as to “the nature of the offence for which he is being prosecuted”. We are aware that regarding an EU member State such as Poland, where questions in relation to the independence of its judiciary have arisen following a series of sustained legislative changes, it is now being asked whether there is a need for the second stage of the CJEU assessment just described. On this view, the deficiencies in an individual case could be regarded as established once systemic deficiencies reach a certain level. However, given that the violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention in the present case derives from a series of shortcomings, of variable importance and gravity, albeit ones which were allowed to occur in a specially designed judicial appointment procedure, we consider that the present case is clearly far removed from the Polish context which is the subject of the bulk of the CJEU cases.
The method to be followed. In the light of the foregoing, two methodological points have to be highlighted: first, the various interrelated requirements of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention – “tribunal established by law”, “independence” and “impartiality” – can and may have to be examined separately – in line with the applicant’s complaints – and, second, the consequences of this examination, whatever its outcome, have to be considered.
As indicated previously, the applicant raises two separate, albeit interrelated, complaints – violation of the “established by law” requirement (A.) and violation of his right to a fair trial due to the alleged lack of independence and impartiality of the Court of Appeal panel (B.).
An obligation to examine all the complaints brought forward. For the reasons outlined above, these two complaints should have been examined separately by the Grand Chamber. While they may have a common origin this does not mean that the consequences of establishing a breach of one or the other are the same. In addition, a violation with regard to one complaint does not automatically imply a violation of the other.
It is true that the Court has frequently refrained from examining peripheral or secondary complaints or complaints that are in one way or another absorbed by the main complaint to which it has provided an extensive answer. This is a means by which the Court seeks to deal with as many applications as possible, to concentrate on the core legal issues, to avoid overburdening a given judgment and to ensure greater clarity by leaving aside peripheral or secondary claims. However, where claims are neither peripheral nor secondary, skipping an essential and even distinct element of an application could rightly be perceived as a partial “denial of justice”. In the present case, the applicant’s two complaints obviously stand on an equal footing and both have a bearing on the question of the consequences, pursuant to Article 6 § 1, of any violations established thereunder.
Two flaws in the appointment procedure. Applying the three-tier test developed and explained under the general principles (see paragraphs 243 et seq. of the judgment), the judgment identifies two flaws in the appointment procedure:
(i) ministerial breaches in relation to the candidates shortlisted by the EC and the amended list proposed to Parliament by the Minister; and
(ii) non-compliance by Parliament, which had to endorse the choice of candidates proposed by the Minister, with the established voting rules.
Ministerial failure to comply with the legal procedure. We have no difficulty concurring with the majority in finding a series of flaws in the manner in which the Minister departed from the list proposed by the EC and proceeded to propose a different list to Parliament. Those flaws were identified by the Icelandic Supreme Court in its judgments of 19 December 2017, awarding damages to candidates whose names had been shortlisted but removed (see paragraphs 68-73 of the present judgment). According to that Supreme Court judgment, the Minister of Justice was entitled to propose her own candidates to Parliament, but her proposal had to be based on an independent investigation of all the elements necessary to substantiate it, in accordance with the well-established rules of administrative procedure. She consequently had to ensure that her own investigation and assessment were based on expert knowledge, on a par with that of the EC, and that the instructions concerning the evaluation procedure as set out under the applicable rules on the work of the EC – rules that had been put in place by the Ministry of Justice to guide that work – were taken into account in her assessment. The Minister should, at the very least, have compared the competencies of the four candidates that she had added to the list with the four that she had removed. Depending on the outcome of such a comparison, the Minister should then have given due reasons for her decision to seek Parliament’s approval for her proposal to depart from the EC’s selection. Only in this manner could Parliament have sufficiently played its role in the process and taken a sufficiently informed position on the Minister’s assessment. The inadequate character of the investigation conducted by the Minister of Justice prevented her from reaching a different decision on the competencies of the candidates from that previously reached by the EC on the basis of the same data (paragraphs 72-73 of the judgment). The Minister’s conduct was all the more regrettable as she must have been aware of the slippery slope on which she was embarking, having been warned by her in-house legal advisers (paragraphs 35 et seq. of the judgment).
According to an exchange of memoranda with the Parliament, the Minister had also been told at an earlier stage that she was expected to provide grounds for her proposals, and in particular to state whether she intended to deviate from the assessment of the EC (paragraph 33 of the judgment). She was also advised to inform the candidates about any change envisaged in the evaluation criteria and to give them an opportunity to present new information that could be relevant for any fresh evaluation (paragraph 37 of the judgment).
As to the reasons provided by the Minister for her selection – greater judicial experience and gender balance – it should be noted that her choice of replacement candidates did not entirely correspond to the reasons provided. For example, she did not replace the four candidates who had been on the initial list – four men – with four women, but instead with two women and two men, despite the fact that there were more than two women on the list of suitable candidates who had not been shortlisted by the EC.
Absence of any valid reasons for the Ministerial choice? It is, however, incorrect in our view to state that the Minister did not provide any valid reasons for her choice (paragraph 263 of the judgment). On the contrary, she considered the criteria applied by the EC Committee inadequate in that, in particular, insufficient importance had been accorded to the judicial experience of candidates being proposed for the new appellate body (paragraphs 44 and 47 of the judgment). It should be added that criticism of the rigidity of the criteria chosen and applied by the EC, as well as of the insufficient importance accorded to judicial experience, was echoed by several domestic stakeholders and bodies at the time. Furthermore, the appointment system has subsequently been changed so that evaluation committees propose more candidates than the number of judicial posts (as explained in the respondent Government’s submissions at paragraph 190 of the judgment). This represents – it should be noted – the very margin which the Minister had requested in relation to the Court of Appeal appointments. Moreover, the difference between candidate 15 (the last to be retained) and A.E., no. 18, was 0.205 (5.48-5.275/10) points = 2.05%. With such a narrow margin between them, it is almost impossible to speak of a difference in merit. Moreover, the greater reliance placed by the Minister on two criteria, even if she did not follow them entirely and consistently, does not seem totally unreasonable. Four men were replaced by two women and two men, and among the newly retained candidates, each had more – indeed much more – judicial experience. The judge whose impartiality and independence was impugned in the applicant’s case, A.E., had a score of 8.5 in this respect, whereas the four removed candidates had only obtained between 0.5 and 5.3 points. There appears to be nothing arbitrary or unreasonable about insisting on significant judicial experience for a State’s first Court of Appeal.
Non-compliance by Parliament with the established voting rules. A single vote was taken by Parliament whereas it is uncontested that, according to the procedure specially put in place by the 2016 Judiciary Act, there should have been a separate vote for each of the candidates (see paragraphs 19 and 105, and also 70, 90 and 189, of the judgment). It may be somewhat excessive, however, to find that the failure to comply with those rules “surely compounded the grave breach already committed by the Minister of Justice ...” (paragraph 270 of the judgment, emphasis added). Informed by the Speaker of Parliament that the candidates proposed by the Minister could be voted on individually or, if there were no objections, put to a single vote, nobody from either the majority or the minority in Parliament objected or requested a separate vote (paragraph 52 of the judgment). The Supreme Court had examined this flaw and concluded that it was “a defect of no significance” (paragraph 90 of the judgment). It had convincingly explained that the single vote “did not present any irregularities, provided an opportunity had been made available to vote separately on each candidate upon request” (paragraph 70 of the judgment). It should be added that, had the single vote in Parliament itself been a significant or manifest flaw, the appointment of all the Court of Appeal judges, including the 11 shortlisted by the EC, would have been flawed too (ibid.).
A series of shortcomings that, considered together, lead to the finding of a violation of Article 6 § 1. As indicated in the introduction, we concur with our colleagues regarding the violation of the “established by law” requirement because we find a series of shortcomings, of variable importance and gravity, in the appointment procedure for judges of the Court of Appeal. The Minister did not comply with the duty to give reasons under Icelandic administrative law generally and in particular under the provisions of the Judiciary Act, which allowed her, exceptionally, to deviate from the EC’s proposal. Although she deviated on the basis of ostensibly legitimate criteria, she did not consistently follow those criteria when choosing the four replacement candidates. The shortcoming at Parliamentary level – which could be attributed to the Speaker or to Parliament as a whole – was not such that it could be said to give rise on its own to an irregular appointment procedure. However, considering the procedure as a whole – the selection and proposal by the EC, the Ministerial decision to deviate from that proposal and the manner in which this was done, the questions raised by members of the CSC, the impression that the decision-making process was rushed through, etc. – we can agree that the parliamentary procedure followed did not offset the preceding flaws. This cumulative series of shortcomings was all the more regrettable as a judicial appointment procedure had been specially and carefully designed for the establishment of a new appellate court, a factor that should have prompted special vigilance and strict compliance with the applicable rules by all those involved. We disagree with our colleagues, however, in the “supercharging” of the flaws identified, in order to meet the manifest breach test which the Grand Chamber has decided to develop, and the consequences that the majority have attributed to the passing of the threshold, namely a general violation of Article 6 § 1 which they regard as dispensing with the need to assess the applicant’s individual case.
The reasons given by the majority for dispensing with an assessment of independence and impartiality. As stated succinctly in paragraph 295 of the judgment and explained above, the majority decided that there was no need to examine the applicant’s second complaint in relation to the alleged lack of independence of the Court of Appeal panel which heard his case. As the complaints stem from the same underlying problem – an irregular judicial appointment procedure – the finding of a violation in relation to one requirement (“established by law”) dispensed with the need to examine the other complaint (an allegedly unfair trial due to the lack of judicial independence). In other words, the consequence of the violation of Article 6 § 1 in relation to the first requirement was, automatically but implicitly, the unfairness of the applicant’s trial. At its most extreme – as expressed explicitly or implicitly in the separate opinions of Judge Serghides and Judge Pinto de Albuquerque – the applicant was not tried by a properly constituted court and thus there was no “judgment” as such, in his regard.
Need to assess independence and impartiality. However, while we fully agree that flaws in a judicial appointment procedure can give rise to a strong presumption of a lack of independence and objective impartiality, there can and should be no automaticity in this respect. In each case, it is necessary to ascertain whether the violation of legal requirements in the appointment procedure has impaired the independence and objective impartiality of the judge in the impugned trial whose fairness has been challenged. Evidence of such an approach is scattered throughout the Grand Chamber judgment itself; take the position of the Polish Commissioner for Human Rights: “instances of flagrant violation had to be fundamental in nature and form an integral part of the appointment process” (paragraph 197 of the judgment, emphasis added). Then in paragraph 234 of the judgment, for example, the Grand Chamber stresses that it must “systematically enquire whether the alleged irregularity in a given case was of such gravity as to ... compromise the independence of the court in question”. In addition, it is clearly stated that departure from the principle of legal certainty is justified only “when made necessary by circumstances of a substantial and compelling character, such as fundamental defects and miscarriages of justice” (paragraph 238 of the judgment).
The applicant’s arguments concerning A.E.’s alleged lack of independence. Turning to the applicant’s trial – the individual trial which must be at the heart of the Court’s Article 6 § 1 assessment – and to the question of A.E.’s independence, it will be remembered that the applicant was tried for driving without a valid licence and under the influence of drugs. He pleaded guilty and was heavily sentenced. He appealed against the sentence imposed. As the appeal proceedings progressed, he altered his grounds of appeal and raised the issues of the regularity of the appointment of A.E. to the Court of Appeal and, secondly and separately, the fairness of his trial given her alleged lack of independence and impartiality.
He based this latter complaint on the suggestion, little more, that A.E.’s appointment had formed part of a political deal, that her participation in the election of the Court of Appeal’s president must have been politically biased and that this in turn had influenced the assignment of cases to appeal court judges. He claimed that he therefore had reason to fear that the Court of Appeal panel, as it was composed in his case, lacked the necessary independence and impartiality to dispose fairly of his appeal.
Assessment of the applicant’s arguments. These arguments are both general and of an unsubstantiated nature. They do not reveal any specific reason related to the applicant, his case, or the charges under appeal which would justify his alleged fear of a lack of independence or impartiality of the Court of Appeal when dealing with his case. A.E., who had served as a judge for a number of years, was recognised by the EC as possessing the professional qualifications and competence for the office of judge of the Court of Appeal. In other words, she fulfilled the requirements set by the new Judiciary Act. This was not contested by the applicant. She had scored lower in the EC’s evaluation because she had no attorney, teaching or academic experience and because the EC had decided to downplay the importance of prior judicial experience. Once she was appointed as a Court of Appeal judge by the President of Iceland, all the constitutional and legal guarantees for, and obligations incumbent on, members of the judiciary applied to her. She held office for an indefinite term, was not bound to follow any instructions from the executive and could not be removed from office except by a judicial decision. Transfer to another post against her will was only possible in the event of a reorganisation of the judiciary. Moreover, the applicant had been convicted of a serious traffic offence. His case was processed summarily because he had fully confessed to the charges. The applicant did not contest the fact that his conviction was first and foremost based on his admission of guilt.
Besides, it is clear from the judgment that the majority do not actually impugn the independence of A.E. Her judgment in the applicant’s case and, and beyond that, any judgment of an appellate panel on which she sat, simply fall foul of an absolutist approach to irregularities in a judicial appointment procedure which were entirely remote from any appeal in relation to a driving offence to which the appellant had pleaded guilty. As regards A.E., in paragraph 285 of the judgment the majority indicate that:
“the question whether the irregularities at issue had any actual implications for A.E.’s independence and impartiality, this being at the centre of the Supreme Court’s examination of the applicant’s case, did not as such have a direct bearing on the assessment of his separate complaint under the ‘tribunal established by law’ requirement.” (emphasis added)
In paragraph 280 this point is made even more clearly:
“The Court has no reason to doubt that ... once appointed, the individual judges would endeavour to observe the fair trial requirements.”
The respondent Government had, quite rightly in our view, asked the Court not to confuse the legal effects of the irregularities in the appointment procedure for the shortlisted candidates whose names had been removed with the legal effects of the same irregularities on the status of A.E. or on the applicant’s case. Whereas for the former, the legal effects were identifiable and real, hence the award of damages, the procedural irregularities complained of and acknowledged by the domestic courts were entirely remote from the applicant’s appeal. The majority approach the question of “remoteness” in temporal terms (see paragraph 285 of the judgment) when in fact the central question, as the Grand Chamber stated at the outset, was whether any irregularities in the appointment of Court of Appeal judges, including A.E., had any consequences for the fair trial of the applicant and for the disposal of his appeal. This question of cause and effect is either not understood by the majority as being relevant or simply not addressed.
Conclusion: no lack of independence. The applicant did not sufficiently substantiate how the procedural irregularities at issue had the effect of undermining the independence and impartiality of the Court of Appeal in practice – that is, how his fears in this regard were objectively justified, as required under the Court’s case-law.
What conclusion should be drawn if it is found that the procedure leading to the appointment of a judge is irregular, such that the “established by law” requirement is not met but the flaws identified are not important enough to entail a lack of independence and/or impartiality?
The judgment’s findings on individual redress and general measures. The judgment remains quite discreet as regards the consequences of the violation of Article 6 § 1. The applicant has not been awarded any compensation for non-pecuniary damage. Under the head of Article 46 of the Convention, the judgment reiterates the general principle that the respondent State has a legal obligation to choose, “subject to supervision by the Committee of Ministers, the general and/or, if appropriate, individual measures to be adopted in its domestic legal order to put an end to the violation found by the Court and to redress as far as possible the effects” (paragraph 311 of the judgment). It acknowledges that, in certain special circumstances, the Court has found it useful to indicate to a respondent State the type of measures that might be taken to put an end to an – often systemic – situation (paragraph 312). The judgment then relies entirely on the statement made at the Grand Chamber hearing by the applicant’s representative, who, when asked whether his client sought the reopening of his case, responded in the negative. No heed is paid to the fact that he eventually retracted this statement, the reason being that there was insufficient justification to explain the change in the applicant’s position (paragraph 313). The judgment lastly observes that it falls to the respondent State to take any general measures, as appropriate, in order to resolve the problems that have led to the Court’s findings and to prevent similar violations from taking place in the future. It adds that this does not mean that the Icelandic State would be obliged, under the Convention, to reopen all similar cases that have since become res judicata (paragraph 314).
The missing reasons for not requiring reopening. Whilst we fully agree with the conclusions, we have difficulties with the underlying reasoning.
The majority judgment, in its conclusion, quite rightly makes a distinction between general and specific individual measures. We clearly subscribe to such a distinction, as the common thread of our separate opinion lies precisely in the need for a distinction between the general problem of the flawed appointment procedure for certain judges of the newly created Court of Appeal and the specific problem of the fairness of the applicant’s trial for a traffic offence.
We subscribe to the conclusion that general measures should be taken by the Icelandic authorities to avoid repetition of the flaws which occurred in this appointment procedure. We are mindful of the very delicate context in which the present judgment intervenes, with challenges proliferating in relation to judicial independence and the rule of law more generally. Oddly enough, what is at stake at European level is less a failure to comply with the “tribunal established by law” requirement and more the issue of the independence of the judiciary. For the reasons outlined above, it is that question which we consider to be central. There are striking examples in Europe today of legal systems where appointments are strictly in conformity with domestic law but where the law itself may be the problem, as it appears to be aimed, usually after a process of gradual or rapid amendment, at cementing executive control over the judiciary, thus fettering and undermining its independence. As a matter of fact, we note that on a general level the Icelandic authorities have already acknowledged and remedied the imperfections in the impugned judicial appointment procedure. After the Chamber judgment the Court of Appeal operated with only eleven of the fifteen appointed judges; four additional judges were temporarily appointed then a fresh call for judges was made and eventually new judges, including A.E., were appointed after a regular procedure (see paragraphs 99-100 of the judgment).
The underlying justification: distinction between general and individual consequences. There is, however, a very simple and straightforward reason for refusing the reopening of the applicant’s case and, beyond that, in a general and indefinite manner, all proceedings in which A.E. participated. While the overall and systemic problem requires general measures, on the specific and individual level the reopening of a case is only necessary if a judge lacks independence or impartiality or if overall fairness is impaired.
As we have sought to explain above, in the present case no element was advanced that could have led to such a conclusion. There was, in short, no evidence, not even anecdotal, to suggest that the irregularities in the appointment procedure had affected the hearing or determination of the charges in the applicant’s case and specifically upon his appeal.
It is, therefore, the extremely important distinction between general problems and their possible, but not automatic, consequences at the level of a specific case that explains why, in the present case, general measures of redress are necessary, whereas the reopening of the specific proceedings in which the applicant was tried is not. In terms of causation, in the specific case, the problem at the general level had no causal effect on the fairness of the applicant’s appeal.
As we indicated at the outset, our vote in favour of finding a violation of Article 6 § 1 stems from our opinion that there was a series of flaws, of variable importance and gravity, in the appointment procedure for the newly-established Court of Appeal in Iceland, but that vote is, crucially, qualified by the fact that the fairness of the applicant’s individual trial was not in any way impaired.
Our separate opinion should in no way be read as downplaying the fundamental importance of observing the rules that govern the appointment of judges with regard to the confidence of litigants and of the public in general in the independence and impartiality of the judiciary. These requirements constitute a major achievement of democracy and of the rule of law and form part of the essence of the right to effective judicial protection and the fundamental right to a fair trial. Every democratic system has to preserve these values. The transformation of the courts over time, from a “long arm” of political power to control and muzzle citizens, into bodies which protect individual liberties in an institutional environment characterised by the separation of powers, is a development whose importance cannot be overestimated. It is a development, moreover, which this Court seeks to safeguard and in relation to which it must remain constantly vigilant.
The main issue in the present case was whether the Court of Appeal, which upheld the applicant’s conviction and sentence for a road traffic offence (seventeen months’ imprisonment and the revocation of his driving licence for life), had been a “tribunal established by law” within the meaning of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, in so far as one of the judges on the bench of the newly constituted Court of Appeal which ruled on his case had not been appointed in accordance with the domestic law.
I am in agreement with the judgment that there has been a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, as the tribunal was not one “established by law”. However, I take objection to the Court’s finding that it did not need to examine the remaining complaints under that provision, namely that the tribunal lacked independence and impartiality. More precisely, my only disagreement with the judgment concerns point 2 of its operative part which holds that “there is no need to examine the remaining complaints under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention”, following point 1 of the operative part (adopted unanimously) by which it found “that there ha[d] been a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention as regards the right to a tribunal established by law”.
The explanation given by the Court as to why there is no need to examine the remaining complaints of independence and impartiality is given in paragraph 295 of the judgment:
“The Court notes that in the present case, the complaints under the ‘tribunal established by law’ and ‘independence and impartiality’ requirements stem from the same underlying problem, that is, the irregularities in the appointment of A.E. as a judge of the Court of Appeal. As the Court has found above, the irregularities in question were of such gravity that they undermined the very essence of the right to be tried before a tribunal established in accordance with the law. Having made that finding, the Court concludes that the remaining question as to whether the same irregularities have also compromised the independence and impartiality of the same tribunal does not require further examination ...”
In my view, after the finding that there was no tribunal established by law, the alleged “remaining complaints” mentioned in point 2 of the operative part, namely those on the right to an independent and impartial tribunal, became immediately and automatically devoid of object and existence ex tunc; and therefore they should have been rejected as inadmissible ratione materiae, by virtue of Article 35 §§ 3(a) and 4 (under the latter provision, the Court may declare a complaint inadmissible “at any stage of the proceedings”). This consequence is not something that the Court, having held that there is no tribunal established by law, can overlook or consider unnecessary to examine. It should have decided the issue by stating the obvious and rejecting these complaints, in the manner that I propose.
It is self-evident that the rule of grammar and logic according to which there can be no adjective without a noun applies here. “Independent” and “impartial” are attributes of a noun, in the present case “a tribunal”, within the meaning of Article 6 § 1. When there is no “tribunal”, as in the present case because of the absence of a tribunal established by law, there is no noun and thus no object to which the adjectives “independent” and “impartial” can correspond, with the result that these adjectives become devoid of object and existence. It is crucial to note that all the requirements of the right to a fair trial specified by Article 6 § 1 are indispensable, and without them the said right cannot be secured. However, the only free-standing requirement of Article 6 § 1 is that there must be a lawful tribunal. This requirement is a central feature of a fair trial as it refers to the very essence of the relevant right. The other requirements of Article 6 § 1, such as the independence or impartiality of the tribunal, or that the hearing should take place within a reasonable time, all pre-suppose the fulfilment of the central demand, namely that the tribunal must have been established by law. In other words, the “independence” and “impartiality” requirements are intrinsic and inseparable qualities related to the very existence of “a tribunal established by law”. It is impossible to examine the qualities of a tribunal that does not exist, just as it is impossible to examine the qualities of a nonexistent person or building. Therefore, any hope that a tribunal is independent and impartial will hinge on the fact that it is a tribunal established by law in the first place. The former qualities are dependent on the latter and cannot be left in a vacuum.
Regrettably, the Court, by finding that there was no need to examine the complaints of a lack of independence and impartiality, gave the impression that it was referring to the merits of those complaints, thus suggesting that they remained admissible. However, as submitted in this opinion, these complaints had become inadmissible and should have been rejected as such.
Finally, the proposed approach is in line with the principle of effectiveness, which underlies all Convention provisions, and according to which all human rights enshrined and guaranteed therein must be protected practically and effectively and not in a theoretical or illusory manner. I would point to some other aspects of this principle, namely that it assists the Court: (i) in seeking to ascertain and determine the core or very essence of an allegedly violated right which needs effective protection and to give it the weight and consideration that it deserves; (ii) in deciding whether there has been a violation of the core of the right; and (iii) if there has been such a violation, to draw, in its corresponding decision, all the necessary conclusions or repercussions from such finding.
These aspects of the principle of effectiveness are also corollaries of its capacity to secure rights in a practical and effective manner. In the present case the Court, even though it found a violation of the right in question, on the ground that there had been no tribunal established by law, in holding that there was no need to examine the issues of independence and impartiality, it then failed, with all due respect, to attribute the requisite weight and consideration to the consequences of that violation. And what is more, it failed to do so even though it had rightly acknowledged that the very essence of the right in question had been undermined (see paragraph 295 of the judgment).