The case concerns the death of the applicant’s son during an arrest attempt and the lack of an adequate investigation in that respect.
The applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Warsaw. She had been granted legal aid and was represented by Mr Ł. Brydak, a lawyer practising in Warsaw.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mrs J. Chrzanowska, and subsequently by Mr J. Sobczak, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On the evening of 18 June 2013 the applicant’s son, D.J., was driving his car in the company of a friend, M.S. They were stopped at a police checkpoint for a random search of the car. During the search the officers found two small packets containing white powder (later identified as amphetamine).
The officers decided to arrest D.J., but he refused to comply with their orders and began walking away from the car. Two officers (W.J. and M.K.) attempted to overpower and handcuff him; however they failed. Shortly afterwards, six more officers arrived at the scene. A struggle ensued and D.J. fell face down on the ground. The officers allegedly hit him with a truncheon and used tear gas. As submitted by the applicant, the officers also kicked D.J. in the head (at least once) and attempted to strangle him. The Government argued that those allegations had not been confirmed during the domestic investigation.
Eventually, the officers managed to subdue and handcuff D.J. He was lying face down on the ground and his head was bleeding. After a while, the officers turned him on his back and realised that he was not breathing. Two passing paramedics offered help and began resuscitation. Two of the officers, W.J. and A.O., also participated in the resuscitation attempt. Subsequently, an ambulance arrived and its crew continued the resuscitation attempts, which ended unsuccessfully forty minutes later when D.J. was pronounced dead.
An investigation into the events set out above was opened on 19 June 2013 by the Warsaw Wola District Prosecutor. Subsequently, it was transferred to the Warsaw Śródmieście District Prosecutor.
On 19 June 2013, a post-mortem examination and a forensic inspection of D.J.’s body (oględziny zwłok) were carried out. The forensic expert established that his death had been caused by acute cardiorespiratory failure related to chronic circulatory insufficiency. The expert noted that D.J.’s neck injuries might also have had an impact on his death.
On the same day, a search of D.J.’s house and shop was carried out, during which 53.94 g of cocaine was found.
During the investigation into the circumstances of D.J.’s death, the applicant, together with her two daughters, submitted numerous evidentiary requests to the prosecutor. In particular, they asked to have the recordings from the security cameras secured, to have D.J.’s car examined for any traces of blood, to have evidence taken from certain witnesses and also to have the details of other potential witnesses established (persons whose car registration plates had been recorded on CCTV).
On 7 February 2014 experts from the Department of Forensic Medicine at Warsaw Medical University (“the Forensic Institute”) submitted a toxicology report to the district prosecutor. According to the report, there were traces of cocaine and cannabis in D.J.’s body, which indicated that he had been a cocaine user.
On 28 May 2014 the district prosecutor asked the Forensic Institute to prepare an expert report and reply to the following seven questions:
“1.  How did D.J.’s injuries originate?
... how [can] D.J.’s neck injuries ... be classified with reference to the provisions of the criminal code and also [could] these injuries ... have occurred in the circumstances as described by the police officers[?]
What impact on the victim’s death did his neck injuries have?
In view of the post-mortem results and the reconstruction of the incident, can it be concluded that tear-gas spray was used on D.J., and if yes, did it have an impact on his death?
State, if possible, within what timeframe (how soon) did D.J.’s death occur?
Did the actions of any of the police officers expose the victim to a direct risk of death or grievous bodily harm?
What was the direct cause of D.J.’s death?”
On 6 August 2014 the forensic expert, Dr A.B., submitted a report answering the questions put by the prosecutor. With reference to D.J.’s neck injuries (questions nos. 1, 2 and 3) the expert stated that they had been inflicted by a hard blunt object impacting with considerable force. According to her, those injuries could have occurred when the officer M.K. had attempted to restrain D.J. by applying a type of neck hold from behind. Since M.K. was much smaller than D.J., he had been in fact hanging on D.J.’s neck. This strong pressure on D.J.’s neck had exposed him to a direct risk of death or grievous bodily harm. However, in view of the “dynamics of the incident”, the expert could not confidently indicate which person had been directly responsible (question no. 6). It could also not be excluded that those injuries had occurred when D.J. had fallen on the ground.
The expert further stated (question no. 7) that D.J.’s death had been caused by acute cardiorespiratory failure related to chronic circulatory insufficiency. The results of the post-mortem examination did not indicate that his death had been caused by physical injuries. Most of his injuries had been superficial. It had not been established that the neck injuries had caused him to choke. This theory was confirmed by the results of the reconstruction, as the neck injuries had occurred at the beginning of the incident.
Lastly, the expert was of the opinion that the death of the applicant’s son could have occurred as a result of so-called “excited delirium syndrome” (“EDS”). She stated that such a condition could not be identified anatomically during a post-mortem examination, but only afterwards on the basis of the victim’s characteristics and when other causes of death were excluded. Deaths often occurred during police intervention and individuals who suffered EDS were often heavy-set men. During arrest they demonstrated extraordinary physical strength and resistance to pain. Death happened within the first hour of the incident. Such cases were most frequently associated with cocaine abuse. D.J. was found to have been a cocaine user and to have been suffering from a chronic circulatory insufficiency.
On 25 September 2014 the Warsaw Śródmieście District Prosecutor discontinued the investigation into the death of the applicant’s son, which related to offences defined in Article 155 of the Criminal Code (manslaughter) in conjunction with its Article 231 § 1 (abuse of powers). The prosecutor based his decision in particular on the following documents: a record of D.J.’s belongings (protokół oględzin rzeczy); a record of the reconstruction of the incident (protokół eksperymentu procesowego); footage from a security camera; medical documents, including toxicology results; and photographs from the scene of the incident. The prosecutor also took statements from the police officers involved and from other witnesses. A post-mortem examination was conducted and the prosecutor obtained an additional forensic report.
The prosecutor established that at about 8.30 p.m. on 18 June 2013, two police officers, W.J. and M.K., had stopped the car driven by the applicant’s son in order to search it. There had also been a passenger in the car, M.S. Officer W.J. had recognised one of them as the man he had arrested a few years earlier in connection with various car break-ins. D.J. had been asked to open the car boot. In his wallet the officers had found two small packets containing white powder – as later established, 0.82 g and 0.62 g of amphetamine. In view of that discovery, the officers had decided to arrest him. D.J. had attempted to convince them not to arrest him by offering money. The arrest attempt had failed as D.J. had refused to comply with the officers’ orders and had begun to walk away from the car. They had managed to bring him back but he had still resisted their attempts to handcuff him. He had been agitated and had demonstrated extraordinary physical strength. W.J. and M.K. had tried various holds on him, such as an arm lock with a truncheon (dźwignia na rękę z użyciem pałki), and also tear gas. During the struggle which ensued, D.J. had hit his head on the triangular window pane of the police car and had kicked the right rear bumper, damaging it. Consequently, he had lost his balance and fallen on his back. At that time W.J. and M.K. had called for back-up. D.J. had again attempted to flee but the officers had managed to catch him.
During a further struggle, D.J. had fallen on top of one of the officers (M.K.), who had at that point managed to handcuff one of his hands. D.J. had been left lying face down, and he had also been bleeding heavily from a cut on his forehead (which had occurred when he had hit the car). Six more officers had arrived at the scene and had continued the attempts to handcuff D.J. The applicant’s son had been very aggressive and agitated. He had shouted vulgar words at the officers and tried to kick them. He had also inflicted injuries on himself by repeatedly hitting his head on the pavement. Despite the fact that the officers had outnumbered him, they had not been able to handcuff him.
Eventually, as D.J. had been trying to get up, he had hit one of the officers, A.T., in the stomach. A.T. had thought that D.J. posed a serious threat and had hit him twice with a truncheon on his left side. However, D.J. had been resistant to the pain and remained very forceful. At last, after some time, four police officers had managed to restrain and handcuff him. They had also called an ambulance.
At that time, two people had approached the group: U.M. and R.S. They had informed the officers of their status as paramedics and that they could provide medical aid. Shortly before beginning the resuscitation procedure, D.J. had been in verbal contact and had attempted to free himself. When the paramedics had turned him on his back, they had realised that he was not breathing. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (“CPR”) had been performed in turns by the paramedic, R.S., and officers W.J. and A.O. At the same time, D.J.’s handcuffs had been taken off. At 8.53 p.m. an ambulance had arrived and its crew had continued performing CPR. The resuscitation attempts had ended unsuccessfully at 9.33 p.m. when the applicant’s son had died.
The prosecutor considered that the police action had been justified in the circumstances of the case. There had been a reasonable suspicion that D.J. had committed an offence (he had been in possession of two packets containing what had looked like intoxicants) and he had attempted to flee. The prosecutor further noted that apart from the use of truncheons, the officers had not hit D.J. but had only used restraint techniques (techniki obezwładniające). The prosecutor did not find credible the evidence given by M.S. (D.J.’s passenger), who had testified that one of the officers had kicked D.J. three times in the head. Nor did he find credible evidence given by three other witnesses, who had claimed that D.J. had been hit by the officers. Those witnesses had arrived at the scene after CPR had already commenced.
The prosecutor further held that D.J.’s death had been caused by acute respiratory and circulatory failure related to chronic circulatory insufficiency. Referring to the forensic opinion, he stated that D.J.’s physical injuries and, in particular, his neck injuries, had no connection with his death, which had resulted from “excited delirium syndrome”. This condition, often related to stress caused by police actions, was associated with excessive hormonal stimulation resulting in acute respiratory failure. The prosecutor considered that D.J.’s situation was a typical example of that condition. During the attempted arrest D.J. had displayed extraordinary strength and resistance to pain. It had also been demonstrated that he had been using cocaine and other drugs.
The prosecutor concluded that even if, as stated by the forensic expert, some of the neck injuries suffered by D.J. had exposed him to a direct risk of death or grievous bodily harm, it was not possible to blame any of the intervening officers, taking into account the dynamics of the events and D.J.’s resistance.
On 4 September 2014 the applicant and her two daughters appealed against that decision. The applicant submitted that the police officers had not been able to apply the restraint techniques correctly and their inept actions had caused D.J.’s death. In the final moments of the struggle, eight police officers had been unable to handcuff D.J. who, although tall and heavily built, had not been particularly athletic. In the applicant’s view the intervention on that day had been wholly unprofessional and had resembled a common tussle rather than a police operation.
The applicant further stressed that D.J. had had two large haematomata on the front of his torso, in particular just below his right ribcage. It had not been explained why officer A.T. had hit D.J. when the latter had already been lying on the ground, bleeding heavily (as confirmed by witnesses). Likewise, the officers had used tear gas on D.J. when he had already been lying face down on the ground and had been bleeding heavily from his head wound. In the applicant’s view, such use of force had clearly been disproportionate.
Furthermore, only the police officers had testified that D.J. had inflicted injuries on himself by repeatedly hitting his head on the pavement. That allegation had not been confirmed by other witnesses. Even if her son had indeed hit his head on the pavement, it was the duty of the police to take all necessary measures to prevent persons under their control from harming themselves.
The applicant submitted that the police officers had been completely unprepared for administering emergency medical assistance to the victim. When R.S. (a paramedic and witness) had asked if anyone could help perform CPR, only one of eight officers had stated that he knew how to do it. Furthermore, R.S. had testified that when he had begun performing CPR, D.J. had still been handcuffed. It had only been at his explicit and firm request that the officers had removed the handcuffs. It had also been R.S.’s personal first-aid kit that had been used during the incident. Consequently, it could not be said that the officers had provided the requisite emergency medical assistance to D.J.
The applicant also stressed that the prosecutor had failed to deal with numerous inconsistencies between the statements made by the police officers and those made by other witnesses. The cause and consequences of D.J.’s neck injuries had not been properly explained, particularly the consequences of the neck hold applied by officer M.K. None of the officers had stated that the victim had shouted “air” and cried for help, while four other witnesses had confirmed that fact.
In the applicant’s view, such uncritical acceptance of the version of events as presented by the police officers was surprising. In particular, the prosecutor had found credible the testimony given by the paramedics (R.S. and U.M.), even though those witnesses had contradicted the officers.
Furthermore, the prosecutor had failed to hear another direct witness of the incident, despite the fact that the applicant had provided her contact details. Lastly, the applicant stressed that a witness confrontation should have been organised in order to explain the discrepancies between witness statements and to establish the course of events.
The Warsaw District Court held hearings on 28 October and 13 November 2014.
On 13 November 2014 the Warsaw District Court, in a briefly reasoned decision, dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the prosecutor’s decision. The court shared the prosecutor’s conclusions. It further stressed that in view of the dynamics of the incident, it had not been necessary to organise a witness confrontation. In particular, the court stressed that only M.S. had testified that D.J. had been kicked by one of the officers. However, that testimony had conflicted with the other testimony. The court stated:
“In view of the collected evidence, it cannot be established that the actions of a certain person/certain people caused D.J.’s death. In other words, there is no causeand-effect connection. D.J.’s death was caused by acute respiratory and circulatory failure related to a chronic circulatory insufficiency. The injuries which he sustained were of no relevance to his death and the circulatory failure was most probably caused by ‘excited delirium syndrome’. At the time of his arrest D.J. fulfilled all the attributes of a person suffering from ‘excited delirium syndrome’ and since other causes of death had been eliminated, this one remained highly probable.”
The decision was final as no appeal lay against it.
On a later unknown date the Warsaw District Prosecutor analysed the case and decided to complement the evidence with a view to reopening the investigation. In that connection, four witnesses were questioned (on 12 April, 16 May, 20 August and 20 November 2018). Three of them stated that they had no recollection of the events of 18 June 2013. One of the witnesses stated that he had noticed an officer swinging his hand in an apparent attempt to hit D.J. However, the witness’s view had been obstructed by passing cars and he had not seen whether D.J. had indeed been hit. In any event, he stressed that he would not have been able to identify that officer.
On 20 May 2019 the prosecutor ordered a supplementary medical opinion from Dr A.B. of the Forensic Institute, in order to eliminate any inconsistencies in her opinion of 4 August 2014 (see paragraphs 1315 above). The expert was asked to specify whether D.J.’s neck injuries had occurred as a result of a hard blunt tool impacting with considerable force or because of the neck hold applied by officer M.K., or alternatively as a result of D.J.’s fall. In addition, she was asked which of the persons who had been in direct contact with D.J. could have caused his neck injuries.
On 26 June 2019 the forensic expert submitted her report in reply to the prosecutor’s questions. She reiterated the findings made in her opinion of 4 August 2014, stressing that her previous opinion had been delivered on the basis of the case file. She stated that it was true that she had found that the neck injury had been caused by a hard blunt object impacting with considerable force. At the same time, she agreed that none of the witnesses had confirmed that D.J. had been hit by such an object. In these circumstances, the second possibility, discovered during the reconstruction – that officer M.K. had applied a neck-hold from behind D.J. and, given the differences in height, had in fact been hanging from D.J.’s neck – could, in her view, have caused the injuries in question. She stressed that it had not been her intention to conclude that D.J.’s injuries had occurred as a result of a fall, but that those injuries could have occurred when he had already been lying on the ground. Nevertheless, none of the persons who had taken part in the incident had admitted to having touched D.J.’s neck at that point in time.
The expert concluded that it could not be unequivocally established which person who had been in direct contact with D.J. had caused his neck injuries. In the expert’s view, the victim’s neck injuries had most probably occurred when officer M.K. had attempted to overpower him.
On 30 October 2019 the Warsaw District Prosecutor questioned M.K. The officer stated that he only had a very vague recollection of the incident and could not remember any details. He submitted that at the relevant time there had been no police procedures relating to interventions when a person was suspected of being under the influence of drugs. Moreover, as regards the case in question, at the relevant time neither he nor his colleagues had had any reason to believe that D.J. could have been under the influence of drugs.
On 14 November 2019 the Government informed the Court that the Warsaw District Prosecutor had decided that the supplementary evidence obtained did not constitute circumstances justifying resuming the investigation.
The relevant provisions of the Criminal Code provide as follows:
Article 155 (manslaughter)
“Anyone who unintentionally causes the death of another person shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment for between three months and five years.”
Article 231 (abuse of power)
“1.  A public official who, by overstepping his powers or not fulfilling his duties, acts to the detriment of public or private interests shall be liable to serve a prison term of up to three years.
...
If the perpetrator of the act specified in [paragraph] 1 acts unintentionally and causes serious damage, he shall be liable to a fine, or the penalty of restriction of liberty, or deprivation of liberty for up to two years.”
Pursuant to Article 327 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, any discontinued investigation may be reopened pursuant to an order given by a prosecutor, provided that it will not be conducted against a person who was a suspect in the previous proceedings.
The Act of 24 May 2013 on the use of direct coercion and firearms (Ustawa o srodkach przymusu bezposredniego i broni palnej) specifies types of coercive measures and the circumstances in which they can be applied.
In particular, section 7 of the Act provides that a police officer should use coercive measures in a manner which causes as little harm as possible, and should discontinue their use if the person complies with orders.
Section 19 (4) of the Act provides as follows:
“A truncheon shall not be used to hit or push against a [person’s] head, neck, stomach and non-muscled and particularly delicate parts of the body, unless it is necessary in order to counter an attack against the health or life of another person.”