The case originated in an application (no. 43478/11) against the Republic of Armenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Armenian national, Ms Karine Hambardzumyan (“the applicant”), on 27 June 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr L. Simonyan, a lawyer practising in Yerevan. The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, and subsequently by Mr Y. Kirakosyan, Representative of the Republic of Armenia to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged that she had been subjected to unlawful secret surveillance measures and that the evidence thus obtained had been used in the criminal proceedings against her, thereby making the proceedings unfair.
On 30 August 2016 the Government were given notice of the complaints concerning the applicant’s secret surveillance and the admissibility of the evidence obtained thereby and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1956 and lived in Yerevan prior to her detention. At the time when the applicant lodged her application with the Court she was serving her sentence in Abovyan correctional facility.
The applicant worked as the deputy chief of the women’s unit of Abovyan correctional facility.
On 2 February 2010 one of the prisoners in the same unit, A.S., reported to the Head of the Department Against Organised Crime of the Armenian Police (“the Department Against Organised Crime”) that the applicant had demanded a bribe in return for transfer to an open-type prison.
On the same date the Head of the Department Against Organised Crime applied to the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan (“the District Court”), seeking authorisation to carry out operative and intelligence measures. The application stated the following:
“On [2 February 2010] ... [A.S.] applied to the [Department Against Organised Crime] stating that ... [the applicant] had requested a bribe from her ...
Thus, [A.S.’s] actions contain the elements of a crime prescribed by Article 311.
In order to establish fully the circumstances of the crime in question and identify those involved it is necessary to carry out operative and intelligence measures, in particular, video and audio recordings.
In view of the foregoing and with reference to the Operative and Intelligence Measures Act of [the Republic of Armenia] and Article 284 of the [Code of Criminal Procedure] I decide to lodge an application with the [District Court] seeking authorisation to carry out video and audio recordings for a period of one month.”
On 3 February 2010 the District Court granted the application. The relevant decision stated the following:
“On [2 February 2010] ... [A.S.] applied to the [Department Against Organised Crime] stating that ... [the applicant] had requested a bribe from her ...
Thus, [A.S.’s] actions contain the elements of a crime prescribed by Article 311.
In view of the fact that in order to establish fully the circumstances of the crime in question and identify those involved it has become necessary to carry out operative and intelligence measures, the Head of the [Department Against Organised Crime] has submitted an application to carry out operative and intelligence measures, i.e. video and audio recordings.
Having studied the collected materials and the application submitted, the court finds that the application is substantiated and must be granted.
In view of the foregoing and with reference to Articles 14, 41, 278, 281, 284, 286 of the [Code of Criminal Procedure] and the Operative and Intelligence Measures Act of [the Republic of Armenia] the court decides:
To grant the application.
To authorise the conduct of video and audio recordings for a period of one month for the purpose of disclosure of the above-mentioned crime.
To assign the execution of the decision to the [Department Against Organised Crime].
The decision is subject to appeal to the Criminal Court of Appeal within fifteen days.”
On the same date the police launched a covert operation targeting the applicant. A.S. contacted the applicant by telephone to set up a meeting during which the applicant, inter alia, asked A.S. whether she would be able finally to pay the money. This conversation was intercepted by the police. For their meeting, which took place later the same day, the police equipped A.S. with a tape recorder and instructed her to record her conversation with the applicant. A.S. and the applicant met near the applicant’s home and discussed matters related to the amounts to be paid.
On 4 February 2010 police officers gave A.S. banknotes treated with a special chemical, to be handed over to the applicant.
On the same day the applicant received the money from A.S. and the conversation during their meeting was again recorded on a tape recorder. The moment after the applicant received the money the police approached and arrested her, while capturing this incident on video camera.
On 7 February 2010 the applicant was arrested and charged under Article 311 of the Criminal Code with bribe-taking involving a particularly large amount of money. The applicant did not admit her guilt and submitted that A.S. had owed her a certain amount of money, which she was actually returning.
On 8 February 2010 the recordings made as a result of the covert operation were submitted to the investigating authority. They were later examined by a forensic video/audio expert and an expert report was produced.
On 11 May 2010 the investigator brought new charges against the applicant under Articles 178 § 3 (1), 311 §§ 3 (3 and 4) and 4 (2) and 34313 § 2 (2) of the Criminal Code for fraud, bribe-taking and attempt to act as an intermediary in bribe-taking.
On 12 May 2010 the investigation was completed. On the same day the applicant and her lawyer were given access to the case file. On this day she became aware of the court warrant of 3 February 2010 and the secret surveillance conducted on the basis of that warrant.
On 25 May 2010 the bill of indictment was finalised and the case was sent to court.
In the proceedings before the District Court the applicant filed an application seeking to exclude from evidence the audio recordings made as a result of the covert operation and the relevant expert report. She argued that the warrant of 3 February 2010 was vague since it did not name her as the person to be subjected to secret surveillance. She alleged that the court warrant could have served as a basis for surveillance of any person. Thus, she had been subjected to secret surveillance without a court warrant, in violation of the requirements of Article 23 of the Constitution, including the right to respect for private life and to secrecy of communications, and Article 286 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. She further relied on Article 22 of the Constitution and Article 105 of the Code of Criminal Procedure as regards the admissibility of evidence.
According to the applicant’s submission, the District Court decided to adjourn the examination of this application and deal with it in the judgment.
By its judgment of 9 November 2010 the District Court found the applicant guilty as charged and handed down a nine-year sentence. In substantiating the applicant’s guilt, the District Court relied, inter alia, on the recordings made on the basis of the court warrant of 3 February 2010 and the conversations between the applicant and A.S. during their meetings of 3 and 4 February 2010, as well as the expert report of the forensic video/audio expert. The following evidence was further cited: the statement of A.S. who had been recognised as a victim in the proceedings, witness statements, the relevant banknotes, the expert report of the forensic chemical expert, A.S.’s personal file, the information received from mobile network operators concerning telephone calls made by the applicant to A.S.’s number, the application of 2 February 2010 and the court warrant of 3 February 2010. The District Court stated, inter alia, that the applicant’s allegations of procedural violations had not been confirmed.
The applicant lodged an appeal in which she raised similar arguments in respect of the warrant of 3 February 2010 and claimed that the results of the surveillance should not have been relied on by the District Court.
On 1 March 2011 the Criminal Court of Appeal rejected the applicant’s appeal finding, in particular, the following:
“As regards the arguments raised in the appeal, that [the applicant] was video and audio-taped and that her telephone conversations were intercepted by the police in violation of her rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution and the Code of Criminal Procedure, namely in the absence of a relevant court warrant authorising the video and audio recordings, it must be noted that the materials of the case include a judicial act granting such authorisation. Thus, the video and audio recordings in question were made in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law and in this case the relevant restrictions were justified. Consequently, the arguments of the defence are unsubstantiated and not based on the objective information available in the case and cannot have any legal consequences if granted.
Furthermore, the arguments raised do not have any impact on the credibility of the information contained in the above-mentioned recordings and on reaching an accurate decision in this case.”
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law which was declared inadmissible for lack of merit by a decision of the Court of Cassation of 28 April 2011.
Article 22 prohibits the use of unlawfully obtained evidence.
Article 23 provides that everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life. Everyone has the right to secrecy of his correspondence, telephone conversations and postal, telegraphic and other means of communication, which can be restricted only in cases and in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law and upon a court warrant.
Article 278 § 1 prescribes that applications seeking the implementation of investigative, operative and intelligence and procedural measures limiting a person’s constitutional rights are examined by the court.
Article 281 prescribes that operative and intelligence measures which restrict the right to secrecy of correspondence, telephone conversations, postal, telegraphic and other communications of persons may be carried out upon a court decision. The types of operative and intelligence measures carried out upon a court order are set out in the Operative and Intelligence Measures Act.
Article 284 prescribes that operative and intelligence measures which restrict the right to secrecy of correspondence, telephone conversations, postal, telegraphic and other communications of persons may be carried out only upon a judicial warrant, save in cases where one of the interlocutors has consented beforehand to his conversations being intercepted or monitored. It further prescribes the procedure for the judicial examination of applications for authorisation to carry out secret surveillance of telephone conversations filed by the head of the authority charged with carrying out operative and intelligence measures. The application must indicate the grounds justifying such measures, the information sought to be obtained through such measures, the place and time-limit for such measures, as well as all other relevant elements. The materials substantiating the need to carry out such measures must be attached to the application. The court must indicate the reasons for granting or refusing the application.
Article 286 prescribes that a court warrant must include: the date and the place of drafting the decision, the judge’s last name, the official who has submitted the application, an indication of the investigative activity or the operative and intelligence measure or the measure of restraint to be applied, specifying the activity or the measure and the persons in whose respect it is applied, the time-limit during which the measure is effective, the official or authority competent to carry out the warrant and the judge’s signature certified by a seal.
Article 289 prescribes that appeals against judicial warrants authorising the implementation of investigative and operative and intelligence measures and the application of measures of judicial restraint and their review are carried out in accordance with the rules contained in Articles 287 and 288 (which prescribe the procedure for lodging appeals against detention orders).
Article 376.1 (8) states that judicial acts other than those stated in the same provision are subject to appeal in cases prescribed by the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Article 379 sets out the time-limits for lodging appeals against judgments and decisions of first instance courts.
According to Article 379 § 1 (3), appeals against all other procedural decisions (գործն ըստ էության չլուծող մյուս ակտեր) of a first instance court can be lodged within ten days from the date they are pronounced.
Article 379 § 2 provides that appeals lodged out of time are not examined in which regard the court adopts a decision.
Section 14 (1) prescribes the following types of operative and intelligence measures:
1)  operative enquiry;
2)  acquisition of operative information;
3)  collection of samples for comparative examination;
4)  control purchase;
5)  controlled supply and purchase;
6)  examination of items and documents;
7)  external surveillance;
8)  internal surveillance;
9)  identification of a person;
10)  examination of buildings, structures, locality, premises and means of transport;
11)  interception of correspondence, postal, telegraphic and other communications;
12)  interception of telephone conversations;
13)  operative infiltration;
14)  operative experiment;
15)  ensuring access to financial data and secret surveillance of financial transactions;
16)  simulation of taking and giving a bribe.
Operative and intelligence measures are prescribed only by law.
Section 21 prescribes that external surveillance is the tracing of persons or monitoring the course of various events and developments in open air or public places, without infringing the inviolability of residence, and with or without the use of special and other technical means, as well as the recording of surveillance results with or without the use of video recording, photographic, electronic and other data-carrying devices.
Section 26 prescribes that interception of telephone conversations is the secret surveillance of conversations, including internet telephone conversations and electronic communication carried out with the use of special and other technical means.
In its decision no. S-903/05 of 28 March 2014 the Court of Cassation examined a complaint about the refusal of the Criminal Court of Appeal to admit an appeal lodged by a person in respect of whom criminal proceedings had been terminated, against a judicial warrant authorising search and seizure which had been issued years before the relevant proceedings were terminated and of which that person had become aware when granted access to the case file. The relevant parts of the decision read as follows:
“... the purpose of the review of the disputed judicial act is to ensure uniform application of the law ... In this respect the Court of Cassation considers that there exists an issue of ensuring uniform application of the law in relation to providing a person with an effective remedy for judicial protection in the context of [application of] time-limits for lodging appeals against procedural judicial acts. Therefore, [the Court of Cassation] finds it necessary to state its legal position ... which could serve as guidance for the establishment of correct judicial practice in similar cases.
... a person’s right to appeal against a procedural judicial act rendered within the framework of pre-trial judicial supervision of the proceedings arises from the moment when the given judicial act actually becomes available to him... [That is] ... the person has actually received the procedural judicial act ... or has been actually acquainted with it.
...
The moment when procedural judicial acts ... “actually become available” may vary. In particular, a person may be informed of a procedural decision ... during the performance of the given investigative measure (for instance, a search), upon completion of the investigation (for instance, in cases of surveillance of correspondence, telephone conversations, postal, telegraphic and other communications and in other cases), when sending the case to the court and so on. That is, the calculation of the time-limit for lodging an appeal against the abovementioned judicial act should start from:
a) the moment when the person actually received or became acquainted with the [judicial] act in question (for instance, as regards cases of surveillance of correspondence, telephone conversations, postal, telegraphic and other communications...);
b) the moment of starting the given investigative measure authorised by the judicial warrant, for example a search, if during the search the person is officially notified of the grounds for investigative measures being carried out ...
... in each case the court should find out at which moment a person’s right to become acquainted with the disputed decision had arisen and whether the latter had become acquainted with the relevant judicial act in a reasonable time...”