The case originated in an application (no. 30682/11) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Ms Hamide Yüksel (“the applicant”), on 29 March 2011.
The applicant was represented by Ms T. Aslan Ağaç, a lawyer practising in İzmir. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicants complained that her conviction under section 7(2) of Law no. 3713 on account of a speech she had made had constituted a breach of her rights under Articles 7 and 10 of the Convention.
On 21 September 2016 the above-mentioned complaints under Articles 7 and 10 of the Convention were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1974 and lives in İzmir.
On 21 March 2007 the applicant attended celebrations for the festival of Newroz in Buca, a district of the city of İzmir, as one of the moderators. While she was hosting the event, the applicant addressed the crowd in Kurdish and invited them to observe a minute’s silence in memory of “Newroz martyrs” and martyrs for freedom and democracy.
On 10 April 2007 the İzmir Assize Court issued a warrant for the applicant’s arrest and a search of her residence.
On 11 April 2007 she was arrested at her house.
On 12 April 2007 the applicant was brought before the public prosecutor and the investigating judge. In her statements to the public prosecutor and the judge, she maintained that she had attended the Newroz celebrations as a moderator and that she had not shouted any illegal slogans. She stated that she had called for a minute’s silence in memory of revolutionary martyrs. The investigating judge remanded the applicant in custody following her questioning.
On 24 April 2007 the public prosecutor instituted criminal proceedings before the İzmir Assize Court against the applicant and seven other individuals, charging them under section 7(2) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act (Law no. 3713) with disseminating propaganda in favour of an illegal organisation and, under Article 215 of the Criminal Code, praising a crime or a criminal. Subsequently the criminal proceedings commenced before the İzmir Assize Court.
On 13 August 2007, at the end of the first hearing in the trial, the firstinstance court ordered the applicant’s release.
On 10 September 2008 the İzmir Assize Court convicted the applicant under section 7(2) of Law no. 3713 of disseminating propaganda in favour of an illegal organisation and sentenced her to one year’s imprisonment. The court observed that the applicant had made a speech in Kurdish, that a man had translated her words into Turkish at the end of her speech, and that according to the translation she had uttered the following sentences:
“Welcome. I wish you a happy Newroz. We thank those who enabled us to be where we are today. I invite you to stand to observe a moment of silence in memory of Newroz martyrs, martyrs for freedom and democracy, and those who enabled us to be where we are today.”
The Assize Court further noted that following the applicant’s speech the crowd had made a “V” sign and that during the speeches made by the other speakers, the crowd had chanted slogans in favour of the PKK and its leader. According to the court, the Newroz celebrations had turned into a propaganda event in favour of the PKK and the speakers had chanted slogans and had incited the crowd to chant slogans. The court also observed that during the celebrations, symbols and banners of the PKK had been carried by the crowd. The court found that the speakers had provoked the crowd and had as a result committed the offence of disseminating propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation. The court considered that in view of the applicant’s conviction under section 7(2) of Law no. 3713 it was unnecessary to deliver a decision in respect of the charges under Article 215 of the Criminal Code.
On 21 September 2010 the Court of Cassation upheld the judgment of the İzmir Assize Court.
Between 13 January and 22 June 2012 the applicant served her prison sentence. On 22 June 2012 the Diyarbakır Assize Court ordered her conditional release.
The relevant domestic law applicable at the material time can be found in Belge v. Turkey (no. 50171/09, § 19, 6 December 2016).
In particular, at the time of the events giving rise to the present application, section 7(2) of Law no. 3713 read as follows:
“Anyone who disseminates propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation shall be liable to [serve] a term of imprisonment of one to five years ...”