The case concerns the ban imposed by the bailiffs’ service on the applicant’s leaving the territory of Russia for his failure to pay a judgment debt.
The applicant was born in 1961 and lives in Moscow. The applicant was represented by Mr Loskutov and Mr Laptev, lawyers practising in Moscow.
The Government were represented by Mr M. Galperin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 10 December 2013 the Zelenogradskiy District Court, Moscow (“the District Court”), awarded 6,493.500 Russian roubles (RUB) to the Ministry of Finance to be paid by the applicant and RUB 40,667 for the reimbursement of legal costs, also to be paid by the applicant. The judgment of 10 December 2013 entered into force on 14 April 2014.
On 8 July 2014 the District Court issued a writ of execution.
By a ruling of 12 September 2014 a bailiff with the bailiffs’ service of the Zelenogradskiy administrative circuit, Moscow (“the bailiff”), initiated enforcement proceedings. The applicant was invited to voluntarily comply with the judgment debt within five days of the date on which he received a copy of that ruling.
On 18 September 2014 a copy of that ruling was sent to the applicant by a registered mail. After an unsuccessful attempt to deliver the letter to the applicant, the letter remained available at the post office between 23 September and 27 October 2014. The applicant submitted that he had not received the post office’s notification whereby the letter of 18 September 2014 had been available at the post office. The applicant did not pick up the letter and it was returned to the bailiffs’ service on 29 October 2014. It was not until 9 September 2015 that the applicant acquainted himself with the ruling of 12 September 2014.
On 6 October 2014 the Ministry of Finance asked the bailiffs’ service to impose travel restrictions on the applicant for his failure to pay the judgment debt.
On 7 November 2014 the bailiff issued a ruling restricting the applicant’s right to leave the country for a period of six months (until 7 May 2015) on the grounds that the applicant had not paid the judgment debt within the prescribed time-limit. The ruling also stated that the applicant had not confirmed that his failure to comply with the set timelimits had been caused by extraordinary unavoidable circumstances and other unsurmountable obstacles which were beyond his control. The ruling further stated that the applicant had been duly notified of the decision to initiate enforcement proceedings and warned that he would be subjected to coercive measures, including travel restrictions. The ruling was based on the 2007 Federal Act on Enforcement Proceedings and on the 1996 Federal Act on Leaving and Entering the Russian Federation (procedures) (see “Relevant legal framework” below).
The Government have not provided any information regarding the date on which a copy of the ruling of 7 November 2014 was sent to the applicant. The applicant submitted that the bailiff had not notified him of the ruling 7 November 2014. The applicant received its copy on 25 June 2015 following a request submitted by his representative.
On 19 November 2014 the bailiff attached the applicant’s property (several plots of land and a house).
On 2 January 2015 the applicant, who was allegedly not aware of the travel restrictions imposed on him on 7 November 2014, decided to travel to Thailand, but was stopped by border guards as he was attempting to board the plane.
On 25 June 2015 the applicant challenged in court the bailiff’s ruling of 7 November 2014 imposing a travel ban. He submitted that he had not been duly notified of the enforcement proceedings initiated on 12 September 2014 and therefore the bailiff had no right to impose the travel restriction on him. The bailiff’s decision was therefore in breach of Section 30 (12) of the 2007 Federal Act on Enforcement Proceedings (see “Relevant legal framework” below).
On 17 July 2015 the District Court examined and dismissed the applicant’s complaint. The District Court held that the travel restrictions had been lawful; the time-limit set in the ruling of 12 September 2014 had expired, whereas the applicant had not started paying the debt. In any event, by the moment when the applicant applied to the court, the travel restrictions had expired as well.
In his appeal against the judgment of 17 July 2015, the applicant submitted that the District Court, in taking its decision, had not examined whether the requirements of the 2007 Federal Act on Enforcement Proceedings had been complied with.
On 10 November 2015 the Moscow City Court (“the City Court”) upheld the judgment of 17 July 2015. The City Court found that the applicant had not provided any valid reason for his failure to pay the judgment debt and therefore the travel restrictions had been proportionate to the aims sought to achieve.
In his cassation appeal against the decision of 10 November 2015, the applicant submitted that the District and City Courts had not examined whether he had been duly notified of the enforcement proceedings and of the time-limit set for the payment of the judgment debt.
On 9 June 2016 a judge of the City Court refused to refer the applicant’s cassation appeal to the cassation court.
In his second cassation appeal the applicant submitted that the bailiff had failed to justify the necessity of the travel restrictions and applied that measure automatically.
On 20 September 2016 a judge of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation refused to refer the applicant’s cassation appeal to the civil chamber of the Supreme Court. The applicant received a copy of that decision on 14 April 2017.
The right of a Russian citizen to leave the Russian Federation could be temporarily restricted if he or she had evaded obligations imposed on him or her by a court. In such cases the restriction was valid until the obligation had been complied with or until the parties had settled the matter (section 15(5)).
Section 30 of the Act set out the procedure for instituting enforcement proceedings. In particular, it provided that enforcement proceedings could be instituted by the bailiffs’ service upon the request of a judgment creditor (section 30 (1)). When submitting a request for enforcement proceedings to be instituted, the judgment creditor could ask the bailiffs’ service to seize the debtor’s property in order to secure the enforcement of the judgment debt. The judgment creditor could also ask for the application of the restrictions set out in the Act (section 30 (2)). In its decision to institute enforcement proceedings the bailiffs’ service set a timelimit for voluntary compliance with the judgment (section 30 (11)). The time-limit for voluntary compliance with the judgment was five days from the date of receipt by the debtor of the ruling on the institution of enforcement proceedings (sections 30 (12)). A copy of the bailiff’s decision to institute enforcement proceedings had to be sent to the judgment creditor, the debtor and to the court (or other body or State official) that had issued the writ of execution no later than the day following the day on which the decision to institute enforcement proceedings was issued (section 30 (17)).
Section 67 established a framework for imposing restrictions on a debtor’s right to leave the country. In particular, it provided that a restriction on leaving the country could be imposed in the event of all the following criteria being met: enforcement proceedings had been initiated following a court decision; the bailiffs’ service had set a time-limit for voluntary compliance with the decision (and the debtor had failed to comply within that time-limit); and the debtor had no valid reason for not having complied with the judgment (section 67 (1)). A travel restriction could also be imposed at the request of the judgment creditor, which had to be submitted together with his request for enforcement proceedings to be instituted (section 67 (2)).