The applicants were born in 1974, 1984 and 1979 respectively. They were represented by Mr M. Erbil, a lawyer practising in Istanbul.
The Government were represented by their Agent.
The Government did not object to the examination of the application by a Committee.
In January 2004 Ms Çakmak (Altay) (“the first applicant”), Mr Nas (“the second applicant”), and Mr Kılıç (“the third applicant”) were arrested on suspicion of membership of an illegal armed organisation, namely the PKK (the Workers’ Party of Kurdistan).
The applicants made incriminatory statements to the police concerning their involvement in the activities of the terrorist organisation in the absence of a lawyer as, according to their statement forms, they did not ask for a lawyer. The third applicant also took part in a reconstruction of events where he had made incriminatory statements in the absence of a lawyer, admitting, notably that he had thrown Molotov cocktails at a bank. The applicants’ subsequent statements had been taken in the presence of their lawyers and had not been incriminatory. The third applicant denied the contents of the statements he had made to the police, alleging that although he had asked for a lawyer, the police officers had taken his statements without one.
On 6 February 2004 the public prosecutor at the Istanbul State Security Court filed a bill of indictment against nine individuals, including the applicants, accusing the second and the third applicant of membership of an illegal armed organisation under Article 168 of the then Criminal Code and the first applicant with aiding and abetting an illegal organisation under Article 169 of that Code. The third applicant was also charged with throwing a Molotov cocktail under Article 264 of the same code.
On 22 April 2008 the Istanbul Assize Court found the third applicant guilty and sentenced him to: (i) six years and three months’ imprisonment for membership of an illegal armed organisation; (ii) three years and nine months’ imprisonment for storage of hazardous materials; and (iii) one year and eight months’ imprisonment and a fine for causing damage to property. The trial court also convicted the first and the second applicants for aiding and abetting the PKK and sentenced them to three years and nine months’ imprisonment.
On 25 April 2011 the Court of Cassation upheld the third applicant’s convictions for membership of an illegal armed organisation and storage of hazardous materials, but overturned his conviction for causing damage to property and the convictions of the first and the second applicant, remitting the case to the Istanbul Assize Court.
On 14 August 2012 the Istanbul Assize Court found the first and the second applicants guilty of membership of an illegal armed organisation and sentenced each of them to three years and nine months’ imprisonment. The trial court further convicted the third applicant of causing damage to property and sentenced him to one year and eight months’ imprisonment.
According to the two reasoned judgments rendered by the trial court, all of the accused who had made incriminatory statements to the police in the absence of their lawyers had denied those statements either before the public prosecutor or before the investigating judge. However, the trial court relied on, inter alia, the applicants’ police statements to convict them without subjecting them to scrutiny and examining their inadmissibility or the circumstances surrounding the applicants’ waivers.
On 2 July 2014 the Court of Cassation upheld the trial court’s judgment.
The relevant domestic law in force at the material time, as well as the case-law of the Constitutional Court on the issue of waiver of the right to a lawyer, may be found in Ruşen Bayar v. Turkey, (no. 25253/08, §§ 416, 19 February 2019).