The case originated in two applications (nos. 51279/09 and 32098/13) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Russian nationals, Mr Aleksey Yuryevich Vlasov and Mr Mikhail Mikhaylovich Benyash (“the applicants”), on 10 February 2010 and 21 April 2013 respectively.
The first applicant was represented by Mr V. Kuznetsov, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants alleged that a restriction placed on their right to leave Russia had not been justified.
On 20 November 2014 and 9 July 2015 the above-mentioned complaint was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the applications was declared inadmissible.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The first applicant, Mr Aleksey Yuryevich Vlasov, was born in 1957 and lives in Moscow.
On 6 October 2008 Mr Vlasov applied to the Federal Migration Service for a travel passport which would allow him to go abroad.
On 27 October 2008 the Golovinskiy District Court of Moscow convicted him of smuggling and sentenced him as follows:
“... the penalty in the form of three years’ imprisonment is not to be enforced and is to be considered conditional with a three years’ probationary period.
To require Mr Alexey Vlasov to report twice a month during the probationary period to the authority in charge of execution of conditional sentences, and to inform [that authority] of any change of residence ...”
On 11 November 2008 his application for a travel passport was refused by reference to the fact that he had been given a suspended threeyear sentence whose period of suspension had not yet expired.
The applicant Mr Vlasov applied for judicial review of the refusal.
On 3 June 2009 the Butyrskiy District Court of Moscow upheld the refusal as lawful, finding as follows:
“The argument by Mr Vlasov to the effect that the Golovinskiy District Court’s judgment of 27 October 2008 contained an exhaustive list of restrictions during the probation period which did not include a restriction on leaving Russia and which was not, in the claimant’s view, subject to expansive interpretation by State officials, does not contradict section 15(4) of the Entry and Exit Procedures Act which provides for a restriction on the right to leave for abroad in cases of both actual custodial and suspended sentences. A person who is given a suspended sentence is a convicted offender serving a sentence, and may be relieved from punishment only after the period of suspension has expired. Mr Vlasov’s period of suspension expires on 14 January 2012 and after its expiry Mr Vlasov’s criminal conviction will be spent in accordance with Article 86 of the Criminal Code. Until that time Mr Vlasov is an offender serving a sentence, which is a ground for restricting his right to leave for abroad.”
On 18 August 2009 the Moscow City Court rejected an appeal against the District Court’s judgment. It held:
“The arguments that Mr Vlasov was subjected to restrictions that go beyond those imposed by his conviction and that he was compelled to serve the sentence within the Russian Federation, whereas he needed to take care of his business interests and perform his duties abroad, are not grounds for setting aside the correct judgment [of the first-instance court].”
The second applicant, Mr Mikhail Mikhaylovich Benyash, was born in 1977 and lives in Sochi.
On 31 August 2011 the Tsentralnyy District Court of Sochi convicted Mr Benyash of extortion and sentenced him to three years’ imprisonment, suspended for three years. He was released in the courtroom. On 12 October 2011 the Krasnodar Regional Court upheld the conviction on appeal.
On 5 December 2011 the Federal Migration Service refused Mr Benyash’s application for a travel passport, noting that he had been arrested on 1 September 2010 and that, according to the available information, the criminal proceedings against him were still pending.
The applicant Mr Benyash applied for judicial review of the refusal.
On 28 June 2012 the Tsentralnyy District Court of Sochi upheld the refusal as lawful:
“...for the time being the conviction of 31 August 2011 is not yet spent, Mr Benyash is a convicted offender, and, accordingly, the refusal [of travel documents] does not violate his rights”.
On 29 November 2012 the Krasnodar Regional Court rejected the appeal, endorsing the reasoning of the District Court.
On 11 April 2013 the Regional Court refused him leave to appeal to the cassation instance.
The Entry and Exit Procedures Act (Law no. 114-FZ of 15 August 1996) provides:
“The right of a Russian citizen to leave the Russian Federation may be restricted only on the grounds listed in this Act and in accordance with the procedure set out therein.”
“The right of a Russian citizen to leave the Russian Federation may be temporarily restricted if ...
(4)  he has been convicted of an offence, – up until the penalty has been enforced or until the individual has been relieved from serving the penalty.”
The Russian Criminal Code provides:
“1.  If, having decided on a penalty not exceeding ... eight years’ imprisonment, the court considers that the offender may be corrected without serving the sentence, it may declare the sentence to be a suspended one ...
Taking into account the offender’s age, work capacity and state of health, the court may supplement a suspended sentence with a requirement to abide by certain restrictions: to abstain from changing the place of residence, work or study without prior notification to the competent State authority in charge of probation, to abstain from visiting certain places ... The court may impose other restrictions conducive to the rehabilitation of the offender.”
“1.  A convicted offender shall be considered to have a criminal record from the day the conviction becomes final and until the day the criminal record is cancelled or becomes spent ...
An individual who has been exempted from punishment shall have no criminal record.
A criminal record is cancelled –
(a)  in case of a suspended sentence, on expiry of the period of suspension ...”
On 8 December 2009 the Constitutional Court dismissed a constitutional challenge to section 15(4) of the Entry and Exit Procedures Act brought by two claimants who had been refused travel documents (judgment no. 19-P). The first claimant had been given a suspended sentence and the second claimant had been released on parole on condition that he found employment and abstained from changing his place of residence without notifying the probation authority.
The Constitutional Court held that enforcement of final convictions was a constitutionally important objective, as a failure to enforce them would undermine the rights of others and the authority of the judiciary. A suspended sentence does not mean that the convicted offender has been exempted from punishment: he or she is on probation during the specified period of time and may be subject to additional restrictions during that period (Articles 73 and 86(3) of the Criminal Code). The Constitutional Court inferred therefrom that the restriction on the right to leave the country applicable to those who received a suspended sentence was a “temporary measure designed to secure the enforcement of a criminal conviction”. Similarly, as regards the situation of individuals released on parole, the Constitutional Court considered that a temporary restriction on their right to leave Russia was a safeguard necessary to secure the full enforcement of the sentence.
Since the probation authorities only have jurisdiction within the Russian territory, they can only exercise effective control over the conduct of convicted offenders on probation within Russia. A convicted offender’s departure from Russia would remove them from the sphere of such control, undermining the objectives of the punishment and negating the established procedure for enforcement of the sentence as a means of rehabilitating offenders.
The Constitutional Court finally pointed out that federal law-makers should be able to determine situations in which the competent authority, in certain extraordinary circumstances and having regard to the principle of humanity and valid and objective reasons, could authorise the convicted offenders to leave the Russian Federation.