The case originated in an application (no. 10446/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Polish nationals, Ms Wanda Buczkiewicz and Mr Antoni Buczkiewicz (“the applicants”), on 14 March 2003
The applicants, who had been granted legal aid, were represented by Mr P. Sendecki, a lawyer practising in . The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicants alleged that their right to the peaceful enjoyment of their possessions had been breached since the land which they owned had been designated for expropriation at some undetermined future date. Under domestic legislation they were not entitled to any compensation for the interference with their ownership rights resulting from the future expropriation.
On 20 October 2006 the President of the Fourth Section of the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it was decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicants’ legal predecessors owned a plot of land with a surface area of 3,625 sq. m. located in the , listed in a land register under entry no. 29552. In 1993 the applicants inherited this property as coowners. The property was designated, by an administrative decision given on an undetermined date, apparently prior to 1993, for agricultural use.
By a letter of 30 October 1991 the first applicant was informed by the WarszawaOchota Muncipal Office that the starting date for the development foreseen by the draft land development plan for the municipality had not yet been yet fixed, but that it was most likely that work would begin after 1995.
According to the relevant local development plan, which was adopted in 1992 and later amended in 1995, the entire property had been designated for construction of a major roadway, connecting the municipality with , and various commercial buildings. As a result, the applicants could continue to use their property for gardening or agricultural purposes, but could not carry out any development. A number of owners lodged objections against this plan, which were ultimately dismissed by the .
In June 1992 the applicants requested the municipality to specify the use to which their property would be put under the land development plan and to indicate timelimits for the works to begin. They also requested the municipality to acquire the property from them. This offer apparently remained unanswered.
On 13 May 1999 the applicants made an enquiry with the municipality as to the development plans in respect of their property.
In a reply of 14 June 1999 they were informed that their property remained covered by the development plan adopted in 1992 under which it was designated for construction of a roadway and for various commercial buildings.
On 12 November 2001 the applicants renewed their request for the municipality to acquire their plot. This was refused on 21 December 2001.
On 27 December 2001 the applicants complained to the municipal authorities that the local land development plan had not been implemented and that no timeframe for its implementation had been foreseen, even tentatively. As a result, they could not carry out any development of the property and had been left in a prolonged state of uncertainty as to its future fate. It could not be used for leisure purposes as it was situated in a rather unattractive area. They had been contacted by many potential buyers who, having learnt about the lack of possibilities to develop the land immediately, had lost interest in buying the property. Their requests that the municipality acquire their land had been unsuccessful. As a result of the legal situation of the property, their ownership had been stripped of all economic value.
On 7 January 2002 the applicants were informed by the Municipal Office that their land would be acquired in the future by a company which would construct the roadway foreseen under the 1992 development plan.
On 11 April 2002 the applicants requested, for the first time, that an initial approval of a development project (decyzja o warunkach zabudowy) be issued for the construction of a small house on their land.
In a reply of 20 May 2002 the WarszawaWłochy Municipal Office informed them that such a decision could not be issued as it would not be compatible with the local land development plan adopted in 1992.
In a further letter of 2 August 2002 the WarszawaWłochy Municipal Office informed the applicants that the mere fact that their property had been foreseen for future expropriation for the purposes of the construction of the roadway did not entail for the municipality an obligation to acquire their land from them. Accordingly, there were no immediate plans to purchase the properties designated in the local development plan for the construction of the roadway. They were also informed that a new land development plan was being prepared by the municipality.
On 27 March 2003 the applicants complained to the  about the local administration’s failure to adopt a new land development plan. They referred to the restrictions which the 1992 plan imposed on the exercise of their ownership.
On 16 April 2003 the  rejected their complaint, holding that a complaint against the administration’s failure to act could not be made in respect of proceedings concerning elaboration of local land development plans.
On 31 December 2003 the relevant local development plan expired, pursuant to the Local Planning Act 2003 (see paragraph 23 below).  Apparently to date no new land development plan has been adopted by the municipality.
Other relevant legislative provisions are extensively set out in the Court’s judgment of 14 November 2006 in the case of Skibińscy v. Poland (no. 52589/99, §§ 2853).
Judgment of the