The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 14 October 2004 (Rule 59 § 3).
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Mr Laptev, Mr Bowring, Mr Leach and Mr Koroteev.
The attack on Katyr-Yurt
The investigation of the attack
Documents from the investigation file
a) Opening of the investigation
b) Questioning of the applicant and her relatives
c) Examination of the site
d) Statement by the head of the village administration
e) Identification and questioning of other victims
f) Medical documents
g) Statement by Major-General Shamanov
h) Statement by Major-General Nedobitko
i) Testimony by servicemen in the ground forces
j) Testimony by servicemen from the air force, helicopters and tank battalion
k) Other documents from the military
l) Military experts' report
Additional witness statements submitted by the applicant
Interviews with the military commanders, submitted by the applicant
Human Rights Watch report, submitted by the applicant
a) The Constitutional provisions
Section 25 of the Law on Defence of 1996 (Федеральный закон от 31 мая 1996 г. N 61-ФЗ "Об обороне") provides that “supervision of adherence to the law and investigations of crimes committed in the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, other Forces, military formations and authorities shall be exercised by the General Prosecutor of the Russian Federation and subordinate prosecutors. Civil and criminal cases in the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, other forces, military formations and authorities shall be examined by the courts in accordance with the legislation of the Russian Federation.”
The 1998 Law on the Suppression of Terrorism (Федеральный закон от 25 июля 1998 г. № 130-ФЗ «О борьбе с терроризмом») provides as follows:
“Section 3. Basic Concepts
For the purposes of the present Federal Law the following basic concepts shall be applied:
... 'suppression of terrorism' shall refer to activities aimed at the prevention, detection, suppression and minimisation of the consequences of terrorist activities;
'counter-terrorist operation' shall refer to special activities aimed at the prevention of terrorist acts, ensuring the security of individuals, neutralising terrorists and minimising the consequences of terrorist acts;
'zone of a counter-terrorist operation' shall refer to an individual land or water surface, means of transport, building, structure or premises with adjacent territory where a counter-terrorist operation is conducted; ...
Section 13. Legal regime in the zone of an anti-terrorist operation
In the zone of an anti-terrorist operation, the persons conducting the operation shall be entitled:
2) to check the identity documents of private persons and officials and, where they have no identity documents, to detain them for identification;
3) to detain persons who have committed or are committing offences or other acts in defiance of the lawful demands of persons engaged in an anti-terrorist operation, including acts of unauthorised entry or attempted entry to the zone of the anti-terrorist operation, and to convey such persons to the local bodies of the Ministry of the Interior of the Russian Federation;
4) to enter private residential or other premises ... and means of transport while suppressing a terrorist act or pursuing persons suspected of committing such an act, when a delay may jeopardise human life or health;
5) to search persons, their belongings and vehicles entering or exiting the zone of an anti-terrorist operation, including with the use of technical means; ...
Section 21. Exemption from liability for damage
In accordance with and within the limits established by the legislation, damage may be caused to the life, health and property of terrorists, as well as to other legally-protected interests, in the course of conducting an anti-terrorist operation. However, servicemen, experts and other persons engaged in the suppression of terrorism shall be exempted from liability for such damage, in accordance with the legislation of the Russian Federation.”
Articles 126-127 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Гражданский процессуальный Кодекс РСФСР) ), in force at the material time, contained general formal requirements governing an application to a court, including, inter alia, the defendant's name and address, the exact circumstances on which the claim was based and any documents supporting the claim.
Article 214 part 4 provided that the court had to suspend consideration of a case if it could not be considered until completion of another set of civil, criminal or administrative proceedings.
Article 225 of the Code provided that if in the course of reviewing a complaint against the actions of an official or a civil claim a court came across information indicating that a crime had been committed, it was required to inform the prosecutor.
Chapter 24-1 established that a citizen could apply to a court for redress in respect of unlawful actions by a state body or official. Such complaints could have been submitted to a court, either at the location of the state body or at the plaintiff's place of residence, at the latter's discretion. Under the same procedure, the courts could also rule on an award of damages, including non-pecuniary damages, where they concluded that a violation had occurred.
Article 126 provided that military prosecutor's office was responsible for the investigation of crimes committed by military servicemen in relation to their official duties or within the boundaries of a military unit.
f)  Situation in the Chechen Republic
g)  Amnesty