The case originated in an application (no. 36369/04) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mr Igor Volodymyrovych Pivnenko (the applicant), on 28 September 2004.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Mrs V. Lutkovska and Mr Y. Zaytsev.
On 7 July 2005 the Court decided to communicate the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
On 1 April 2006 this case was assigned to the newly constituted Fifth Section (Rule 25 § 5 and Rule 52 § 1).
The applicant, Mr Igor Volodymyrovych Pivnenko, is a Ukrainian national who was born in 1965 and lives in the town of Oleksandriya, Kirovograd region, .
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On an unspecified date the applicant retired from the army. Upon retirement, the applicant became entitled to compensation for his uniform. As this compensation remained unpaid, in 2002 he instituted proceedings in the Dnipropetrovs'k Garrison Military Tribunal against his former employer, a military unit, seeking recovery of the debt.
On 14 June 2002 the tribunal found for the applicant (Решение Военного суда Днепропетровского гарнизона) and awarded him UAH 3,377.17 for uniform and UAH 51 for court fees. The latter sum was paid to him, while the main judgment debt remains unpaid.
By letter of 20 January 2004, the Dnipropetrovs'k Regional Department of Justice (Дніпропетровське обласне управління юстиції) informed the applicant that the remaining debt could not be paid due to the debtor's lack of funds.
On 29 July 2004 the Bailiffs' Serivce (відділ державної виконавчої служби Центрально-Міського районного управління юстиції) returned the writ of execution to the applicant on the ground that the judgment could not be enforced due to the debtor's lack of funds.
RELEVANT DOMESTIC LAW