The case originated in an application (no. 30315/10) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Ukrainian nationals, Mr Vyacheslav Vasilyevich Bigun (“the first applicant”) and Ms Lesya Nikolayevna Bigun (“the second applicant”), on 12 May 2010.
The applicants were represented by Mr P.F. Bukalov, a lawyer practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr Ivan Lishchyna.
On 5 January 2016 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The Government did not object to the examination of the application by a Committee.
The applicants were born in 1979 and 1983 respectively. The first applicant is serving a life sentence in Dnipropetrovsk Prison no. 89. The second applicant lives in Obukhiv.
On 24 March 2000 the applicants got married.
On 16 February 2001 the first applicant was found guilty of a number of criminal offences and was sentenced to life imprisonment.
The applicants requested that the prison administration allow them a long-term family visit on many occasions, in particular, in 2006. Their requests were rejected on the grounds that Article 151 of the Code of Execution of Sentences did not provide for long-term visits to life prisoners.
In April 2007 the applicants lodged an administrative claim against the State Department for Enforcement of Sentences seeking an entitlement to a long-term conjugal visit every three months. They submitted that they were willing to have a common child and that a denial of that right to them was unlawful and arbitrary. The courts, on three levels of jurisdiction, rejected that claim as not based on law. The final decision of the Higher Administrative Court was delivered on 8 December 2009.
According to the information provided by the Government, the first applicant was disciplined on three occasions during the period of his detention from 2001 to 2016: once in 2001 following the discovery of an unreported written message on him; once in 2003 on account of his attempt to get in touch with an inmate in an adjacent cell; and once in 2013 on account of unauthorised possession of a mobile telephone.
The applicants got divorced on an unspecified date. According to the Government, it happened “shortly after the introduction of the application”. According to the applicants, the divorce took place on an unspecified date in 2014.
As indicated in the information note issued on 24 June 2016 by the administration of Dnipropetrovsk Prison no. 89, during his detention in that prison starting from 2003, the first applicant had had forty short-term visits and nine long-term family visits. More specifically, on 10 December 2003 and 10 June 2004 he had short-term visits from the second applicant, as well as his mother and sister. The second applicant did not pay him visits thereafter. During the period from 2004 to 2012 the first applicant had regular short-term visits from his mother, sister and some other persons. On 13 September 2012 he had a visit from his sister and a certain Ms L. who was registered in the prison’s logbook as his fiancée. Since then he had regular short-term visits from Ms L. On 11 July 2014 the first applicant was allowed for the first time a long-term family visit, which was from his sister. On 5 December 2014 the first applicant got married with Ms L. and they were allowed a long-term family visit on that occasion. Subsequently, they enjoyed long-term conjugal visits about every three months.
The penalty of life imprisonment was introduced in the Criminal Code 1960 by the legislative amendments adopted by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine (the Parliament) on 22 February 2000 as a follow-up to the decision of the Constitutional Court of 29 December 1999, by which the death penalty existing until then had been declared to be contrary to the Constitution of Ukraine. The above-mentioned amendments entered into force on 29 March 2000.
On 5 April 2001 the Parliament adopted a new Criminal Code which entered into force on 1 September 2001. Its relevant provision reads as follows:
“Life imprisonment is envisaged [as punishment] for particularly serious crimes and shall be applied only in cases explicitly provided for by this Code and where a court does not consider it possible to apply fixed-term imprisonment. ...”
Pursuant to Article 110 of the Code of Execution of Criminal Sentences (“the Code”), a short-term visit in a prison lasts up to four hours and a long-term visit – up to three days. Short-term visits may be allowed with relatives or other persons and take place in the presence of a prison official. Long-term visits may be allowed only with close relatives and entails living in the same room.
Under Articles 138-140 of the Code, prisoners serving a fixed-term sentence were entitled to one short-term visit monthly and one long-term family visit every three months. Following the amendments of 7 September 2016, the above-mentioned became the minimum visiting entitlement of fixed-term prisoners detained in the “enhanced control sector”. Those detained in the “resocialisation sector” are entitled to short-term visit monthly and one long-term family visit every two months. Lastly, fixed-term prisoners detained in the “social rehabilitation sector” have the right to as many short-term visits as they wish and to a long-term family visit monthly.
Under Article 151 of the Code, convicted prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment were entitled to one short-term visit every six months. Following the amendments of 16 February 2010, they became entitled to one short-term visit every three months.
Subsequently, Article 151 of the Code was further amended, with those changes coming into effect on 7 May 2014, after which prisoners serving a life sentence became entitled to one short-term visit per month and to one long-term family visit every three months.
Following another round of amendments, which were enacted on 7 September 2016, life prisoners are now entitled to one long-term family visit every two months.
The relevant provisions are summarised in Trosin v. Ukraine (no. 39758/05, § 29, 23 February 2012).
The Council of Europe material pertaining to family visits to prisoners was quoted in Khoroshenko v. Russia ([GC], no. 41418/04, §§ 5867, ECHR 2015).
The relevant excerpts from the Report to the Ukrainian Government on the visit to Ukraine carried out by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) from 9 to 21 September 2009 (CPT/Inf (2011) 29) read as follows (footnotes omitted, original emphasis):
“92. As regards possibilities for contact with the outside world, the CPT considers that special efforts should be made to prevent the breakdown of family ties of prisoners serving life sentences. Ukrainian legislation continues to impose severe restrictions on the visiting entitlement of life-sentenced prisoners. This approach runs counter to the generally accepted principle that offenders, whatever the crimes for which they have been sentenced, are sent to prison as a punishment, not to receive punishment.
Lifers’ visits took place in secure booths with a glass partition, which allowed no physical contact between inmates and their visitors. In addition, some lifers at Colony No. 89 indicated that they remained handcuffed during visits. As the CPT has indicated in the past, to be handcuffed when receiving a visit could certainly be considered as degrading for both the prisoner concerned and his visitors. Further, life-sentenced prisoners had no access to a telephone.
The CPT calls upon the Ukrainian authorities to increase substantially the visit entitlement of life-sentenced prisoners. As a general rule, visits should take place in open conditions (e.g. around a table), visits through a partition being the exception. Further, life-sentenced prisoners should only be prohibited from receiving long-term visits on the basis of an individual risk assessment. In addition, staff must receive clear instructions that life-sentenced prisoners should not be kept in handcuffs during visits. Steps should also be taken to ensure that life-sentenced prisoners have access to a telephone.
...
More generally, during the 2009 visit, the delegation was informed of proposals to amend the legislation with a view to improving the situation of life-sentenced prisoners (e.g. increasing their visit entitlement, [...]). However, there was reportedly political resistance to these proposals. The CPT urges the Ukrainian authorities to pursue these legislative proposals without further delay.”