The case originated in an application (no. 42113/09) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by ANO Redaktsionno-Izdatelskiy Dom “Novaya Gazeta”, a legal entity incorporated under Russian law (“the applicant company”), and Georgiy Emilyevich Borodyanskiy, a Russian national (“the second applicant”), on 12 September 2008.
The applicants were represented by Mr Ya. Kozheurov, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 6 February 2013 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant company, an editorial and publishing house registered in Moscow, edits and publishes a national newspaper with a circulation of 500,000, the Novaya Gazeta (“the newspaper”). The second applicant was born in 1959 and lives in Omsk.
On 25 August 2005 the newspaper published an article by the second applicant entitled “The Pope of Omsk, or a Masked Bell” («Папа Омский, или колокол в маске») (hereinafter – “the article”). The article concerned Mr P., the then Governor of the Omsk Region, and read, in so far as relevant, as follows:
[1] “The Governor of Omsk, Mr P., is typical of those in power for whom acting is an everyday part of life. He even received a Golden Mask award ...”
[2] “Few believed that the Governor possessed nothing else. They call him the Pope for a reason – his hand spreads out over a region with two million inhabitants feels the pulp of every serious business enterprise in it. It [the hand] can pat on a head or beat. Everybody, as they do elsewhere, would prefer to believe a rumour than official sources. A rumour spread over the town [Omsk] in 2003 started by the singer Ms Pugacheva, who made a slip in an interview broadcast on the radio saying that her villa in Miami was next to the villa of the Governor of Omsk.”
[3] “He [Mr P.] also knows a thing or two about car makes. While he prefers to travel on service-related business in a BMW-750 SUV, he is also partial to Land Rover cars. At the same time a car corresponding to his rank, a Lexus, is parked in his private garage”.
On 17 September 2007 Mr P. initiated civil defamation proceedings against the applicants, claiming compensation for non-pecuniary damage in the amount of 150,000 Russian roubles (RUB) (approximately 4,245 euros (EUR)). He argued that, as the Governor of the Omsk Region, he was a civil servant and that the article had depicted him, in the eyes of the general public, as a person who had committed unlawful and unethical acts and had exercised inappropriate influence on State agencies, officials and citizens.
On 12 October 2007 the Kuybyshevskiy District Court of Omsk (“the District Court”) heard the defamation case in the absence of the applicants and delivered a default judgment. The District Court reasoned that an obligation to prove the truthfulness of information disseminated in the mass media lay with the defendants, whereas the claimant only had to prove that the information had been disseminated. It observed that the defendants had not disputed that the statements contained in paragraphs 1 to 3 (see paragraph 6 above) had been disseminated. Nor had they presented any objection regarding the claimant’s assertion that the statements had tarnished his reputation or any proof of the truthfulness of the statements. The District Court further noted the claimant’s assertion that the statements had “engender[ed] in the residents of the Omsk Region distrust of the actions and policies of the claimant as the highest office holder, the head of the highest body of the State executive power in the Omsk Region”. It reasoned as follows:
“Taking into account that the defendant has not presented before the court any objections and evidence in their support as regards the claimant’s arguments that the statements made in Mr Borodyanskiy’s article “The Pope of Omsk, or a Masked Bell” tarnished his honour, dignity and business reputation by way of describing his activities as being in breach of the laws on elections, aimed at personal enrichment, [amounting to] interference with entrepreneurial activities and unlawful control over business structures, and in fact [those statements] asserted that [the claimant] had abused his powers in personal interests, wrong, unethical behaviour in social life aimed at confusing the population, having analysed and assessed these statements contained in the impugned [article], the court agrees with the claimant and concludes that these statements have tarnished the claimant’s honour, dignity and business reputation”.
The District Court thus found for the claimant and ordered that a retraction be published. It held the applicants jointly liable to publish the retraction and to pay the claimant RUB 150,000 (approximately EUR 4,245). The applicants were also ordered to pay stamp tax in the amount of RUB 100 (approximately EUR 3).
On 6 and 12 November 2007 the second applicant and the applicant company, respectively, applied to the District Court requesting that it set aside the default judgment on the grounds that neither defendant had been able to attend the hearing of 12 October 2007 for good reason.
On 26 November 2007 the District Court dismissed the requests to set aside the default judgment as manifestly ill-founded.
On 24 and 28 January 2008 counsel for the applicant company lodged a statement of appeal and a request to restore the time-limit for appeal. On 11 February 2008 the District Court acceded to the request and restored the time-limit.
The second applicant did not lodge a separate statement of appeal. However, the heading of that lodged by counsel for the applicant company read that the second applicant was a codefendant in the defamation case.
On 12 March 2008 the Omsk Regional Court (“the Regional Court”) upheld the default judgment of 12 October 2007, but reduced the amount of the award to RUB 50,000 (approximately EUR 1,370). It agreed with the District Court’s reasoning that the applicants had failed to prove the truthfulness of the information contained in the article and found that the text of the article had served to form a negative public opinion about Mr P. and to engender in the general public distrust of the policies adopted and implemented by him as the head of the Omsk Region. The judgment became final on the same date.
On 14 August 2008 the bailiffs service initiated enforcement proceedings.
On 23 September 2008 the applicant company transferred RUB 50,100, that is, the amount awarded together with the court fees, to the bank account of the bailiffs service.
On an unspecified date the newspaper published a retraction.
On 2 October 2008 the enforcement proceedings were terminated.
Article 29 of the Constitution guarantees freedom of thought and expression, together with freedom of the mass media.
Article 152 of the Civil Code provides that an individual may apply to a court with a request for the retraction of statements (сведения) that are damaging to his or her honour, dignity or business reputation, unless the person who has disseminated the statements proves them to be true. The aggrieved person may also claim compensation for loss and nonpecuniary damage sustained as a result of the dissemination of the statements.
Resolution no. 3 of the Plenary Supreme Court of 24 February 2005 defines “untruthful statements” as allegations regarding facts or events which have not actually taken place by the time the statements are disseminated. Statements contained in court decisions, decisions by investigating bodies, and other official documents amenable to appeal cannot be considered untruthful. Statements alleging that a person has breached the law, committed a dishonest act, behaved unethically or broken the rules of business etiquette tarnish that person’s honour, dignity and business reputation (section 7). Resolution no. 3 requires courts hearing defamation claims to distinguish between statements of fact, which can be checked for truthfulness, and value judgments, opinions and convictions, which are not actionable under Article 152 of the Civil Code since they are an expression of a defendant’s subjective opinion and views, and cannot be checked for truthfulness (section 9).