The case originated in an application (no. 32074/14) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Ms Luminiţa Zamfira Solcan (“the applicant”), on 17 April 2014.
The applicant was represented by Ms A. Diaconescu, a lawyer practising in Iași. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr. V. Mocanu, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, a breach of Article 8 of the Convention as a result of the failure of the authorities to allow her to attend her mother’s funeral during her involuntary hospitalisation in an inpatient psychiatric facility.
On 1 September 2015 notice of the complaint under Article 8 of the Convention was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1969 and is currently in a psychiatric facility in Pădureni-Grajduri.
In 2005 she committed a murder in France. On 12 November 2007 the Mâcon County Court discontinued the criminal investigation against her on the grounds that she had committed the offence in a state of diminished responsibility. The medical experts diagnosed her as suffering from paranoid schizophrenia and concluded that her acts had been the result of paranoid delusions. Endorsing the experts’ findings that she posed a danger to the public on account of her mental health, the court ordered her placement in a psychiatric facility in France for an indefinite period of time.
In 2011 the applicant lodged a request to be transferred to a similar psychiatric facility in Romania in order to be closer to her mother, who lived in Iaşi.
By a decision of 30 March 2012 the Bucharest Court of Appeal authorised her transfer to a psychiatric facility in Pădureni-Grajduri, a village located about twenty kilometres from Iaşi. At the time of the latest information available to the Court (9 November 2016), she was still detained there.
On 11 April 2013 the applicant’s mother died. On 12 April 2013 the applicant lodged a request with the Iaşi District Court for leave to attend her funeral.
On 23 May 2013 the court examined her request and refused to grant her leave. It pointed out that under Article 39 of the Mental Health Act (see paragraph 14 below) the restriction of liberty of mentally ill persons was justified for the protection of their health or safety or for the protection of others, and that under Article 49 of the same Act the facility was chosen so as to allow the mentally ill patient to be as close to home as possible. When applying the above provisions to the applicant’s situation, the court held as follows:
“Bearing in mind these legal provisions, the court considers that the safety of others prevails, the patient Solcan Luminiţa having been diagnosed with a mental illness which could potentially present a danger to the lives of others and their feelings of peace and confidence; for this reason, the request made by the patient shall be dismissed ...”
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law against that decision. She claimed that the provisions of Law no. 275/2006 on the execution of sentences, which authorised the temporary interruption of a custodial sentence for family reasons, should also apply to her detention in a psychiatric facility. The prosecutor’s office argued that a measure of detention in a medical facility could not be assimilated to a custodial sentence and accordingly there was no legal basis for the interruption of the applicant’s involuntary hospitalisation in a psychiatric facility.
By a final decision of 22 October 2013 the Iaşi County Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal. It held that under Article 114 of the Criminal Code read in conjunction with Article 434 of the Code of Criminal Procedure her detention in a psychiatric facility could be either discontinued or replaced by an obligation to undergo outpatient mental health treatment after an assessment by medical experts. It concluded that the applicant’s request to interrupt her detention in a psychiatric facility had no basis in law and that no analogy could be drawn between her situation and the situation of a prison detainee. Accordingly, the provisions of Law no. 275/2006 authorising the temporary interruption of detention on family grounds were not applicable to her situation. Moreover, the court noted that in any event the applicant’s request was no longer valid as her mother’s funeral had already taken place.
The relevant provisions of the Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure, as in force at the relevant time, are set out in Filip v. Romania (no. 41124/02, §§ 30-31, 14 December 2006).
Psychiatric detention is governed by the provisions of the Mental Health Act (Law no. 487 of 11 July 2002 on mental health and the protection of people with mental disorders) published in Official Gazette no. 589 of 8 August 2002. It was amended by Law no. 600/2004 and subsequently by Law no. 129/2012.
The Mental Health Act does not contain any provisions expressly authorising a judge to interrupt or suspend the involuntary hospitalisation of a mentally ill person.
The Government attached to their observations three decisions made by the Buzau District Court (on 30 January 2014, 6 February and 27 March 2015 respectively) by which the applicants, who had all been admitted to a psychiatric facility for inpatient treatment, were allowed to attend the funerals of their family members. In all three case files there was medical evidence proving that they were able to attend. After assessing the particular circumstances of each applicant, the court granted them leave to attend their parents’ funerals. Their requests were examined by the court without undue delay so that they could attend. In one of the three cases the request was allowed on the condition that the applicant would be accompanied by medical staff and under police escort.