The case originated in an application (no. 52589/13) against the Swiss Confederation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Iranian national, Mr M.A. (“the applicant”), on 15 August 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mrs S. Sadri, a lawyer practising in Berne. The Swiss Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr F. Schürmann.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his expulsion to Iran would violate Article 3 and Article 13 read in conjunction with Article 3 of the Convention.
On 12 September 2013 the Vice-President of the Section to which the case had been allocated decided to apply Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, indicating to the Government that the applicant should not be expelled to Iran for the duration of the proceedings before the Court, to grant priority to the application under Rule 41 of the Rules of Court, and to grant anonymity to the applicant under Rule 47 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
On the same day, 12 September 2013, the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant is an Iranian national who was born on 12 October 1977 in Teheran and currently lives in Einsiedeln, Switzerland.
The applicant entered Switzerland illegally on 26 June 2011 and applied for asylum the next day. He had two hearings before the Federal Migration Board (Bundesamt für Migration – hereafter “the Migration Board”).
The first hearing was a summary interview at the Migration Board’s “Centre for Reception and Procedure” (Empfangs- und Verfahrenszentrum) in Basel on 6 July 2011. The applicant gave an account of the alleged events in Iran leading to his escape from his home country. This account was summarised by the Migration Board’s interviewer in official minutes. At the beginning of this summary, the interviewer noted: “For lack of staff, the facts - summarised under no. 15 of the minutes - were not established in detail.” (“Es wird aus Kapazitätsgründen auf eine vertiefte Abklärung zu Pt. 15 verzichtet.”). An interpreter was present during the hearing and the minutes were translated for the applicant prior to his signing.
During the hearing the applicant stated that, following serious ballotrigging after the Iranian presidential elections on 12 June 2009, anti-regime demonstrations had started to take place. He had participated in almost all these demonstrations until the beginning of March 2011. He claimed that he and his friends had organised peaceful demonstrations every Tuesday. As the demonstrations had been brutally oppressed by the Iranian regime, he and his friends had documented the demonstrations and had circulated this documentation to people. He further claimed that during the last demonstration he had attended, at the beginning of March 2011, several of his friends had been arrested. He alleged that they had been tortured and that one of them had probably mentioned his name to the Iranian authorities and had told them about his participation in the demonstrations. Consequently, on 10 May 2011, a summons issued by the Revolutionary Court of Teheran had been delivered to his residence, namely his parents’ house in Karaj, by a court courier. He had not been present at the time of delivery as he had been on a visit to his sister’s house in Teheran. The summons had ordered him to appear in court on 12 May 2011. Fearing that he might be arrested upon his appearance, he had not presented himself in court but had hidden at his sister’s home and at the homes of various friends in Teheran. As a result of his non-appearance before the court, agents of the secret service had come to his parents’ house the following day (13 May 2011) in order to arrest him. Because of his absence, his father had been arrested instead. The applicant had been left a message that he should report to the district police, otherwise his father would remain in detention. For fear of arrest and on his family’s advice, he had fled the country without legal exit papers in June 2011.
In order to support his account during the first hearing, the applicant submitted the allegedly original summons of the Revolutionary Court of Teheran of 10 May 2011. He also submitted documentary material pertaining to the anti-regime demonstrations, which had allegedly been produced by him and his friends.
The second, more detailed hearing took place at the Migration Board’s office in Berne 21 months after the first hearing, on 5 April 2013. A member of the non-governmental Aid Organisation of the Protestant Church of Switzerland (Hilfswerk der Evangelischen Kirche Schweiz) was present as a neutral witness in order to guarantee the fairness of the hearing. He had the opportunity to add comments at the end of the minutes of the hearing in the event that he had witnessed any irregularities, but did not note down any such observations. Again, an interpreter was present during the hearing and the minutes were translated for the applicant prior to his signing.
The applicant again gave an account of the alleged events in Iran leading up to his escape. With regard to the events on the day when the summons had allegedly been delivered to his parents’ house (10 May 2011), the applicant now described that members of the Ettelaad security service had come to his parents’ house in his absence in order to search for him. They had searched the house, opening chests of drawers and cupboards. As they had been unable to find him, they had issued the summons while at his parents’ house and had left it behind. Confronted with the fact that he had not mentioned the house search of 10 May 2011 during the first hearing, the applicant responded that he had in fact done so, that he had recounted the same facts during the first hearing and that it was not his fault that this fact had not been recorded in the minutes of the first hearing.
Furthermore, asked about his hiding place prior to his escape from Iran, the applicant stated during the second interview that he had stayed at his sister’s home the whole time. When confronted with his testimony from the first hearing, the applicant explained that he had been with friends as well and added that these people had been friends from work and not friends he knew from the demonstrations.
With regard to the aftermath of the last demonstration he had attended in March 2011, the applicant stated during the second hearing that he did not know that the Ettelaad security forces were planning to arrest him. He again alleged that one of the friends arrested during the demonstrations had told the security forces who had participated in these demonstrations. Asked when this friend who had given his name had been arrested, the applicant responded that he did not know and that it had not necessarily been this arrested friend directly who had given his name to the security forces. Arrests of that kind usually started a whole chain reaction: the arrested person would give some names, then these people would be arrested and questioned and give further names, and so on.
Questioned further during the second hearing about any special occurrences with regard to his last demonstration in March 2011, the applicant stated that the demonstrations had all been rather similar. People had been arrested and agents of the government had beaten up people during the last demonstration just as during any other demonstration. Asked whether he knew the people who had been arrested, the applicant responded that he just knew these people from the street. They had not been people from his region. Teheran was a big city and people had come from everywhere. Confronted with his testimony from the first interview, in which he had claimed that friends of his had been arrested, the applicant stated that the people demonstrating together were all friends in a way and that he had used the term “friends” in that sense when giving his account of the events during the demonstrations.
On 10 April 2013 the Migration Board dismissed the applicant’s request for asylum and ordered him to leave Switzerland by 7 June 2013. The Migration Board reasoned that the applicant’s statement of facts was not credible as his descriptions of the events in Iran had not been consistent during the two hearings. The descriptions diverged considerably from each other with regard to decisive points of the applicant’s story. During the first hearing, the applicant had neither mentioned the appearance of the Ettelaad security forces at his parents’ house, nor had he mentioned the house search, nor the fact that it had been the Ettelaad who had issued a summons directly at his parents’ house on 10 May 2011, but had simply stated that a courier of the court had brought the summons. Furthermore, the accounts of the applicant’s hiding prior to his escape from Iran diverged from each other, as the applicant had first stated that he had hidden at his sister’s home and at friends’ homes, whereas he had claimed to have stayed exclusively at his sister’s home during the second hearing. Finally, the applicant had only mentioned the arrest of his friends during his last demonstration only in the account he had given during the first hearing and not during the second interview. The Migration Board took into consideration that the applicant had submitted some documentary material including the alleged summons of 10 May 2011, but was of the view that these documents could not dispel the doubts about the applicant’s account. The documentary material gave only a general account of the demonstrations, but not specifically anything about the applicant’s alleged participation, and a summons alone could not prove any public persecution.
On 15 May 2013 the applicant, now represented by counsel, appealed against the decision of the Migration Board to the Federal Administrative Court (Bundesverwaltungsgericht). He asked the Federal Administrative Court to quash the decision of the Migration Board, to grant him asylum, to find that the execution of the expulsion order would be an improper and unreasonable measure, and to grant him legal aid.
In his appeal the applicant claimed that upon the advice of his counsel he had phoned his family in Iran and had asked whether any further summons had been received. On that occasion he had learnt that he had again been summoned to appear before the Revolutionary Court of Teheran on 5 February 2013. He had also learnt that the Revolutionary Court had convicted him in absentia on 7 May 2013 because he had participated in demonstrations against the Iranian regime and had criticised the regime in slogans. The court had sentenced him to seven years’ imprisonment and 70 lashes. The applicant claimed to be in possession only of copies of the summons of 5 February 2013 and the judgment of 7 May 2013 because his family suspected state surveillance and feared that the mail would be checked if they tried to send him the originals by post. The applicant submitted the copies of the alleged new summons and of the alleged judgment to the Federal Administrative Court. In his appeal, he also asked the Federal Administrative Court and the Migration Board whether the authenticity of the two documents could be assessed by the Swiss Embassy in Teheran if the originals were handed in or shown there.
In his appeal the applicant also argued that the deviations between his two statements of the facts could be explained by the different nature of the two hearings. The first hearing had been only a summary hearing and the applicant had been asked not to go into detail. It was therefore understandable that he had not described the house search of 10 May 2011 until the second hearing. With regard to his hiding prior to his departure from Iran, his two reports were correct and consistent. He had stayed at his sister’s home but he had also met friends from work and spent time with them. With regard to the events during the last demonstration, he had in essence stated the same facts during the two hearings, namely that he and his friends had documented the demonstration and had handed out leaflets, that many participants, including his friends, had been arrested, and that he believed that one of the arrested persons had passed on his name to the Iranian authorities. The applicant further argued that when assessing his two statements, it had to be taken into consideration that almost two years had elapsed between the two hearings and that no one was able to describe events in exactly the same way after such a long time. Finally, the applicant claimed that the second hearing had not been fair, as the interviewer had constantly interrupted him and treated him as if he were lying.
On 22 May 2013 the Federal Administrative Court delivered an interim decision in which it declined the applicant’s request for legal aid, reasoning that his application lacked any prospects of success. In its preliminary assessment of the case, the Federal Administrative Court found that the applicant had not convincingly shown that he was persecuted by the Iranian State. His statements of the facts as given during the two hearings by the Migration Board diverged from each other with regard to essential points and his story was therefore not credible. The summons of 5 February 2013 and the judgment of 7 May 2013 had no probative value as the applicant had submitted only copies of these documents.
On 2 July 2013 the Federal Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal as manifestly ill-founded. In accordance with section 111 and section 111a of the Swiss Asylum Act of 26 June 1998 (hereafter “the Asylum Act”, see paragraphs 30ss. below), the case was decided by a single judge and the judgment contained only a summary reasoning. An oral hearing was not provided for in the rules of procedure. In accordance with section 111a of the Asylum Act, the Federal Administrative Court also abstained from the possibility of exchanging observations between the parties. The Migration Board was hence not given an opportunity to comment on the submission of the copies of the alleged summons of 5 February 2013 and the judgment of 7 May 2013 or on the possibility of having the alleged original documents – which were allegedly in the possession of the applicant’s family – checked by the Swiss embassy in Teheran.
The Federal Administrative Court decided that the applicant had no right to asylum. It further stated that there was no reason not to execute the expulsion order as the applicant had not been able to prove that he had been subject to state persecution in Iran. His accounts of the events during the two hearings diverged with regard to essential details and the applicant had not managed to explain these discrepancies to the Federal Administrative Court’s satisfaction. The time that had passed between the two hearings could not explain the contradictions, since the applicant had not been expected to describe the events in Iran in exactly the same way but rather in a consistent manner. Furthermore, contrary to the applicant’s allegation, there was no indication that the second hearing had been unfair. The hearing had been attended by a member of the Aid Organisation of the Protestant Church of Switzerland as a neutral witness. This person had not made any remarks about irregularities witnessed during the hearing, although he could have done so. The minutes had been translated for the applicant and signed by him. He had therefore had the opportunity to correct any statement had he found that it had not been noted down correctly.
The court further found that it could not draw any conclusions from the submitted copy of the summons of 5 February 2013 or the copy of the judgment of 7 May 2013 in the applicant’s favour, as copies had no probative value. The court did not mention the first summons of 10 May 2011, the authenticity of which had not been questioned in the decision of the Migration Board.
On 22 July 2013 the Migration Board issued a new expulsion order requiring the applicant to leave Switzerland before 19 August 2013.
On 15 August 2013 the applicant lodged his application with the Court and asked for Rule 39 of the Rules of Court to be applied in order to stay the enforcement of his expulsion. He stated that he had participated in demonstrations against the Iranian regime following the presidential elections of 2009 up until March 2011 and that he had handed out leaflets on these occasions. He further alleged that the Ettelaad security forces had searched his parents’ house with the purpose of arresting him. Moreover, he claimed that he had been summoned twice to appear before the Revolutionary Court of Teheran and that the same court had sentenced him in absentia on 7 May 2013 to seven years’ imprisonment, the payment of a fine, and 70 lashes of the whip because of his participation in the demonstrations.
In support of his claims the applicant attached to his application of 15 August 2013 documentary material on the demonstrations in Iran, written in Persian, copies of the alleged summonses of 10 May 2011 and 5 February 2013 and a copy of the alleged judgment of 7 May 2013.
On 10 October 2013 the applicant informed the Court that he was now in possession of the original summons of 5 February 2013 and of the judgment of 7 May 2013, as his sister’s husband had finally dared to send the documents by special delivery in August 2013. He also provided the Court with English translations of the summons of 5 February 2013 and the judgment of 7 May 2013. A translation of the summons of 10 May 2011 was not submitted. A translation was included in the minutes of the applicant’s second hearing, however, and this had been submitted to the Court.
According to the translation of the summons of 5 February 2013, the applicant was summoned to appear before the 10th division of the Islamic Revolutionary Court of Teheran on 5 February 2013 at 9 a.m., because of “participation in demonstrations against the public safety and the system of the Islamic Republic of Iran”. The summons was signed by an “investigating authority” on 3 February 2013.
The translation of the judgment of 7 May 2013 of the Revolutionary Court of Teheran reads in its material part:
“Charge: Undertakings and activities against the sacred order of the Islamic Republic of Iran
Judgement
In the case of the accused Mr. M.A., the court – due to the charge sheet of the 10th division of the public prosecutor’s office for the General and the Revolutionary Court of Teheran, due to the existing exhibits and his file, due to the credible report of the intelligence service and the clarification as well as the investigations of public prosecutor’s office mentioned above, due to the testimonies of the persons under arrest as well as due to the especially useful information on file, moreover because of the punishable participation in illegal gatherings, because of the disturbance of the peace and the system of the Islamic Republic of Iran, because of being a troublemaker and the writing of slogans, calling for resistance against the polity by distributing flyers and non-appearance before court despite being summoned, as well as due to the waiver of defence in court – comes to the conclusion that his guilt has been established.
For these reasons, in application of Art. 502 of the Islamic law, he is sentenced to 7 years of imprisonment, 70 strokes of the whip and to a fine of 15 Million Rial which is to be paid to the treasury.
An appeal against this judgment delivered in absentia is possible within ten days after disclosure. After this period of time, a request for reconsideration can be submitted to the competent courts of the province of Teheran.”
The translation also states that the judgment had been
“disclosed on 15 May 2013”.
The provisions applicable in the present case, concerning the right of foreigners to enter and to remain in Switzerland, are laid down in the Asylum Act of 26 June 1998 (Asylgesetz, 142.31 – hereafter referred to as “the Asylum Act”) and in the Aliens Act of 16 December 2005 (Bundesgesetz über die Ausländerinnen und Ausländer, 142.20 - hereafter referred to as “the Aliens Act”).
Chapter 1, Section 2, of the Asylum Act stipulates that an alien who is considered to be a refugee is granted asylum and is entitled to remain in Switzerland. Chapter 1, Section 3, of the same Act states that the term “refugee” means aliens who are exposed to serious disadvantages or who have a reasonable fear of being exposed to such disadvantages in future in their home country or in their last country of residence on grounds of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or because of their political views. According to the same section, the term “serious disadvantages” is understood to mean a danger to life, limb or liberty, or measures that generate intolerable psychological pressure.
Under Chapter 2, Section 7 of the Asylum Act, a refugee has to prove his status or at least has to provide credible evidence that he is a refugee within the meaning of Chapter 1, Section 3. Sufficient credible evidence is provided if the competent authorities are persuaded that it is more likely than not that a person is a refugee within the meaning of Section 3. Insufficient or inconsistent reasoning with regard to essential issues, inconsistency in respect of objective facts, or submissions which are substantially based on falsified pieces of evidence militate against the credibility of an asylum seeker’s submissions.
As regards the enforcement of an expulsion order, Chapter 1, Section 5 of the Asylum Act provides that no one may be forced by any means to leave Switzerland and to return to a country in which his life, limb or liberty is threatened for a reason stipulated by Section 3 of the same Chapter (see above) – or a country which he risks being forced to leave for a country of that type – unless there are significant grounds for believing that a person is a threat to the security of Switzerland or a danger to the public because he has been convicted of a particularly serious crime. Chapter 2, Section 44 of the Asylum Act and Section 83 of the Aliens Act add that, in the event that the enforcement of the expulsion order is not permitted by law and in cases where the enforcement is unreasonable or impossible, an applicant is allowed to stay in Switzerland provisionally (vorläufige Aufnahme).
Asylum decisions are taken by the Federal Migration Board (Chapter 2, Section 6a). If the Migration Board refuses to grant asylum, it issues an expulsion order and sets the date by which the country must be left (Chapter 2, Sections 44 and 45). The asylum seeker can appeal to the Federal Administrative Court against the Migration Board’s decision to refuse asylum and against the expulsion order (Chapter 8, Section 105 of the Asylum Act, Section 5 of the Federal Administrative Proceedings Act of 20 December 1968 (Bundesgesetz über das Verwaltungsverfahren, 172.012) and Sections 82 and 83 of the Federal Court’s Act of 17 June 2005 (Bundesgestz über das Bundesgericht, 173.110)). The Federal Administrative Court decides as a first and final instance in such cases.
The Secretary-General’s above-cited report states:
“I. 5. The United Nations human rights mechanisms continue to raise concerns about amputations, flogging, and increased application of the death penalty, arbitrary detention and unfair trials. Freedom of expression remained curtailed, with a large number of journalists still in prison and social media being blocked. Human rights defenders and women’s rights activists continue to face arrest and persecution. [...].
A. b. 10. [...] The recurrence of cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment, such as amputation of limbs and flogging remains a cause for concern. The judiciary has frequently applied punishments which are prohibited by the ICCPR, to which Iran is a State party. The revised Islamic Penal Code provides for limb amputations for offences, including Moharebeh and theft and flogging for drinking alcohol, theft and certain sexual offences. On 7 January 2013, the Head of the Supreme Court of Iran defended punishments such as amputation, arguing that the proper implementation of Islamic law could prevent crimes. [...].”
This above-cited report states:
“Executive summary:
[...] The most egregious human rights problems were the government’s manipulation of the electoral process, which severely limited citizens’ right to change their government peacefully through free and fair elections; restrictions on civil liberties, including the freedoms of assembly, speech, and press; and disregard for the physical integrity of persons whom it arbitrarily and unlawfully detained, tortured, or killed.
Other reported human rights problems included: disappearances; cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment, including judicially sanctioned amputation and flogging; politically motivated violence and repression, such as beatings and rape; harsh and life-threatening conditions in detention and prison facilities, with instances of deaths in custody; arbitrary arrest and lengthy pretrial detention, sometimes incommunicado; continued impunity of security forces; denial of fair public trials, sometimes resulting in executions without due process; the lack of an independent judiciary; political prisoners and detainees; [...].
Section 1. c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment:
The constitution prohibits all forms of torture “for the purpose of extracting confession or acquiring information,” but there were several credible reports that security forces and prison personnel tortured and abused detainees and prisoners. [...]
Common methods of torture and abuse in prisons included prolonged solitary confinement, rape, sexual humiliation, threats of execution, sleep deprivation, and severe and repeated beatings. There were reports of severe overcrowding in many prisons and repeated denials of medical care for prisoners [...].
The government defended its use of flogging and amputation as “punishment,” not torture. Judicially sanctioned corporal punishment included lashings and, for offenses involving multiple thefts, amputations. On October 23, the UN special rapporteur noted reports about limb amputations for the crime of theft and reports about the flogging of 123 persons between July 2012 and June 30, 2013, for such crimes as “sedition,” “acts incompatible with chastity,” drinking alcohol, “illicit” relationships, and nonpenetrative same-sex sexual activity [...].
Prison and Detention Center Conditions:
Prison conditions were reportedly often harsh and life threatening. There were reports that some prisoners committed suicide as a result of the harsh conditions, solitary confinement, and torture to which they were subjected. Prison authorities often refused medical treatment for injuries prisoners reportedly suffered at the hands of their abusers and from the poor sanitary conditions of prison life. [...].
Section 1. d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention:
[...] Authorities commonly used arbitrary arrests to impede alleged antiregime activities. Plainclothes officers often arrived unannounced at homes or offices, arrested persons, conducted raids, and confiscated private documents, passports, computers, electronic media, and other personal items without warrants or other assurances of due process. Individuals often remained in detention facilities for long periods without charges or trials and were sometimes prevented from informing others of their whereabouts for several days [...].
Section 1. e. Denial of Fair Public Trial: [...], Trial Procedures:
[...] Political Prisoners and Detainees: Statistics regarding the number of citizens imprisoned for their political beliefs were not available. The ICHRI estimated there were 500 political prisoners in the country, including those arbitrarily detained for peaceful activities or the exercise of free expression. Other human rights activists estimated there could be more than 1,000 prisoners of conscience, including those jailed for their religious beliefs [...]. During the year the government arrested students, journalists, lawyers, political activists, women’s activists, artists, and members of religious minorities (see sections 1.a. through 1.e., 6, and 7.a.); charged many with crimes, such as “propaganda against the system” and “insulting the supreme leader;” and treated such cases as national security trials [...]. Political prisoners were also at greater risk of torture and abuse in detention. The government often placed political prisoners in prisons far from their homes and families. The government did not permit international humanitarian organizations or UN representatives to have access to political prisoners.
Section 1. f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence:
The constitution states that “reputation, life, property, [and] dwelling[s]” are protected from trespass, except as “provided by law,” but the government routinely infringed on this right. Security forces monitored the social activities of citizens, entered homes and offices, monitored telephone conversations and internet communications, and opened mail without court authorization. There were widespread reports that government agents entered, searched, and ransacked the homes and offices of reformist or opposition leaders, activists, political prisoners, journalists, and their families to intimidate them [...].”
“Freedom from Torture” is a non-governmental medical foundation for the care of victims of torture in the United Kingdom. The organisation has been working for more than 25 years to provide direct clinical services for survivors of torture who arrive in the United Kingdom, as well as striving to protect and promote their rights. Its above-cited report on torture victims from Iran states:
“Key findings of the report:
The detailed examination of evidence of detention and torture perpetrated in these cases in 2009-2011, as documented in the sample of 50 medico-legal reports (MLRs) prepared by Freedom from Torture, indicates that:
Torture was a key tool of repression used by the Iranian authorities as part of their efforts to crush dissents in Tehran and elsewhere in the months leading up to and for an extended period following the presidential elections in June 2009;
This crackdown involved torture – often during multiple detention episodes – of many people for whom the 2009 presidential election period was the first time they, or other family members, had engaged in any level of political or other form of activism;
A wide range of physical, psychological and environmental torture methods were practised in a highly systematic way by torturers in Iran during this period;
Torture was often used to obtain information about individuals and networks involved in organising political or other activity deemed to be ‘anti-regime’ and to force people to sign what they understood to be ‘confessions’ or other statements which were used against them in legal proceedings or which could be so used in the future;
Half of the cases in this study were arrested in Tehran with the remainder in other provincial capitals and a small number in rural areas. In all cases, the reasons for detention and torture included a ‘political’ element, often at a very low level, even if this emerged after arrest for non-political offences or was imputed to the person on account of the activities of their family members or, in one case, a business associate. Twenty seven of the cases were arrested and detained while attending demonstrations and other protests following the presidential elections [...].”
In the above-cited submission, the non-governmental human rights organisations “International Federation for Human Rights” and “Iranian League for the Defense of Human Rights” list the sentences of numerous human rights activists, journalists, artists and students suspected of anti-regime protests and actions. Several of these sentences included long prison terms and severe flogging. The list in the report includes:
“(p. 7.) Other Women: Shadi Sadr and Mahbubeh Abbas-Gholizadeh, two founders of the “Stop Stoning to Death” Campaign were sentenced in absentia to six years of imprisonment with 74 lashes and two and a half years of imprisonment with 30 lashes, respectively, on 17 May 2010. They have both left Iran to avoid imprisonment [...].
(p. 27.) Artists: [...] Mohammad Nourizad, a director and journalist, was arrested in December 2009 and sentenced to three and a half years’ imprisonment and 50 lashes. He was released on 6 May 2011[...].
(p. 32.) Students: Plain-clothed security agents, members of the Special Squads of the Police and Special Squads of the Islamic Revolution Guards Corps brutally attacked some university dormitories and ransacked them in Tehran, Isfahan and Shiraz, in the aftermath of the June 2009 Presidential Election, as a result of which five students were killed in Tehran, two in Isfahan and two in Shiraz. In Tehran Dormitory, 100 students were arrested. However, rather than investigating the attacks and killings, military courts tried about 40 of them who had lodged complaints with the judiciary and sentenced them to punishments ranging from financial penalties, lashing and prison sentences from 3 to 10 months, in May 2011. Since then, several students have lost their lives in the protest demonstrations or in custody [...].”