The applicants are a political party which ran in the 2014 general elections and fourteen candidates on its electoral list. The application concerns the removal of the applicant party from the list of participants three days before the elections on the ground that, contrary to the provisions of the electoral law, it had used undeclared funds, including money from abroad.
The applicant party is a Moldovan political party without representation in Parliament at the time of the events. The other applicants were candidates on its electoral list in the 2014 legislative elections. The applicant party and Mr I. Pohilă are represented by Mr S. Pavlovschi, a lawyer practising in Chișinău. The remaining applicants are represented by Mr I. Pohilă, a lawyer practising in Chișinău.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr O. Rotari.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In May 2014 Parliament decided that the next general election would be held on 30 November of the same year. The decision was published in the Official Gazette on 10 June 2014 and entered into force on 15 September 2014.
One of the applicants in the present case, Mr R. Usatîi, is a businessman who, at the time of the events, ran all his business in the Russian Federation. After 2012 he returned to Moldova, where he gained popularity as a wealthy businessman, philanthropist, showman, politician and organiser of concerts and anti-government rallies. In April 2014 Mr Usatîi became the leader of an inactive political party after that party’s congress elected him and changed the party’s name. However, the Ministry of Justice refused to register the changes to the party’s statute and thus it could not participate in the upcoming elections under its new name and leadership. In August 2014 Mr Usatîi created another political party, “P.”. However, the Ministry of Justice refused to register that party too.
On 12 September 2014 the applicant party was officially created and registered by the Ministry of Justice with another person as its leader and without Mr Usatîi’s involvement. On 13 October 2014, the Central Electoral Commission (“CEC”) officially registered the applicant party to participate in the elections and it was then that Mr Usatîi appeared as candidate number one in the applicant party’s list of candidates, and the electoral symbol of the party became a square containing Mr Usatîi’s first and last names. The other applicants in the present case were also included in the applicant party’s list of candidates for the November 2014 elections.
According to the results of a poll conducted in November 2014, the applicant party was credited with almost 9% of popular support, making it the fourth most represented political party in the Parliament to be elected.
On 26 November 2014, that is three days before the elections, the chief of the general police inspectorate wrote to the CEC that the applicant party had breached the provisions of the Code of Minor Offences (Codul contravențional) and requested the cancellation of its registration in the upcoming elections. According to the letter, between 30 May and 29 September 2014 the first candidate on the applicant party’s list of candidates, Mr Usatîi, had officially brought into Moldova foreign currency in cash in an amount of 14,872,128 Moldovan lei (MDL) (the equivalent of approximately 800,000 euros (EUR)). Over the same period of time Mr Usatîi had used MDL 6,713,622 in two transactions, while the remaining MDL 8,158,506 had been used for the needs of the applicant party’s campaign, in the following manner:
-  the applicant party had used some seventy mobile telephone lines belonging to a private company owned by the mother of one of the applicant party’s candidates, for which that company had spent MDL 112,000 (the equivalent of EUR 6,000) between August and October 2014;
-  the applicant party had filled its cars with some 1,200 litres of fuel worth MDL 21,450 (the equivalent of EUR 1,200) at a petrol station owned by the son of one of its members, which did not appear in the applicant party’s financial reports;
-  the applicant party had used for its campaign eleven cars which had been bought by two candidates on its electoral list who, according to their tax returns for the previous years, had no means to buy them; the value of the cars was MDL 5,342,003 (the equivalent of EUR 286,000).
The letter continued by stating that on 25 November 2014 proceedings concerning the alleged breach of Article 48 of the Code of Minor Offences had been initiated against the applicant party and against Mr Usatîi in respect of all the above facts. However, since the Electoral Code did not allow for administrative or criminal sanctions to be imposed on candidates in elections, the police inspectorate requested permission for them to be applied. It also requested that the applicant party’s registration for the upcoming elections be cancelled on the grounds of using funds from abroad or undeclared funds.
It does not appear that the letter was accompanied by any documents or other evidence supporting the facts described therein.
On the same date the CEC held a meeting at which it decided, inter alia, to lodge an application with the Chișinău Court of Appeal seeking the cancellation of the applicant party’s registration in the elections on the basis of the facts described in the general police inspectorate’s letter. An application was lodged with the Chișinău Court of Appeal the same day.
On 27 November 2014 the applicant party contested the abovementioned decision (see paragraph 10 above) before the Court of Appeal arguing, inter alia, that the CEC’s meeting had been announced only fifteen minutes before it began, in breach of Article 37 of the CEC’s Rules (see paragraph 22 below) which set a minimum of twelve hours for the announcement of the meetings. Not only had the meeting begun in the absence of the applicant party’s representative, but he had not been given access to the materials examined by the CEC. Only after the adoption of the CEC’s decision had the applicant party’s representative been given a copy of the general police inspectorate’s letter. Thus, the applicant party’s right to defence during the CEC’s meeting had not been respected.
In so far as the merits of the allegations against it were concerned, the applicant party argued that the accusations were unsubstantiated and based on supposition. The proceedings initiated against it were pending and, according to the Code of Minor Offences, the accused person was presumed innocent until proved guilty by a final judicial decision. The applicant party also submitted that it had opened a special bank account which had received donations of MDL 10,842,000 from its members. During the campaign the applicant party had spent MDL 10,746,405 from that account, of which MDL 975,000 for fuel and MDL 200,000 for mobile communications. None of the money belonging to Mr Usatîi had been used in the campaign.
The applicant party presented before the Court of Appeal copies of lease contracts for 161 cars it had used during the campaign, according to which they had been leased to the applicant party free of charge by its members for the duration of the campaign, that is between 13 October and 30 November 2014. It also presented copies of receipts for the purchase of fuel for those cars.
Mr Usatîi submitted during the proceedings that he had provided the money for the acquisition of eleven cars by two persons who worked for him and who later became party members. However, that acquisition had taken place in May 2014, that is before the beginning of the electoral period. The fact that those members had not declared the cars to the tax authorities could not be held against the party. Mr Usatîi also stated that the money brought by him into Moldova between 30 May and 29 September 2014 had been given to charity.
The applicant party’s representative also submitted that, according to Article 69 of the Electoral Code (see paragraph 20 below), the amount of undeclared funds used during the campaign had to attain a minimum of MDL 2,750,000 in order for the CEC to be able to disqualify a political party from participating in the elections on the ground of use of undeclared funds. The amount of MDL 8,158,506, which the CEC deemed to have been spent by Mr Usatîi on the campaign, represented just the difference between the amount of money brought by him to Moldova and the amount used by him for two transactions. There was no evidence to prove that he had used that money for the party’s campaign.
The applicant party also submitted that it was the only one of all the parties running in the campaign whose funds had been verified by the authorities, and argued that the proceedings against it were politically motivated.
On 27 November 2014 the Chișinău Court of Appeal accepted the CEC’s application to exclude the applicant party from the elections and dismissed the applicant party’s objection. In support of its decision, the Court of Appeal reiterated the submissions in the general police inspectorate’s letter and ordered the confiscation of MDL 8,158,506, representing the funds from abroad used by the first applicant.
The applicant party challenged the above-mentioned decision with an appeal on points of law before the Supreme Court of Justice. It argued, inter alia, that there was no evidence to support the accusations against it. Moreover, it submitted that the eleven cars which had been bought with Mr Usatîi’s money had in fact been purchased before 30 May 2014, namely the beginning of the period over which the impugned MDL 8,158,506 had entered Moldova.
On 29 November 2014 the Supreme Court of Justice dismissed the applicant party’s appeal.
The relevant provisions of the Electoral Code of the Republic of Moldova in force at the material time read as follows:
Article 36. Ban on foreign funding
“(1)  It shall be unlawful for direct and/or indirect funding and material support of any kind to initiative groups, electoral campaigns rolled out by candidates and to electoral competitors to be provided by other countries, by foreign, international or joint enterprises, institutions, organisations, as well as by individuals who are not Moldovan citizens. Such funds are subject to seizure and shall be transferred to the state budget. None of the above provisions shall be construed and applied to limit funding allocated openly and transparently with the aim of supporting efforts to promote democratic values and international standards for free, democratic and fair elections.
(2)  If an electoral competitor has intentionally used money from abroad, the Central Election Commission shall submit to the Chișinău Court of Appeal a request to cancel its registration.”
Article 69. Legal liability
“(4)  The cancellation of registration is applied at the request of the Central Electoral Commission, [...], by a final court decision which finds:
a)  the intentional use by the electoral competitor of undeclared funds or exceeding expenses above the ceiling of the means of the electoral fund, in all cases in considerable amounts (more than 5% of the limit) [in 2014 the limit was 55 million lei];
b)  the intentional use by an electoral competitor of funds from abroad; ...”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Minor Offences read as follows:
Article 48. The use of foreign or undeclared funds in elections and referenda
“The use of foreign or undeclared funds in elections and referenda shall be punished with a fine of MDL 600 - 800 for individuals and MDL 6,000 - 10,000 for officials.”
According to Article 37 of the CEC’s Rules, the agenda of ordinary meetings shall be brought to the attention of its members and made public at least twenty-four hours in advance, and that of extraordinary meetings at least twelve hours in advance.