The case originated in an application (no. 25536/14) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Ms Maja Škorjanec (“the applicant”), on 20 March 2014.
The applicant was represented by Ms N. Owens, a lawyer practising in Zagreb. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged, in particular, a failure by the domestic authorities to effectively discharge their positive obligations in relation to a racially motivated act of violence against her. She relied on Articles 3 and 8 taken alone and in conjunction with Article 14 of the Convention.
On 30 June 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1988 and lives in Zagreb.
On 9 June 2013 Zagreb police (Policijska uprava Zagrebačka, hereinafter “the police”) received an emergency call informing them that two men were attacking a man and a woman of Roma origin.
The police immediately went to the scene, where they found the applicant and her partner Š.Š., and another individual, I.M., with whom the applicant and her partner had had a verbal and physical conflict. They all had visible injuries. Soon afterwards, nearby, the police found and arrested another man, S.K., who had also been involved in the conflict.
A preliminary report prepared by the police stated that the applicant and her partner had first had an argument with I.M. and S.K., during which S.K. had said “all Gypsies should be killed, we will exterminate you”. S.K. and I.M. had then attacked the applicant’s partner. The applicant and her partner had tried to escape but I.M. and S.K. had managed to catch them. S.K. had grabbed the applicant’s T-shirt and thrown her to the ground and then kicked her in the head. I.M. and S.K. had then continued beating the applicant’s partner, whose hands had been slashed with a knife by S.K..
The police report stated that the applicant had a contusion that was visible below her left eye. The emergency medical services also attended the scene. A doctor recorded the applicant’s injuries as minor bodily injuries. On the same day the applicant was examined at a hospital, where her injuries were confirmed. She was told to rest and take painkillers.
In connection with the incident, the police carried out an on-site inspection and a further assessment of the available material. The police also interviewed the applicant and her partner as well as the two assailants.
In his police interview of 9 June 2013 the applicant’s partner Š.Š. stated that he was of Roma origin. On the day of the incident he had been at a flea market with the applicant when some passers-by had pushed her. He had realised that it had been two young men and he had told the applicant to ignore them because they were drunk (“wasted”). One of them had heard him and had turned to Š.Š., saying “Fuck your Gypsy mother, who is wasted? Who are you to tell me that? You should all be exterminated, I fuck your Gypsy mother” (Jebem ti mater cigansku, tko je urokan, šta ti meni imaš govoriti, sve vas treba istrijebiti mamu vam cigansku jebem). The other man had also turned towards Š.Š., saying “Fuck your mother, you should all be exterminated, I will kill you” (Jebem vam majku, treba vas istrijebiti, ubit ću te). Š.Š. stated that he had then panicked and had drawn a knife in order to scare them. However, that had created a further outburst of anger from the two men; one of them had taken out a knife and they had started chasing Š.Š. As Š.Š. was running away, the applicant had joined him and they had started running away together, looking for help. However, the attackers had managed to get hold of Š.Š. and had started beating him. At that point the applicant had tried to help and had also been hit. The two men had then continued beating Š.Š., saying that he was a Rom and should be killed.
In her police interview of 9 June 2013 the applicant stated that she lived with Š.Š., with whom she had had two children. She confirmed Š.Š.’s version of events, saying that she had been pushed by the two men. After Š.Š. had reacted by saying that the men should be left alone because they were drunk, one of the two men had said, “Who is drunk? Fuck your Gypsy mother, you should all be exterminated, this will be a white Croatia again, you are garbage” (Tko je pijan, jebem ti mater cigansku, vas treba istrijebiti, ovo će ponovno biti bijela Hrvatska, smeće jedno). The applicant stated that after this the two men had started attacking Š.Š. She had tried to approach them to help Š.Š. but another woman had prevented her from doing so. However, at one point she had joined Š.Š. and they had started running away. The two men had then caught them and one of them had grabbed her by the T-shirt and said, “What are you going to do now you bitch? I will beat you now” (Što ćeš sad kujo jedna, sad ću te prebiti). He had then kicked her in the head. The two men had continued beating Š.Š., while she had run away and looked for help.
In their interviews of 9 June 2013 the two assailants explained that the conflict had broken out because Š.Š. had offended them by saying that they were drunk. They denied the conflict had had any racial overtones.
On 10 June 2013 the police lodged a criminal complaint against S.K. and I.M. with the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office (Općinsko državno odvjetništvo u Zagrebu) for suspected commission of a hate crime, perpetrated by attempting to inflict grievous bodily harm on Š.Š., and motivated by the latter’s Roma origin. The applicant was mentioned in the criminal complaint as a witness.
In the course of the investigation the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office questioned the two suspects and on 17 June and 31 July 2013 it instructed the police to conduct an identification procedure and formal questioning of the applicant and Š.Š. as witnesses.
When questioned as a witness, Š.Š. repeated the statement he had given during the first police interview. He explained how, after the two men had pushed the applicant, one of them had turned towards him and uttered the insults related to his Roma origin (see paragraph 11 above). Š.Š. also stated that the applicant had been attacked after she had tried to help him when the two men were beating him up.
During her questioning as a witness, the applicant repeated the statement she had given during the first police interview (see paragraph 12 above).
Upon completion of the investigation, on 30 October 2013 the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office indicted S.K. and I.M. in the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court (Općinski kazneni sud u Zagrebu) on charges of making serious threats against Š.Š. and inflicting bodily injury on him, associated with a hate-crime element. The indictment also made reference to the attack on the applicant, suggesting that she had been kicked in the head while trying to save Š.Š. from the beating.
The indictment was confirmed and the case was sent for trial on 21 March 2014.
Meanwhile, on 31 October 2013 the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office informed Š.Š., as a victim in the proceedings, that an indictment had been lodged against S.K. and I.M. in connection with the attack on him. On 23 January 2014 the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office informed Š.Š.’s lawyer, L.K., of the institution of the proceedings in the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court.
At a hearing on 9 October 2014 the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court questioned Š.Š. He repeated the statements given to the police. When asked whether the two assailants had said anything to the applicant related to Š.Š.’s racial origin, Š.Š. stated that she had told him something but he could no longer remember the details. He thought that she had said that the two assailants had told her that she was also Roma if she was with a Roma man. On the basis of an agreement between the parties, including Š.Š.’s representative, the applicant’s statement to the police was admitted in evidence and she was not questioned further at the trial.
By a judgment of 13 October 2014 the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court found S.K. and I.M. guilty as charged and sentenced them to one year and six months’ imprisonment.
In the meantime, on 29 July 2013 the applicant and her partner, represented by the lawyer L.K., had lodged a criminal complaint with the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office against two unidentified suspects in connection with the incident of 9 June 2013 (see paragraphs 6-13 above). It was alleged in the criminal complaint that one of the suspects had first pushed the applicant and had then told her that she was a “bitch” (kuja) who had a relationship with a Roma man and that she would be beaten. She had been grabbed by the T-shirt and thrown to the ground, banging her head. The assailants had then continued beating Š.Š., threatening to kill him and the applicant. The criminal complaint also alleged that the assailants had stolen two mobile telephones from Š.Š. at the same time.
The applicant’s representative tried to obtain the relevant information about the attackers from the police on the grounds that she needed the information in order to institute court proceedings. On 12 November 2013 the police informed the applicant’s representative that they had lodged a criminal complaint with the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office against two individuals in connection with a suspicion that they had committed the offence of attempted grievous bodily harm against the applicant and her partner, which, in the circumstances of the case, had been classified as a hate crime. The applicant’s representative was also informed that she should contact the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office for all further information.
The applicant’s representative then informed the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office that the applicant and her partner would participate in the proceedings as victims and requested to be informed of all relevant procedural steps. On 17 February 2014 the applicant’s representative, invoking the domestic authorities’ obligations under the Convention, requested information from the police and the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office about the criminal complaint lodged on behalf of the applicant.
On 31 October 2014 the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office rejected the applicant’s criminal complaint. It examined the materials related to the investigation into the incident of 9 June 2013 and the criminal proceedings against S.K. and I.M. (see paragraphs 10-22 above). The relevant part of the decision reads:
“In view of the above, it is established without any doubt that on the day in issue there was a physical conflict between S.K. and I.M. and Š.Š. whereby [S.K. and I.M.] caused bodily injury to and threatened Š.Š., and those offences were committed primarily because of hatred towards Roma.
However, the statements of the witnesses Š.Š. and Maja Škorjanec show that [S.K. and I.M.] pushed her in the back, causing her to fall onto a [flea market] stall, not because she was the partner of Š.Š., who is of Roma origin, but because they were drunk and they accidentally pushed her towards the stalls.
Furthermore, the medical documentation regarding Maja Škorjanec, as well as the records of the questioning of the witnesses Š.Š. and Maja Škorjanec and the statements of S.K. and I.M. given in their defence in the proceedings before the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court, show that there is no doubt that S.K. kicked Maja Škorjanec in the left side of the face with the result that she sustained a minor bodily injury.
Given that there is no indication that S.K. and I.M. inflicted injuries on Maja Škorjanec because of hatred towards Roma, as she is not of Roma origin, the criminal offence under Article 117 § 2 in conjunction with Article 87(21) of the Criminal Code has not been established.
In particular, the injury which Maja Škorjanec sustained would, by its nature, suggest an injury within the meaning of Article 177 § 1 of the Criminal Code. ... As criminal proceedings for the offence under Article 177 § 1 of the Criminal Code are instituted on the basis of a private prosecution, the criminal complaint ... must be rejected ... on the grounds that the impugned criminal offence is not an offence that is prosecuted of the prosecutor’s own motion.
With regard to the criminal offence under Article 139 § 2 in conjunction with Article 87(21) of the Criminal Code, it should be pointed out that it is obvious that S.K. and I.M. threatened Š.Š. and not Maja Škorjanec ... Moreover, ... it does not follow from the record of Maja Škorjanec’s witness statement, which has been examined, that S.K. and I.M. threatened her, but rather Š.Š., and thus the criminal complaint ... should be rejected on the grounds that the impugned criminal offence is not an offence that is prosecuted of the prosecutor’s own motion.”
The applicant was informed that she could take over the prosecution of S.K. and I.M. as a subsidiary prosecutor, as provided for under the relevant domestic law (see paragraph 30 below).
The relevant provisions of the Criminal Code (Kazneni zakon, Official Gazette nos. 125/2011, with further amendments) read as follows:
“(21) Hate crime is a criminal offence committed on the grounds of race, skin colour, religion, national or ethnic origin, disability, sexual orientation or gender identity of another person. Such conduct shall be deemed an aggravating circumstance if a more severe punishment is not explicitly prescribed in this Code.”
(1) Whoever inflicts bodily injury on another or impairs a person’s health shall be punished by a fine or by imprisonment not exceeding one year.
(2) Whoever commits an act punishable under paragraph 1 motivated by hate ... shall be punished by imprisonment not exceeding three years.
(3) A criminal offence punishable under paragraph 1 shall the subject of a private prosecution.”
“(2) Whoever makes a serious threat to kill or to inflict serious bodily injury on another ... shall be punished by a fine or by imprisonment not exceeding three years.
...
(4) ... [A] criminal offence punishable under paragraph (2) of this Article shall be prosecuted at the request [of the victim], save for an offence committed as a hate crime ... [which shall be prosecuted of the prosecutor’s own motion].”
The relevant part of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Zakon o kaznenom postupku, Official Gazette, nos. 152/2008, 76/2009, 80/2011, 121/2011, 91/2012, 143/2012, 56/2013, 145/2013 and 152/2014) provides:
“(1) Criminal proceedings shall only be instituted and conducted upon the request of a competent prosecutor. ...
(2) In respect of criminal offences subject to public prosecution the competent official shall be the State Attorney, and in respect of criminal offences that may be prosecuted privately the competent prosecutor shall be a private prosecutor. ...
...
(4) Where the State Attorney finds that there are no grounds to institute or conduct criminal proceedings, the victim may take his place as a subsidiary prosecutor under the conditions prescribed by this Act.”
Articles 55 to 63 regulate the rights and duties of private prosecutors and of victims acting as subsidiary prosecutors. A private prosecutor (privatni tužitelj) is a victim who brings a private prosecution in respect of criminal offences for which such a prosecution is expressly allowed by the Criminal Code (less serious offences). A victim acting as a subsidiary prosecutor (oštećeni kao tužitelj) is an individual taking over criminal proceedings in respect of criminal offences subject to public prosecution where the relevant prosecuting authorities, for whatever reason, have decided not to prosecute. When acting as a subsidiary prosecutor, the victim has all the rights in the proceedings which the State Attorney’s Office would have as a public prosecuting authority, save for those vested in the State Attorney’s Office as a State body. Under Article 58 § 2, the State Attorney’s Office is authorised, on a discretionary basis, to take over a prosecution from a subsidiary prosecutor at any point before the end of the trial.
The relevant domestic practice and other materials concerning discrimination in general are set out in the case of Guberina v. Croatia (no. 23682/13, §§ 27 and 29-31, ECHR 2016).
The list published on the Constitutional Court’s Internet site (available at ) of various domestic authorities’ decisions which are not amenable to review on the basis of individual constitutional complaints includes a decision rejecting a victim’s criminal complaint. Reference is made to the following case-law of the Constitutional Court: U-III-1523/2000, U-III-1122/2007, U-III-2411/2012 and U-III-1488/2014.
In 2009 the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) published “Hate Crime Laws: A Practical Guide” as a tool to assist States in implementing their commitment to “consider enacting or strengthening, where appropriate, legislation that prohibits discrimination based on, or incitement to hate crimes”. The relevant part of the Guide (pp. 50-51) reads:
“The United States has a well-documented pattern of crimes directed at interracial couples and families. Similarly, a study in Finland found that one-fifth of hate crime cases involved victims who were ethnically Finnish “in the company of a person of foreign extraction” or whose ‘spouse was of foreign extraction.’
...
Persons affiliated or associated with a group that shares a protected characteristic can easily be overlooked as a category to include in hate crime laws. Therefore, hate crime laws should also penalize those who attack others on the basis of their association with members of protected groups.”
In the further publication entitled “Preventing and responding to hate crimes: A resource guide for NGOs in the OSCE region” (2009) the OSCE stressed the following (pp. 22-23):
“The Characteristics of the Victim and the Perpetrator
...
Characteristics of a victim that may be indicators of hate crime include:
• The victim is identifiable as “different” from the attackers and, often, from the majority community, by such factors as appearance, dress, language or religion;
...
• The victim was in the company of or married to a member of a minority group.”