The case originated in an application (no. 22764/12) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Tatyana Georgiyevna Vanyukova (“the applicant”), on 16 March 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr S.I. Gridnev, a lawyer practising in Vladikavkaz.
The Russian Government (“ the Government” ) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
In the wake of the pilot judgment in the case of Gerasimov and Others v. Russia, on 24 November 2014 the the complaints concerning the non-enforcement of a judgment in the applicant’s favour and the lack of an effective remedy against the non-enforcement was communicated to the Government for settlement or resolution (see Gerasimov and Others v. Russia, nos. 29920/05 and 10 others, §§ 230-31 and point 13 of the operative part, 1 July 2014). The remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. The Court informed the parties at the communication stage that the case, subject to settled case-law, would be allocated to the Committee.
The Court adjourned for two years, that is until 1 October 2016, the proceedings in all cases concerning non-enforcement or delayed enforcement of domestic judgments imposing obligations in kind on the State authorities (ibid., § 232 and point 14 of the operative part).
On 29 September 2016 the Government advised the Court that they were unable to settle the present application within the above time-limit, as the domestic judgment in the applicant’s favour had remained unenforced. Having regard to the expiry of the above-mentioned adjournment period, the Court has decided to resume the examination of the application. In 2018 the Court invited the parties to provide further comments of factual and legal issues arising in the case. They were requested, in particular, to specify a due domestic procedure which was to be used at the material time to allow enforcement of the initial judgment given against the command of a military unit after the applicant’s transfer to a different military unit.
The applicant was born in 1955 and lives in Vladikavkaz. She is a former military officer.
On 11 February 2004 the Vladikavkaz Garrison Military Court ordered the command of military unit no. 5588 to grant the applicant 10 days of additional leave per each three months of service and to recalculate the term of her military service for the purpose of the calculation of her pension, to take account of her participation in an armed conflict for the period between 8 June 1995 and 31 December 2001 and in line with the military unit’s commander’s orders. The judgment entered into force on 25 February 2004.
On 11 February 2004 the debtor unit issued a certificate to confirm that, according to the unit’s calculation, the applicant was entitled to 224 days of additional leave.
Once the judgment became final, the applicant transferred it to the debtor military unit.
At some point military unit no. 5588 complied with the judgment in so far as the recalculation of her term of service on account of her participation in the armed conflict was concerned.
According to the applicant, no procedure for compulsory enforcement of the court order was put in place, and no writ of execution in respect of the judgment has ever been issued, as the military unit voluntarily complied with the judicial order in part (see paragraph 11 above).
On 6 November 2006 the applicant was transferred to military unit no. 3718 (“the mew military unit”) for further military service. According to the applicant, military units nos. 5588 and 3718 are parts of the same “subdivision” (подразделение). The debtor unit indicated in the initial judgment still exists.
On 28 August and 27 October 2010 the applicant asked the new unit to grant her additional leave days in accordance with the judgment, in view of her upcoming dismissal from military service. From the respective commander’s resolutions (hand-written replies on the applicant’s original requests) it follows that her requests were disallowed, as the new military unit was not a debtor in accordance with the judgment, and there was no information on the applicant’s use of the leave days. Furthermore, the request was belated as the judgment of 2004 should have been submitted for execution within three years.
On 8 September 2010 military unit no. 5588 certified that the applicant had been entitled to 224 additional leave days.
According to the applicant, in November 2010 military unit no. 3718 recalculated the term of her military service.
On 15 December 2010 the applicant was dismissed from military service without being granted the leave in question.
On 21 February 2011 she challenged her dismissal without granting additional leave, arguing, in particular, that she was entitled either to the said leave or to a monetary compensation for the unused leave days.
On 20 May 2011 the first-instance court granted her claim. The court found that as a result of the applicant’s transfer to the new unit the duty to enforce the award was also transferred thereon. The applicant had not missed the three-month time-limit for lodging her complaint, as she had challenged the decision to dismiss her without granting the leave awarded by the judgment, and not the commander’s refusals to grant her leave issued in August and October 2010. Finally, the requirement to submit the writ of execution within three years would only be applicable if the applicant had made use of her subjective right to seek compulsory enforcement of the judicial award. In any event, the authorities were not absolved from an obligation to abide by the judgment. Military unit no. 5588 had received the judgment immediately after its entry into force, and the new unit had recalculated the applicant’s term of service and thus had complied with the judgment in part. The court ordered to reinstate the applicant, so that she could have been provided with the leave days.
On 20 July 2011 the appeal court in the final instance quashed the lower court’s ruling and issued a new judgment dismissing her action. The court found that the lower court correctly established the facts but misapplied the domestic law. According to the appeal court, the new military unit was under no legal obligation to enforce the judgment, as it was given against a different military unit. The court noted that the applicant had not requested the initial debtor to provide her with the leave days in 2004-2006, during her service in that unit. Furthermore, the domestic courts had never examined the possibility of changing the method and the procedure of the execution of the judicial award. Finally, the initial judgment had never been amended or modified to allow its enforcement by the new military unit.
Article 203 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that a court which considered a case may change the method and the procedure («cпособ и порядок») of execution of the judgment on applications of the parties or the bailiff or on account of the parties’ property situation or other circumstances.
According to section 18 of the Enforcement Act of 1997 (Federal Law on Enforcement Proceedings no. 119-FZ of 21 July 1997, in force until 1 February 2008), where circumstances precluding performance of the enforcement acts arose, a bailiff could apply to a court or another authority which issued the writ of execution, with a request for modification of the method and the procedure of execution of the judgment. The bailiff could do so of his own initiative or on the parties’ request. Similarly, section 37 of the Enforcement Act of 2007 (Federal Law on Enforcement Proceedings no. 229- FZ of 2 October 2007 which replaced the earlier Enforcement Act as of 1 February 2008 and is now in force) provides that the bailiff may request a court, another organ or authority which has issued the enforcement document to modify the method and the procedure of execution.
Military servicemen are entitled to additional leave days in accordance with domestic legislation on account of their participation in the armed conflicts (Rules of Military Service, approved by the Decree of the President of the Russian Federation no. 1237 of 16 September 1999, section 34(16)).
Servicemen dismissed from military service should be provided with all types of allowances on the date of their exclusion from the military unit’s lists. Otherwise they cannot be dismissed from service without their consent (section 34(16) of the above Rules).