The case originated in an application (no. 6113/08) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Mr Yordan Kirchev Vuldzhev (“the applicant”), on 5 October 2007.
The applicant was represented by Ms S. Stefanova and Mr M. Ekimdzhiev, lawyers practising in . The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Kotseva, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the prison authorities monitored his correspondence in breach of Article 8 of the Convention.
On 13 July 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1976 and lives in .
On 12 July 2006 he was convicted of theft and sentenced to three years and two months’ imprisonment. In the period between 16 April and 17 December 2007 he was detained in a low-security prison facility („затворническо общежитие”) in Smolyan, part of Plovdiv Prison.
The applicant submitted that the entirety of his incoming and outgoing correspondence with his lawyers had been monitored by the prison administration. He submitted two envelopes addressed by him to his lawyers, one from the prison facility in Smolyan and one from Plovdiv Prison. Each envelope was marked or stamped as having been monitored by the prison administration. As noted in a letter from the General Directorate of Enforcement of Sentences at the Ministry of Justice submitted by the Government, the prison administration, acting in compliance with section 33 § 1(c) of the Enforcement of Sentences Act of 1969, routinely opened all letters, including those sent to lawyers, save those addressed to certain state bodies or international organisations.
The applicant further submitted that he had not been allowed to contact his lawyer by phone and that his meetings with relatives and lawyers had been held in special premises with a prison officer attending the meeting.
The applicant submitted that the conditions of his detention in the prison facility in Smolyan had been poor. In particular, the stated that (a) his cell had been small and overcrowded, not equipped with a toilet or a sink; (b) the number of toilets and showers had been insufficient; (c) the food had been of poor quality and insufficient; (d) the heating and ventilation had been insufficient; (e) the level of hygiene in the common areas had been poor; (f) dental services had not been covered by the State; (g) prison officers had often addressed inmates in an offensive way, physical harassment had not been uncommon, and disciplinary punishments had been imposed without proper observance of inmates’ rights.
The applicant never brought an action for damages under the State and Municipalities Responsibility for Damages Act (“the SMRDA”).
The relevant domestic law and practice concerning prisoners’ correspondence are set out in the Court’s judgment in the case of Iliev and Others v. , nos. 4473/02 and 34138/04, §§ 25-31, 10 February 2011.