The present case concerns the impossibility of maintaining family ties between the applicant and his son after the termination of the applicant’s parental status.
The applicant was born in 1976 and lives in Sterlitamak, in the Bashkortostan Republic. The applicant was represented by Ms A. Chechulina, a lawyer practising in Ufa.
The Government were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In 2012 the applicant’s wife, N., gave birth to a son, V.
The applicant and his wife quarrelled about how to raise V. In particular, the applicant objected to physical punishments inflicted on V. by N., her father and her brother.
In September 2015 N. left the applicant and took V. with her. They went to live with her family.
In October 2015 N. instituted divorce proceedings before the Leninskiy District Court of Ufa and asked for a residence order in her favour in respect of V. The applicant counterclaimed, asking for a residence order in his favour in respect of his son.
On 18 January 2016 the applicant, V. and N. were examined by expert psychologists, who found that V. was equally attached to both parents.
On 31 March 2016 the Leninskiy District Court granted the divorce and N.’s application for a residence order in her favour in respect of V.
The applicant then applied for contact rights.
On 13 June 2016 the police opened criminal proceedings at the applicant’s request against an unknown person or persons who had inflicted bodily injuries (multiple bruises) on V. at his place of residence. It appears that the proceedings are still pending.
On 25 August 2016 expert psychologists found that V. was strongly attached to his father. They recommended that contact between V. and his father should continue as it was necessary for V.’s development.
On 31 October 2016 the Leninskiy District Court granted the applicant contact rights.
On an unspecified date N. lodged an application with the Sterlitamak Town Court, contesting the applicant’s paternity of V.
The Town Court ordered the applicant to undergo a DNA paternity test, which he refused to do. He asserted, in particular, that he had no doubts about his paternity of V. He further stated that V. was very attached to him and that the supposed biological father did not intend to take part in V.’s upbringing, while the applicant wished to raise him and loved him irrespective of whether he was the biological father.
During the hearing, S., a friend of N.’s father, stated to the Town Court that the applicant had said to N.’s brother that he doubted his paternity of V. A gardener, while drunk, had once told S. that the applicant was not V.’s father.
On 13 March 2017 the Sterlitamak Town Court allowed N.’s claims. It found that N.’s allegations that the applicant was not V.’s biological father had been confirmed by S.’s statements. Moreover, the court drew inferences against the applicant from his refusal to undergo a DNA paternity test. The court therefore considered it established that the applicant was not V.’s biological father and terminated his parental status in respect of him. It ordered that the applicant’s name be deleted from V.’s birth certificate.
During the subsequent appeal hearing, the applicant asked that N.’s application be rejected by reference to paragraph 29 of the Supreme Court’s recent Plenary Ruling no. 16 of 16 May 2017 (see paragraph 33 below).
On 5 July 2017 the Supreme Court of the Bashkortostan Republic upheld the judgment of 13 March 2017 on appeal. It held, in particular, that the applicant’s reference to paragraph 29 of Plenary Ruling no. 16 was “unfounded” (несостоятельный).
In his subsequent cassation appeal the applicant complained, in particular, that the appellate court had not taken into account paragraph 29 of Plenary Ruling no. 16. He had submitted evidence showing that the termination of his parental status would not be in V.’s best interests, in particular evidence of his active participation in V.’s life, of his wish to continue raising V. as his own child and of V.’s attachment to him, such as photographs, videos, copies of instant messages, documents showing that he had bought clothes, medicine, sports equipment, books and toys for V. and had taken him to the theatre, the cinema, the pool and the amusement park. The appellate court had not taken that evidence into account, limiting its assessment to a finding that he was not V.’s biological father. The applicant claimed that he had never refused to undergo a DNA paternity test but had simply been unable to appear on the appointed dates, the first time because his car had broken down on the way to the laboratory, and then because he had been sick. In any event, he did not care whether he was V.’s biological father or not. He considered that the relevant facts were that he loved V. and that V. loved and needed him. He submitted that the termination of his parental status would result in his complete exclusion from V.’s life. Given that V. was very attached to him, as confirmed by the expert report of 25 August 2016 (see paragraph 13 above), such exclusion would be psychologically traumatic for V. There was also no evidence that the supposed biological father wished to participate in V.’s upbringing. The termination of his parental status would therefore leave V. fatherless. The applicant further complained that the judges had rejected his request to question V. and that the opinion of the childcare authorities had not been obtained. Lastly, the applicant submitted new evidence showing that even after the appellate judgment terminating his parental status he had still continued to see V. and to support him financially.
The applicant’s cassation appeal was dismissed on 22 November 2017 by a judge of the Supreme Court of the Bashkortostan Republic. She held, in particular:
“The arguments that the [lower] courts did not take into account the requirements of paragraph 29 of Plenary Ruling no. 16 of 16 May 2017 by the Supreme Court ... may not serve as a ground for quashing their judgments: no exceptional circumstances have been established for allowing the plaintiff’s claims and showing that in this way the best interests of the child – which must be a primary consideration – will be ensured.”
A further cassation appeal by the applicant was rejected on 19 February 2018 by the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation.
Meanwhile, on 12 October 2017 the Leninskiy District Court of Ufa annulled the contact order of 31 October 2016 on account of a newly discovered circumstance, namely the Sterlitamak Town Court’s judgment establishing that the applicant was not V.’s biological father and terminating his parental status.
On 11 December 2017 the local childcare authority stated that the application for contact rights was to be refused because the applicant was not V.’s father or other relative. It did not provide any other findings or reasoning, in particular any finding concerning the relationship between the applicant and V.
On 22 December 2017 the Leninskiy District Court of Ufa rejected the applicant’s application for contact rights, finding that he was not entitled to maintain contact with V. as he was not his father.
The applicant appealed. He complained that his request to have V. questioned about his wishes had been rejected by the District Court. He had submitted evidence that he continued to actively participate in his son’s life and that V. was very attached to him. Expert psychologists had recommended on 25 August 2016 that contact between them should be maintained. The Town Court had therefore failed to take into account the best interests of the child. He again relied on paragraph 29 of Plenary Ruling no. 16 and argued that, logically, it should be applied to contact proceedings.
On 22 March 2018 the Supreme Court of the Bashkortostan Republic quashed the judgment of 22 December 2017 on appeal and discontinued the proceedings. Given that the applicant was not V.’s father or relative, he had no standing to apply for contact rights. The appellate judgment also stated, without any further details, that the childcare authorities had found no evidence of a close emotional tie between the applicant and V.
In a subsequent cassation appeal the applicant submitted, in particular, that he had not been shown the childcare authorities’ opinion about the absence of a close emotional tie between him and V, and that no such opinion had been examined by the District Court. On the contrary, it was evident from the minutes of the hearing that the childcare authorities had expressly acknowledged that V. was very attached to the applicant.
The applicant’s cassation appeal was rejected on 15 May 2018 by a judge of the Supreme Court of the Bashkortostan Republic, who stressed, in particular, that the applicant’s application for contact rights had not been examined on the merits and had been rejected on the ground that he had no standing to lodge such an application.
A second cassation appeal by the applicant was rejected on 2 July 2018 by the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law, see Nazarenko v. Russia, no. 39438/13, §§ 33-40, ECHR 2015 (extracts).
The applicable domestic provisions have since been interpreted as follows by the Supreme Court in its Plenary Ruling no. 16 of 16 May 2017 (paragraph 29):
“[I]f the mother’s or the guardian’s judicial application contesting paternity is not accompanied by a request to establish the biological father’s paternity or by a request by the biological father to establish his paternity, and if the person registered as the child’s legal father objects to allowing the application, a court may in exceptional circumstances reject the application contesting paternity with the aim of ensuring the child’s best interests, which shall be the primary consideration (Article 3 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and Article 1 § 3 [of the Family Code]), and taking into account the particular circumstances of the case (for example, a long family relationship established between the child and the person registered as his legal father, the child’s stable emotional attachment to that person, or that person’s intention to continue taking care of the child and raising him as his own).”