The applicant was born in 1946 and at the time of lodging the application lived in İzmir. He was represented by Mr S. Cengiz, a lawyer practising in İzmir.
The Government were represented by their Agent.
The Government did not object to the examination of the application by a Committee.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 23 August 2005 a certain M.D. lodged a criminal complaint with the Bodrum Chief Public Prosecutor’s Offıce, alleging that on 22 August 2005 he had been subjected to threats and insults by the applicant, who had also attempted to attack him.
On 25 August 2005 M.D. gave a statement to the gendarmerie officers in relation to his complaint, stating that the applicant had insulted him, threatened to kill him and approached him with an adze in his hand. His neighbours N.Ü.E. and N.G. had intervened and had thus witnessed the incident.
On the same day, N.Ü.E. and N.G. also gave statements to the gendarmerie officers. N.Ü.E. stated that she had heard the incident and that as soon as she had heard the applicant insult M.D. she had gone to where the incident was taking place to intervene and draw M.D. away. However, when she had intervened the applicant had walked up to her and M.D. with a tool in his hand, following which two other neighbours, R.G. and N.G., had come and drawn the applicant away. N.G. stated that she had heard an argument and had gone outside and seen M.D. and the applicant arguing with each other. According to her, insults had been used, and she had drawn M.D. away from the scene by inviting him for a coffee.
On 29 August 2005 the applicant gave a statement to the gendarmerie officers. In his statement, he denied the accusations against him, arguing that M.D. had insulted him and his wife as a result of a separate and unrelated complaint which he and certain other residents of the housing estate had lodged against M.D.
On 31 August 2005 the gendarmerie officers took the statement of the applicant’s wife, Y.A., in which she stated that M.D. had provoked the applicant by using strong and offensive words against him and that when the applicant had responded, M.D. had rushed out to the street with an adze in his hand, as a result of which the applicant had picked up a garden hoe to defend himself. According to her, the neighbours had not witnessed the beginning of the incident. On the same day, the applicant’s sister-in-law also gave a similar statement to the gendarmerie officers.
On 12 June 2006 the public prosecutor filed a bill of indictment, charging the applicant with defamation and attempting to inflict bodily harm.
At the first hearing held on 11 October 2006, the applicant gave evidence in person and endorsed the statement he had made to the gendarmerie officers. The applicant further stated that certain witnesses, namely N.G., R.G. and N.D., who had given statements against him during the investigation stage, might have given incomplete accounts of what had happened as they had been quite far from the scene where the incident had taken place, and he requested that they be examined by the court. M.D. also gave evidence in person, stating that he had not insulted the applicant, but that the applicant had used offensive words against him.
Defence witnesses Y.A. and S.A. also gave evidence in person, both stating that M.D. had insulted the applicant. The trial court decided to adjourn the hearing until 13 December 2006.
On 27 October 2006 N.G., R.G. and N.D., the victim’s wife, arrived at the trial court together with M.D. and his lawyer, upon which the trial court held a hearing of its own motion. The domestic court heard evidence from N.G., R.G. and N.D. without informing the applicant. It appears that R.G. and N.G. stated that they did not know whether M.D. had insulted the applicant or not. They further stated that they did not know what had happened at the beginning of the incident, as their house was nearly 30 metres away from the scene of the incident.
During the hearing held on 13 December 2006, the trial court read out the witnesses’ statements to the applicant, who in turn submitted written submissions in which he contested their statements as untrue. The applicant pointed out that the fact that N.G. and R.G. had stated that they did not know what had happened at the beginning of the incident proved that the victim’s allegation that it had been the applicant who had started the incident had been ill-founded.
In his written submissions dated 15 February 2007, the applicant stated that he had not been able to exercise his right to put questions to the witnesses in person because he had not been informed of the hearing held by the trial court of its own motion on 27 October 2006.
At a hearing held on 6 April 2007, the witnesses L.D. and Ü.D. were examined at the applicant’s request. At the end of the hearing, the trial court sentenced the applicant to a fine of 860 Turkish liras (TRY) for the offence of defamation and a fine of TRY 360 for the offence of attempted injury. In the light of the consistent statements of M.D. throughout the proceedings and the fact that they were corroborated by the statements made by N.G., R.G. and N.Ü.E., the trial court found it established that the applicant had insulted M.D. and had attempted to assault him with an adze. It also took account of the statements made by Y.A. and S.A., finding that the fact that the witnesses testifying in favour of the applicant were his relatives did not mean that they would not tell the truth. As a result, it went on to hold that the offence of defamation had been committed mutually by both the applicant and M.D. and accepted that the applicant had attempted to commit the offence of attempted intentional bodily harm as a result of unjust provocation by M.D. It thus reduced the applicant’s sentence.
As for the applicant’s submissions concerning his inability to put questions to N.G. and R.G., because they had been examined at a hearing of which he had not been informed, the trial court conceded that in principle all witnesses should be examined in the presence of the accused so that the latter could exercise his or her right to put questions. Nevertheless, it went on to hold that the witnesses had provided answers to what appeared to be the only point the applicant had wished to clarify by putting questions to them in person, namely whether M.D. had insulted the applicant first.
On 9 April 2008 the Court of Cassation declared the applicant’s appeal inadmissible on the ground that under Article 305 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, where the fine imposed did not exceed TRY 2,000, the judgment was not subject to appeal.
The general principles with regard to the use of evidence given by absent prosecution witnesses can be found in Schatschaschwili v. Germany ([GC], no. 9154/10, §§ 100-31, ECHR 2015) and Al-Khawaja and Tahery v. the United Kingdom ([GC], nos. 26766/05 and 22228/06, §§ 118-47, ECHR 2011).
Relevant domestic law and practice in relation to the restrictions placed on the right to lodge an appeal can be found in Bayar and Gürbüz v. Turkey, no. 37569/06, §§ 14-16, 27 November 2012.