The case originated in an application (no. 17273/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Czech nationals, Ms Radmila Kysilková and Mr Zdeněk Kysilka (“the applicants”), on 23 May 2003.
The applicants were represented by Mr J. Mazal, a lawyer practising in Písek. The Czech Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V.A. Schorm, from the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that they had not had a public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal during the whole proceedings and that they had not been able to make comments on the written observations submitted by the presiding judge at the Regional Court which had been used in the decision of the Constitutional Court.
On 7 February 2006 the President of the former Second Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government.
The applicants were born in 1927 and 1936 respectively and live in Písek.
On 16 January 2002 a certain S., the applicants' neighbour, received a building permit to build an apartment building.
The applicants appealed against the permit, and on 23 April 2002 the Písek District Office (okresní úřad) partly modified it. The District Office did not hold a hearing.
On 29 April 2002 the applicants, through their legal representative, filed an action against the administrative decision (žaloba proti správnímu rozhodnutí) with the České  (krajský soud), requesting, at the same time, postponement of the building of the flats
In a decision of 23 May 2002 the  invited the applicants to give reasons, within ten days, for their request for the building permit to be suspended. The court also provided the applicants with the following notice:
“The court invites the party to the procedure to clarify whether he agrees to it proceeding without a public hearing ... on the basis of the documents submitted by the parties (Article 250f § 1 (b) of the Code of Civil Procedure). If no reply to this notice is received within the statutory time-limit, the court will assume that the party to the procedure does not oppose the court deciding without a hearing (Article 250f § 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure).”
The applicants were represented in the proceedings by counsel on the basis of a procedural power of attorney (procesní plná moc) and the decision was served on him on 24 May 2002. Apparently, the representative's son collected the court's decision instead of the representative himself. No reply was sent to the court within the fifteen-day time-limit.
On 14 June 2002 the  dismissed the applicants' action. It did not hold a public hearing, assuming that the applicants, not having responded to the court's notice, agreed to such a procedure.
On 27 August 2002 the applicants lodged a constitutional appeal (ústavní stížnost) alleging, inter alia, a violation of Articles 6 and 13 of the Convention and Articles 35 and 38 of the Charter. They further requested that Article 250a of the Code of Civil Procedure be repealed.
In her written observations of 3 October 2002, the presiding judge at the  submitted that the court had dealt with the arguments the applicants had put forward in their action and had applied Article 250f of the Code of Civil Procedure, having informed the applicants' legal representative about their procedural rights and duties in conformity with that provision.
On 5 December 2002 the Constitutional Court (Ústavní soud), without holding a public hearing, rejected the applicants' appeal as manifestly ill-founded. It included the written observations of the presiding judge at the  on the applicants' constitutional appeal in its summary of the facts. The court found that the Regional Court had reviewed the decision of the District Office of 23 April 2002, had rightly proceeded under Article 250f § 1b) of the Code of Civil Procedure and had exhaustively dealt with all the arguments raised by the applicants after having interpreted and applied the relevant provisions of national law.
On 6 September 2007, the Ministry of Justice rejected the applicant's request for damages pursuant to Act no. 82/1998.
Until 31 December 2002, the lawfulness of decisions of the administrative authorities could be reviewed by the courts in accordance with Part V of the Code of Civil Procedure (Articles 244-250s). On 27 June 2001 the  declared this part of the Code unconstitutional (judgment no. 276/2001).
Article 250a § 1 obliged a claimant who was not a lawyer by profession to be legally represented before the court.
Pursuant to Article 250f § 1f), the court was entitled to deliver a judgment without an oral hearing at the parties' suggestion or with their agreement. This provision read as follows:
“1.  A court may decide on an action without holding a hearing by delivering judgment if
a)  the impugned decision is non-reviewable for lack of intelligibility or for lack of grounds, or
b)  the parties to the procedure have concurrently moved for or consented to this.
Consent under subsection 1b) shall be deemed granted also in the event that a party to the procedure does not, within 15 days of the service of the court's request, express an objection to the consideration of the case without a hearing. The party must be advised on the consequences.”
The relevant domestic law concerning the proceedings before the Constitutional Court is set out in the Court's judgment Milatová and Others v. the Czech Republic, no. 61811/00, §§ 39-44, ECHR 2005-V (extracts)).