The case originated in an application (no. 38726/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Sergey Vasilyevich Pelevin (“the applicant”), on 20 October 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr A.I. Samsonov, a lawyer practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Ms V. Milinchuk, the former representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 9 February 2007 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1972 and lives in .
On 15 April 2004 the applicant was apprehended.
On 17 April 2004 the Kuybyshevskiy District Court of St Petersburg authorised his detention on remand. The court based its decision on the grounds that the applicant had a criminal record and was suspected of having committed several serious criminal offences, notably robbery and participation in a criminal gang, that he was unemployed and had no income to support himself and his family. Moreover, as some accessories to robbery had not yet been identified, the applicant, if remained at large, could have alerted his accomplices and thus interfere with the investigation.
It appears that by decisions of 10 June and 17 August 2004 the District Court extended the applicant's detention. On the latter occasion it did so until 21 October 2004. According to the applicant, the court relied mainly on the gravity of charges against him.
On 21 October 2004 the case against the applicant and his fourteen co-defendants was referred to the  for trial.
On 5 November 2004 the trial court in a closed meeting decided to fix a date for the preliminary hearing. Besides, without referring to any grounds, it ordered that the detention measure imposed on the applicant and his co-defendants “should remain unchanged”.
On 28 December 2004 the  held the preliminary hearing. The applicant and his counsel pleaded for his release on factual and legal grounds. They submitted that the applicant's criminal record had been purged and that he had dependants, namely a disabled mother and under-age daughter. They also asserted that the authorised detention had expired on 21 October 2004 and that a further detention – from 5 November 2004 afterwards – had been extended unlawfully, that is outside the time-limit and in the absence of the applicant and his representative. The court acknowledged that the applicant's previous conviction had expired and that he had two dependants. However, it attached decisive weight to the gravity of the charges and found no reason to vary the preventive measure because “the initial grounds for detention still obtained”. The court thus authorised the applicant's further detention. It did not set any time-limit. On the same occasion, the  returned the case to the prosecutor for remedying defects of the bill of indictment.
Counsel for the applicant filed an appeal, maintaining that any extension of the custodial measure after the initial detention period had expired on 21 October 2004 had been unlawful.
On 21 April 2005 the Supreme Court of Russia dismissed the appeal. The relevant part of its decision reads:
“... It appears from the materials that the case against [the applicant and others] was received by the [Regional] Court on 21 October 2004. The authorities in charge of the preliminary investigation had authorised their detention until that date.
Neither at the directions hearing, nor at the preliminary hearing did the [Regional] Court detect any violations of law in the application of the preventive measure to the defendants and its extension during the pre-trial investigation.
There existed no grounds for revoking or varying the chosen measure.
Taking into account those considerations and also the gravity of the charges against the defendants, the [Regional] Court correctly decided not to vary the preventive measure in the form of placement in custody.
Since 5 November 2004 the defendants have been held in custody on the basis of a lawful and justified judicial decision ...”
On 19 April 2005 the  examined and granted the prosecutor's application for the extension of the defendants' detention until 21 July 2005. The court relied on the same grounds as in its decision of 28 December 2004 (see paragraph 10).
The applicant's lawyer appealed. He submitted that the  by its decision had violated the right of the defence because it extended the detention period in the absence of the case materials which had been at that time at the Supreme Court. He also reiterated the argument that the applicant's detention after 21 October 2004 had been unlawful.
By a decision of 29 June 2005, the Supreme Court dismissed the appeal. It held that the Code of Criminal Procedure did not prevent the decision on extending detention from being made at the time when the case-file was with the appeal court. Referring to its earlier decision of 21 April 2005, it declined to examine again the lawfulness of the applicant's detention after 21 October 2004.
On 15 June 2005 the case against the applicant and his co-defendants was again referred to the  for trial.
By a decision of 12 July 2005, it extended the applicant's detention until 21 October 2005. The court stated as follows:
“... Pelevin S.V. does not have a criminal record, has a minor dependent and a disabled mother ... However, the court has a regard to the gravity of the charges levelled against Pelevin S.V. The grounds which the court relied upon when it decided to place Pelevin S.V. in detention still obtain, therefore the [Regional] Court finds no reasons for varying ... the preventive measure [in question] ...”
From the material submitted to the Court, it follows that the Leningrad Regional Court, paraphrasing the grounds set out in the decision of 12 July 2005, extended the applicant's detention yet six times, notably by decisions of 17 October 2005, 17 January, 18 April, 11 July, 20 October 2006 and 19 January 2007. By the latter detention order, it maintained the custodial measure until 21 April 2007.
The applicant was convicted on 16 April 2007. No particulars about the conclusions in his criminal case have been provided to the Court.
“Preventive measures” (меры пресечения) include an undertaking not to leave a town or region, personal surety, bail and deprivation of liberty (Article 98 of the Code of Criminal Procedure). If necessary, the suspect or accused may be asked to give an undertaking to appear (обязательство о явке) (Article 112 of the Code).
When deciding on a preventive measure, the competent authority is required to consider whether there are “sufficient grounds to believe” that the accused would abscond during the investigation or trial, re-offend or obstruct the establishment of the truth (Article 97). It must also take into account the gravity of the charges, information on the accused's character, his or her profession, age, state of health, family status and other circumstances (Article 99).
Detention may be ordered by a court if the charges carry a sentence of at least two years' imprisonment, provided that a less restrictive preventive measure cannot be applied (Article 108 § 1).
After arrest, the suspect is placed in custody “pending investigation”. The maximum permitted period of detention “pending investigation” is two months but it can be extended for up to eighteen months in “exceptional circumstances” (Article 109 §§ 1-3). The period of detention “pending investigation” is calculated up to the date on which the prosecutor sends the case to the trial court (Article 109 § 9).
The term of detention “during the trial” is calculated from the date the prosecutor sends the case to the trial court and to the date the judgment is given. The period of detention “during the trial” may not normally exceed six months but if the case concerns serious or particularly serious criminal offences, the trial court may approve one or more extensions of no longer than three months each (Article 255 §§ 2 and 3 of the Code).
An appeal may be lodged with a higher court within three days against a judicial decision ordering or extending detention. The appeal court must decide the appeal within three days after its receipt (Article 108 § 11).
On 22 March 2005 the Constitutional Court of the  issued a decision no. 4-P where it held, in the relevant parts, as follows:
“The second part of Article 22 of the Constitution of the  provides that ... detention is permitted only on the basis of a court order ... Consequently, if the term of detention, as defined in the court order, expires, the court must decide on the extension of the detention, otherwise the accused person must be released ...
These rules are common for all stages of criminal proceedings, and also cover the transition from one stage to another. ... The transition of the case to another stage does not automatically put an end to the measure of restraint applied at previous stages.
Therefore, when the case is transmitted by the prosecution to the trial court, the measure of restraint applied at the pre-trial stage ... may continue to apply until the expiry of the term for which it has been set in the respective court decision [imposing it] ...
[Under Articles 227 and 228 of the Code of Criminal Procedure] a judge, after having received the criminal case concerning a detained defendant, should, within 14 days, set a hearing and establish “whether the measure of restraint applied should be lifted or changed”. This wording implies that the decision to detain the accused or extend his detention, taken at the pre-trial stage, may stand after the completion of the pre-trial investigation and transmittal of the case to the court, only until the end of the term for which the measure of restraint has been set.
The prosecution, in its turn, when approving the bill of indictment and transferring the case file to the court, should check whether the term of detention has not expired and whether it is sufficient to allow the judge to take a decision [on further detention of the accused pending trial]. If by the time of transfer of the case file to the court this term has expired, or if it appears to be insufficient to allow the judge to take a decision [on detention], the prosecutor, applying Articles 108 and 109 of the Code of Criminal Proceedings, [must] ask the court to extend the period of detention.”
The Supreme Court in the Resolution of the Supreme Court of Russia No. 1 of 5 March 2004 on Application by Courts of the Code of Criminal Procedure noted that, when deciding on extension of a defendant's detention during the trial, the court should indicate the grounds justifying the extension and its time-limit.
The Civil Code of the  provides as follows:
Article 1070.  Responsibility for damage caused by unlawful acts of investigative authorities, prosecuting authorities and courts
“1.  Damage caused to a citizen as a result of unlawful conviction, unlawful criminal prosecution, ... unlawful detention on remand ... shall be compensated at the expense of the Treasury of the Russian Federation, and in the instances provided for by law, at the expense of the Treasury of the subject of the Russian Federation ... in full, irrespective of the fault of the officials of the agencies ...”
Article 1100.  Grounds for compensation for non-pecuniary damage
“Compensation for non-pecuniary damage shall be made irrespective of the fault of the person causing the damage when:
... the damage is caused to a citizen as a result of his unlawful conviction, unlawful criminal prosecution, unlawful detention on remand ...”
The Civil Code provides that the damage caused by an unlawful detention should be compensated irrespective of the fault of the wrongdoer (that is the State agency which decided detain). However, the notion of “unlawful” detention is not developed in provisions of the Civil Code. It appears that “unlawfulness” of detention have to be found by a competent authority.