The case concerns the alleged unlawful disclosure of the applicants’ medical data by a public hospital to the police in violation of their right to private life under Article 8 of the Convention.
The applicants, J.M. and A.T., were born in 1979 and 1974, respectively and live in S. They were represented by Ms N. Boshkova, a lawyer practising in Skopje.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms D. Djonova.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 22 December 2009 the public health centre in S., which includes a centre for drug addiction (“the hospital”), reported to the police that an unspecified quantity of methadone, which was used to treat patients experiencing drug-withdrawal symptoms, was missing.
On 1 April 2010 two police inspectors visited the hospital and seized the original copies of the lists for patients’ daily methadone dispensing for 15 and 16 February 2010 (“the lists”). The lists contained the names and surnames of all the patients that had received methadone on those days, including the applicants, and the quantity of methadone received. The applicants, who were present at the hospital on that day, witnessed the police intervention. A.T. claimed that he had entered the room where the police officers had been inspecting documents and had seen them looking at hospital records concerning methadone (метадонски книги). He further claimed that he had seen the police removing documents from the hospital to make copies. The police had issued a certificate for the seizure of the two lists.
Following a request by the applicants, on 8 June 2010 the Data Protection Authority (Дирекција за заштита на лични податоциhereinafter “the DPA”) conducted an onsite inspection of the hospital. In its report the DPA found that on 1 April 2010 the police had seized the two original lists, which had contained the applicants’ names, surnames and the methadone they had received in treatment. The police had also been allowed to examine a “methadone-reporting book” (тетратка за рапорт) and individual patient files in order to verify the quantities of methadone that they had been prescribed. The DPA concluded that the police had acted lawfully, specifically in accordance with section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Act. The report was not served on the applicants, who were notified by letter that the inspection had not found any problems with regard to the treatment of their data by the hospital.
On 15 July 2010, following a request by the police, the hospital sent them copies of the same lists for daily dispensing of methadone again, this time with the names and surnames of the patients redacted.
The police continued their investigation and on 17 August 2010 submitted a report to the first-instance prosecutor’s office in S., stating that there had been no elements of a crime with regard to the missing methadone. Having taken а statement from а doctor at the hospital they concluded that certain discrepancies in the hospital’s records were the result of a clerical error. There is no evidence that the prosecution took further actions with regard to the above events.
On 2 September 2010 the police returned the seized lists to the hospital.
On 13 August 2010 the applicants, together with four other patients of the hospital, submitted a request for the protection of personal data with the DPA against the hospital and the police. They stated that on 1 April 2010 the hospital had disclosed sensitive medical data to the police without a court order.
In its reply the hospital argued, inter alia, that it could only give information to the police on the basis of an order issued by a judge or public prosecutor.
On 1 October 2010 the DPA dismissed their requests. It found that in addition to seizing the two lists the police had also had access to patient files, which had been necessary to establish the quantities of methadone administered to each patient. The DPA held that the data delivered to the police on 1 April 2010 had been anonymised, and therefore, relying on sections 14 and 68 of the Police Act and section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Act, it held that the hospital and the police had processed the applicants’ personal data in accordance with the law.
The applicants appealed, arguing, inter alia, that the DPA had confused the two events of 1 April and 15 July 2010 during which the police had been given access to the applicants’ data (see paragraphs 6 and 8 above). On 3 May and 10 December 2012, the Administrative Court (Управен суд) and the Higher Administrative Court (Виш управен суд), respectively, dismissed appeals by the applicants complaining about the actions of the police and the hospital on 1 April 2010, and upheld the DPA’s findings in full.
Meanwhile, on 10 September 2010 the applicants, together with four other patients at the hospital (see paragraph 11 above) lodged a civil claim through a lawyer against the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the hospital for violation of their right to privacy. They argued that the hospital had unlawfully given access to their medical data to the police on 1 April 2010. They further stated that after that day they had had several encounters with police officers who had teased them using private information about their health and methadone treatment, which they could have learned only from their medical data kept by the hospital. They sought non-pecuniary damage in the amount of 90,000 Macedonian denars each.
On 24 January 2013 Court of First Instance in S. dismissed their claim. The court held that on 1 April 2010 the police had inspected the lists concerning 15 and 16 February 2010 and the patient files, but their names on all the documents had been redacted. The court further held that under domestic law a hospital ought to have had a court order in order to disclose patients’ medical data. However, the fact that the applicants’ names had been redacted had rendered that requirement moot in the instant case. Relying on section 5 of the Police Act (see paragraph 17 below), the court held that the police had also acted lawfully when they had processed private and medical data. This judgment was confirmed on appeal by the Court of Appeal with a judgment of 19 April 2013 served on the applicants’ representative on 17 June 2013. Neither court referred to the police inspection carried out on 1 April 2010 (paragraph 6 above) notwithstanding the applicants’ explicitly complaining about it before both courts.
Section 5 § 1 (3) of the Act defines the term “activities of the police” (полициски работи) as activities whose purpose is to prevent crimes and misdemeanours and lead to discovery and capture of perpetrators.
Section 14 of the Police Act provides that a police officer can take of his or her own motion or by order of the public prosecutor, court or other body measures for the detection of a crime and prosecution of a person who is suspected of planning or committing a crime.
Under section 68 the police are authorised to collect personal and other information from the individuals to whom the information refers, third parties or from already existing databases operated by State institutions and other legal entities.
Section 144(2)(6) of the Act (consolidated version, Official Gazette no. 15/2005), which was part of the Chapter concerning pre-investigation (предистражна постапка) allowed the police, if there existed a reasonable suspicion that a crime subject to automatic prosecution has been committed, and in the presence of an official, to conduct a search of certain premises, and to consult and inspect certain documentation (определена документација) belonging to State institutions.
Section 4 of this Act defines a “patient” as any person, healthy or ill, who requests a medical procedure or on whom one is performed in order to preserve and promote his or her health, to prevent an illness, or who receives treatment, healthcare or rehabilitation treatment. “Medical data” are any data relating to patients’ medical histories, diagnoses, prognoses and treatment, as well as other data closely connected with patients’ health.
Section 25 of the Act regulates the confidentiality of medical data. It stipulates that medical data must be processed in accordance with the regulations on protection for personal data. Medical data, exceptionally, can be disclosed to third parties if the patient gives express permission, if the processing of such data is necessary for treatment of the patient, if such data are used anonymously for scientific and educational purposes or in accordance with another law for the aim of protection of the lives, health and safety of others.
Section 15 provides that certain rights under the Act can be restricted under conditions prescribed by law, inasmuch as strictly necessary, inter alia, for the purpose of detecting and prosecuting crimes.