The case originated in an application (no. 74568/11) against the Republic of Poland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Arkadiusz Wrona (“the applicant”), on 30 November 2011.
The applicant was represented by Ms W. Pasik, a lawyer practising in Warsaw. The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms J. Chrzanowska of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, that he had been deprived of his liberty in breach of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention. He further submitted that his detention on remand had exceeded a “reasonable time” within the meaning of Article 5 § 3 of the Convention and that, contrary to Article 5 § 5, he could not obtain compensation for his allegedly unjustified detention.
On 5 January 2016 the complaints under Articles 5 §§ 1, 3 and 5 were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1979 and lives in Warsaw.
On 11 February 2004 the applicant was charged with domestic violence.
On 27 February 2004 a bill of indictment in respect of the applicant was lodged with the Warsaw District Court. Subsequently, on an unknown date the case was returned to the prosecution authorities in order to amend the charges.
On 20 August 2004 the Warsaw District Court ordered the applicant to undergo a psychiatric assessment in a psychiatric hospital. The applicant did not lodge an interlocutory appeal against this decision.
On 11 April 2005 the applicant was brought by the police to the Warsaw Psychiatric Hospital in order to undergo the psychiatric assessment. However, he refused to stay and left the waiting room. On the same day he was ordered to come to the hospital on 18 April 2005, on pain of detention on remand. On 18 April 2005 the applicant came to the hospital. However, he refused to stay for the assessment, explaining that he had many urgent matters to attend to.
On 7 June 2005 the Warsaw District Court ordered the applicant’s detention on remand in accordance with Articles 249 § 1 and 258 § 1 (1) and (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”) (see paragraphs 25 and 26 below). The court held that in view of the applicant’s parents’ and his sister’s  testimonies there was a reasonable suspicion that the applicant had committed the offences with which he was charged. In addition, there was a reasonable risk that the applicant would obstruct the proceedings or that he would go into hiding. The court noted that the applicant’s mother had admitted that he had stayed irregularly at his home address: he had been coming home late in the evening and leaving early in the morning. Furthermore, the applicant had failed to comply with the order of 20 August 2004 to undergo a sixweek psychiatric assessment (see paragraph 8 above). The court noted the applicant’s parents’ submissions that his mental condition was bad, he was not able to function independently and he was in need of urgent medical assistance. The court also attached importance to the fact that the applicant had previously behaved in a similar manner. He had been admitted to a psychiatric hospital on 23 October 2001, however the next day he had left the hospital on his own initiative. Consequently, in the court’s view the applicant’s submissions that he would comply with the order to undergo a psychiatric assessment were not convincing.
An appeal lodged by the applicant was dismissed by the Warsaw Regional Court on 20 September 2005. The court mainly referred to the fact that the applicant had still to undergo a psychiatric assessment. It also noted the fact that the applicant stayed irregularly at his home address, therefore once released he might go into hiding.
The applicant’s detention was subsequently prolonged on the following dates: 28 September 2005 (until 4 January 2006), 27 December 2005 (until 4 February 2006) and 1 February 2006 (until 4 March 2006). The court relied on the grounds previously given. The applicant unsuccessfully appealed against all those decisions.
On 18 October 2005 the Warsaw District Court ordered that the applicant undergo a psychiatric assessment at the hospital wing of the Warsaw Detention Center. The applicant underwent this assessment between 21 November 2005 and 1 February 2006.
On 3 February 2006 the amended bill of indictment was lodged with the Warsaw District Court. The applicant was charged with domestic violence and possession of 1.15 grams of marijuana.
On 16 February 2006 the Warsaw District Court again extended the applicant’s detention (until 4 May 2006). The court stressed that there was a reasonable risk that the applicant would obstruct the proceedings and that he would go into hiding. This risk was particularly valid in view of the difficulties which the applicant had caused in the past by his repeated refusal to undergo a psychiatric assessment.
During a hearing held on 23 March 2006 the applicant’s father and sister refused to testify. The applicant was released from detention on the same day. Subsequently, on 5 April 2006, the applicant’s mother also refused to testify.
The Warsaw District Court held further hearings on 27 April, 7 July and 16 October 2006 and on 24 January and 12 March 2007.
On 12 March 2007 the Warsaw District Court gave judgment, acquitting the applicant on charges of domestic violence and convicting him of possession of a small amount of marijuana. The court sentenced the applicant to five months’ imprisonment stayed for three years.
Following an appeal by the applicant, the judgment was quashed (in its part concerning possession of drugs) by the Warsaw Regional Court on 9 August 2007. The proceedings were subsequently discontinued by the Warsaw District Court on 6 November 2007. The court found that the prohibited act committed by the applicant had not constituted an offence because of its insignificant social consequences (znikoma szkodliwość społeczna czynu).
On 5 November 2008 the applicant instituted proceedings for compensation for unjustified detention under Article 552 of the CCP (see paragraph 27 below) before the Warsaw Regional Court. He stated that while the main reason for his detention on remand had been a six-week psychiatric assessment, he had been kept in detention for nearly one year. Moreover, the assessment had begun only five months after his arrest. He also stressed that there had been no risk that he would have attempted to obstruct the proceedings.
His claim was dismissed by the Warsaw Regional Court on 18 March 2010. The court referred at the outset to the Supreme Court’s Resolution of 15 September 1999 (see paragraph 28 below). It further noted that in the present case there had been no breach of procedural provisions of the CCP since the detention on remand had been applied mainly in view of the applicant’s repeated refusal to comply with the courts’ orders. Consequently, the applicant’s detention on remand had been undoubtedly justified, even though eventually he had been acquitted.
On 16 July 2010 the Warsaw Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal. The court repeated the reasons given by the Regional Court. It stressed that the applicant had clearly obstructed the proceedings by refusing to undergo a psychiatric assessment. Furthermore, there had been a risk that he could have gone into hiding. Lastly, the court noted that as soon as the applicant’s parents and sister had refused to testify, the applicant had been released.
On 31 May 2011 the applicant’s cassation appeal was dismissed as manifestly ill-founded by the Supreme Court.
The CCP of 1997, which entered into force on 1 September 1998, defines pretrial detention (tymczasowe aresztowanie) as one of the socalled “preventive measures” (środki zapobiegawcze) enumerated in Chapter 28. Theother measures are bail (poręczenie majątkowe), police supervision (dozór policji), a guarantee by a responsible person (poręczenie osoby godnej zaufania), a guarantee by a social entity (poręczenie społeczne), a temporary ban on engaging in a given activity (zawieszenie oskarżonego w określonej działalności) and prohibition on leaving the country (zakaz opuszczania kraju).
Article 249 § 1 sets out the general grounds for imposition of the preventive measures. That provision reads:
“Preventive measures may be imposed in order to ensure the proper conduct of proceedings and also, exceptionally, in order to prevent an accused from committing another, serious offence; they may be imposed only if the evidence gathered shows a significant probability that an accused has committed an offence.”
The provisions on pretrial detention are based on the precept that pretrial detention, the most severe preventive measure, should not be imposed if more lenient measures are adequate.
Article 257 reads, in so far as relevant:
“1.  Pre-trial detention shall not be imposed if another preventive measure is sufficient.”
Article 258 lists grounds for pretrial detention. It provides, in so far as relevant:
“1.  Pre-trial detention may be imposed if:
(1)  there is a reasonable risk that an accused will abscond or go into hiding, in particular when his or her identity cannot be established or when he or she has no permanent abode [in Poland];
(2)  there is a reasonable risk that an accused will attempt to induce [witnesses or codefendants] to give false testimony or to obstruct the proper course of proceedings by any other unlawful means;
If an accused has been charged with a serious offence or an offence for the commission of which he or she may be liable to a statutory maximum sentence of at least eight years’ imprisonment, or if a court of first instance has sentenced him or her to at least three years’ imprisonment, the need to continue detention to ensure the proper conduct of proceedings may be based on the likelihood that a severe penalty will be imposed.”
Article 259 § 1 reads:
“1.  If there are no special reasons to the contrary, pre-trial detention shall be lifted, in particular if depriving an accused of his liberty would:
(1)  seriously jeopardise his or her life or health; or
(2)  entail excessively harsh consequences for the accused or his or her family.”
Article 552 of the CCP provides:
“1.  An accused who, as a result of the reopening of proceedings or an appeal on points of law, has been acquitted or resentenced under a more lenient provision, shall be entitled to receive from the State Treasury compensation for the pecuniary and nonpecuniary damage which he or she has suffered as a result of having served all or part of the sentence unjustifiably imposed on him or her.
The provisions of paragraph 1 shall also be applicable if, after the sentencing judgment has been overturned or declared null and void, the proceedings have been discontinued by reason of material circumstances not duly considered in prior proceedings.
A right to compensation for pecuniary and nonpecuniary damage shall also arise if a preventive measure has been applied under the conditions specified in paragraphs 1 and 2.
A right to compensation for pecuniary and nonpecuniary damage shall also arise in the event of undoubtedly unjustified [niewątpliwie niesłuszne] pretrial detention or arrest.”
In accordance with the Supreme Court’s Resolution of 15 September 1999 (no. I KZP 27/99), “undoubtedly unjustified” pretrial detention was detention effected in breach of the provisions of Chapter 28 of the CCP and which caused hardship which the defendant should not have suffered in the light of the totality of the circumstances established in the case and, in particular, of those established in the final ruling.