The case originated in an application (no. 12555/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Austrian national, Mr Pierre Müller (“the applicant”), on 3 April 2003.
The applicant was represented by Mr Herbert Pochieser, a lawyer practising in . The Austrian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ferdinand Trauttmansdorff, Head of the International Law Department at the Federal Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
On 15 September 2005 the Court decided to communicate the complaint concerning the length of the proceedings to the Government. Applying Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time.
The applicant was born in 1968 and lives in . He is the managing director (Geschäftsführer) of the M company.
On 24 January 1994 an officer of the Vienna Employment Office (Landesarbeitsamt) found Mr S, a Polish national, working on the construction site of the M company without employment or work permit.
Having obtained the applicant's submissions on 11 August 1994, the Vienna municipality (Magistrat), on 10 August 1995, issued a penal order (Straferkenntnis) against the applicant in which it convicted him under ss. 28 and 3 of the Employment of Aliens Act (Ausländerbeschäftigungs-gesetz) of illegal employment of a foreigner and sentenced him to a fine of 10,000 ATS (approximately 700 EUR).
On 28 May 1996 the Vienna Independent Administrative Panel (Unabhängiger Verwaltungssenat, IAP), having held two public hearings, confirmed this decision. It did not follow the applicant's argument that he was not guilty as he had not known about the illegal employment of Mr S and had ordered a subordinate to observe the legality of the M company's employment policy. The IAP noted that the applicant had failed to set up an effective supervising system and had not shown how and when he had exercised control whether his orders were respected. It concluded that the applicant had not convincingly shown that no fault lay with him within the meaning of section 5 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Offences (Verwaltungsstrafgesetz).
The applicant filed a complaint with the  (Verfassungsgerichtshof) on 22 July 1996. On the same day he lodged a further complaint against another penal order of the IAP concerning also illegal employment of foreigners. The  joined these proceedings and, on 24 September 1996, granted the applicant's requests for suspensive effect.
At the same time, proceedings concerning complaints lodged by another managing director of the M company and the M company itself were pending before the  which involved the review of the constitutionality of a specific provision of the Employment of Aliens Act.
On 15 October 1998 the  declined to deal with the applicant's complaint for lack of prospect of success. It referred to its decision of 2 October 1997 in which it had found that the Independent Administrative Panels in principle qualified as “tribunals” but that the IAP in this case lacked “independence” as the deciding judge was a former civil servant of the federal authority which had issued the impugned decision and was likely to return after his term of office to the federal authority which had issued the impugned decision. The  noted that in the present case there was no concrete indication of lack of independence of the deciding member of the Vienna IAP. Upon the applicant's request, it transferred the case to the  (Verwaltungsgerichtshof).
On 26 March 1999 the applicant submitted his amended complaint and submitted that the IAP's decision was unlawful on account of its content and the breach of procedural rules. The  instituted preliminary proceedings on 6 April 1999. On the same date it granted suspensive effect to the applicant's complaint. On 17 May 1999 the  obtained the IAP's submissions. On 3 September 2002 it dismissed the applicant's complaint. On the same day it also confirmed the applicant's conviction concerning illegal employment of three other Polish nationals. These decisions were served on the applicant's counsel on 3 October 2002.
The relevant provisions of the Austrian Federal Constitution (Bundes-Verfassungsgesetz) concerning the establishment of Independent Administrative Panels which entered into force on 1 January 1991 read as follows:
Article 129
“It is the task of the Independent Administrative Panels in the regions and the  in  to ensure the lawfulness of the entire public administration.”
 “(1) Independent Administrative Panels are composed of a president, a deputy president and a sufficient number of further members. Its members are appointed by the Regional Government for a period of at least six years. ...
 (2) In fulfilling their tasks under Articles 129a and 129b the members of the Independent Administrative Panel are not bound by any instructions. The court business shall be distributed among the members in advance for the period provided for in the regional legislation. A matter which according to such a schedule is the business of one member may only be withdrawn from him or her in case of impediment by a decision of the president.
 (3) Before the end of their term of office members of Independent Administrative Panels may only be removed from office in the cases specified by the law and upon a decision of the Independent Administrative Panel itself.
The Vienna Act on the Independent Administrative Panel, Regional Gazette no. 53/1990 (Gesetz vom 26. Juni über den Unabhängigen Verwaltungssenat Wien, Landesgesetzblatt no. 53/1990), as in force at the time of the events, repeated the provisions of the Federal Constitution as regards appointment, removal and freedom from instructions of the members of the Vienna Independent Administrative Panel (ss. 4-6). It further stated that the members of the Independent Administrative Panel should be chosen in a procedure including public announcement of the vacancy and a hearing of the Panel's president. At least a quarter of the members of the Independent Administrative Panel should be taken from departments of the federal authorities.
Section 5 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Offences provides:
“Unless a provision of administrative law states otherwise, negligent behaviour is sufficient to establish guilt. Negligence is to be assumed in the case of failure to observe a prohibition or a prescription where damage or danger is not an element of the administrative offence, and the defendant does not convincingly show that no fault lies with him for the contravention of the provision of administrative law.”