The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission") on 9 September 1994, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 para. 1 and Article 47 (art. 32-1, art. 47) of the Convention.  It originated in an application (no. 16841/90) against the  lodged with the Commission under Article 25 (art. 25) by an Austrian national, Mr Harald Pfarrmeier, on 13 June 1990.
The Commission's request referred to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48) and to the declaration whereby  recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46) (art. 46).  The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) of the Convention.  
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 para. 3 (d) of Rules of Court A, the applicant stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings and designated the lawyer who would represent him (Rule 30).
On 24 September 1994 the President of the Court decided, under Rule 21 para. 6 and in the interests of the proper administration of justice, that a single Chamber should be constituted to consider the instant case and the cases of Schmautzer, Umlauft, Gradinger, Pramstaller and Palaoro v.  .
The Chamber to be constituted for this purpose included ex officio Mr F. Matscher, the elected judge of Austrian nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr R. Ryssdal, the President of the Court (Rule 21 para. 3 (b)).  On the same day, in the presence of the Registrar, the President drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr L. E. Pettiti, Mr R. Macdonald, Mr S.K. Martens, Mr I. Foighel, Mr J.M. Morenilla, Sir John Freeland and Mr J. Makarczyk (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 para. 4) (art. 43).  
As President of the Chamber (Rule 21 para. 5), Mr Ryssdal, acting through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Austrian Government ("the Government"), the applicant and the Delegate of the Commission on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 37 para. 1 and 38). Pursuant to the order made in consequence, the Registrar received the Government's memorial on 23 January 1995 and the applicant's memorial on 30 January 1995.  On 3 February the Commission supplied the Registrar with various documents that he had requested on the President's instructions.
In accordance with the President's decision, the hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, , on 26 April 1995.  The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:  
(a) for the Government  
(b) for the Commission  
(c) for the applicant  
The Court heard addresses by Mr Weitzel, Mr Weh and Mr Cede.  
On 5 April 1986 Mr Harald Pfarrmeier was stopped by the police after he had parked his car at the side of the road with its headlights on and the engine running.  He refused to submit to a breath test.  In a "sentence order" (Straferkenntnis) of the same day the Bregenz district authority (Bezirkshauptmannschaft) imposed on him a fine of 9,000 Austrian schillings (ATS) with 360 hours' imprisonment in default of payment, for an offence under section 99(1)(b) taken together with section 5(2) of the Road Traffic Act (Straßenverkehrsordnung - see paragraphs 13 and 14 below).
The applicant appealed against that decision to the Vorarlberg regional government (Amt der Landesregierung), which dismissed the appeal on 11 November 1987.
On 7 January 1988 Mr Pfarrmeier applied to the  (Verwaltungsgerichtshof).  He complained, in particular, that the impugned decision was unlawful and that there had been a procedural irregularity.
On 23 March 1988 the  quashed the decision of the regional government (section 42(2), sub-paragraphs 1 and 3, of the Administrative Court Act (Verwaltungsgerichtshofsgesetz) - see paragraph 21 below) and referred the case back to it.  
The Vorarlberg regional government, giving a second ruling on 23 December 1988, upheld the Bregenz district authority's decision on the issue of guilt, but reduced the fine to ATS 5,000 and the penalty in default to 200 hours' imprisonment.
On 10 February 1989 the applicant applied to the  (Verfassungsgerichtshof).  He complained of an infringement of the right of property, of the principle that all citizens are equal before the law and of the right to a "fair procedure" in criminal proceedings under Article 6 (art. 6) of the Convention.
On 10 March 1989, at the conclusion of a consideration of the case in private, the Constitutional Court declined to accept the appeal for adjudication (Article 144 para. 2 of the Federal Constitution (Bundes-Verfassungsgesetz) - see paragraph 17 below), since, in view of Austria's reservation in respect of Article 5 (art. 5) of the Convention, it did not have sufficient prospects of success; moreover, the case did not lie outside the jurisdiction of the Administrative Court.  
At Mr Pfarrmeier's request, it referred the application to the  on 24 April 1989.
Reiterating in substance the arguments he had set out before the , the applicant complained, in particular, of a faulty assessment of the evidence by the administrative authority concerned.
The  ruled for the second time and dismissed the appeal, after proceedings that were wholly in writing; the applicant had not asked it to hold a hearing.  It gave the following reasons:
"However, having regard to the Administrative Court's limited supervisory power in proceedings relating to an application for review of an administrative decision, it is not for the court to ascertain whether the assessment made of the evidence in a given case is correct in the sense, for example, that a statement which incriminates the applicant corresponds to the facts and not the reply (decision of 3 October 1985 delivered by a full court, Zl. 85/02/0053).  
Accordingly, the applicant's complaint that he did not speak to the reporting police officer about a night's drinking session cannot be entertained.  
...  
The respondent authority was entitled, without disregarding the requirement that the assessment of the evidence has to be conclusive, to draw from the established facts mentioned above the conclusion that objective circumstances - and not merely the subjective belief of the reporting police officer - supported the suspicion that the applicant was under the influence of drink.  
...  
As regards the applicant's complaint that his lawyer was not allowed to examine the witness Widlroither in the proceedings before the authority, reference is made to the Administrative Court's settled case-law, according to which neither the holding of a hearing nor the possibility of examining witnesses is an essential part of lawful administrative criminal proceedings (see the decision of 13 June 1986, Zl. 86/18/0065, and the one of 19 February 1987, Zl. 86/02/0159).  
As to the alleged unconstitutionality of Austria's reservation in respect of Article 5 (art. 5) of the European Convention on Human Rights, reference is made to the decision delivered by a full court on 8 May 1987, Slg NF no. 12.466/A.  
Since the alleged unlawfulness of the impugned decision has not been made out in the application, it falls to be dismissed as unfounded, under section 42(1) of the Administrative Court Act.  
..."  
Under section 5 of the Road Traffic Act 1960 it is an offence for any person to drive a vehicle if the proportion of alcohol in his blood or breath is equal to or higher than 0.8 grams per litre or 0.4 milligrams per litre respectively.  The same section also lays down the conditions for the use of breathalysers and blood tests.
In its 1971 version, section 99(1) of the Act provided:
"It shall be an administrative offence (Verwaltungsübertretung), punishable with a fine of not less than 5,000 and not more than 30,000 schillings or, in default of payment, with one to six weeks' imprisonment, for any person 
 ...  
(b) to refuse to submit to a breath test where the conditions laid down in section 5 are satisfied;  
..."  
In 1958, at the time when the Austrian Government ratified the Convention (see paragraph 25 below), section 7 of the Traffic Police Act 1947 (Straßenpolizeigesetz) provided: "Every driver shall be under a duty to pay reasonable heed to other road users and to display the care and diligence necessary to ensure the maintenance of order, safety and a proper flow of traffic."
Article 90 para. 1 of the Federal Constitution (Bundes-Verfassungsgesetz) provides:
"Hearings by trial courts in civil and criminal cases shall be oral and public.  Exceptions may be prescribed by law."  
By Article 144 para. 1 of the Federal Constitution, the Constitutional Court, when an application (Beschwerde) is made to it, has to determine whether an administrative decision (Bescheid) has infringed a right guaranteed by the Constitution or has applied regulations (Verordnung) contrary to the law, a law contrary to the Constitution or an international treaty incompatible with Austrian law.
Article 144 para. 2 provides:  
"Up to the time of the hearing the  may by means of a decision (Beschluß) decline to accept a case for adjudication if it does not have sufficient prospects of success or if it cannot be expected that the judgment will clarify an issue of constitutional law.  The court may not decline to accept for adjudication a case excluded from the jurisdiction of the  by Article 133."  
By Article 130 para. 1 of the Federal Constitution, the  has jurisdiction to hear, inter alia, applications alleging that an administrative decision is unlawful.
Section 39(1) of the Administrative Court Act provides, in particular, that at the end of the preliminary proceedings (Vorverfahren) the  must hold a hearing where the applicant makes a request to that effect.
Section 39(2) reads as follows:  
"Notwithstanding a party's application under subsection (1), the  may decide not to hold a hearing where  
Sub-paragraphs 1 to 3 of section 39(2) were in force in 1958; sub-paragraphs 4 and 5 were inserted in 1964 and sub-paragraph 6 in 1982.  
Section 41(1) of the Administrative Court Act provides:
"In so far as the Administrative Court does not find any unlawfulness deriving from the respondent authority's lack of jurisdiction or from breaches of procedural rules (section 42(2)(2) and (3)) ..., it must examine the impugned decision on the basis of the facts found by the respondent authority and with reference to the complaints put forward ... 
If it considers that reasons which have not yet been notified to one of the parties might be decisive for ruling on [one of these complaints] ..., it must hear the parties on this point and adjourn the proceedings if necessary."  
Section 42(1) of the same Act states that, save as otherwise provided, the Administrative Court must either dismiss an application as ill-founded or quash the impugned decision.
By section 42(2),  
"The  shall quash the impugned decision if it is unlawful  
(a) the respondent authority has made findings of fact which are, in an important respect, contradicted by the case file, or  
(b) the facts require further investigation on an important point, or  
(c) procedural rules have been disregarded, compliance with which could have led to a different decision by the respondent authority."  
If the Administrative Court quashes the impugned decision, "the administrative authorities [are] under a duty ... to take immediate steps, using the legal means available to them, to bring about in the specific case the legal situation which corresponds to the Administrative Court's view of the law (Rechtsanschauung)" (section 63(1)).
In a judgment of 14 October 1987 (G 181/86) the  held:
"From the fact that it has been necessary to extend the reservation in respect of Article 5 (art. 5) of the Convention to cover the procedural safeguards of Article 6 (art. 6) of the Convention, because of the connection between those two provisions (art. 5, art. 6), it follows that, conversely, the limited review (die (bloß) nachprüfende Kontrolle) carried out by the Administrative Court or the Constitutional Court is insufficient in respect of criminal penalties within the meaning of the Convention that are not covered by the reservation."  
Pursuant to Article 129 of the Federal Constitution, administrative courts called "independent administrative tribunals" (Unabhängige Verwaltungssenate) were set up in the Länder with effect from 1 January 1991.  The functions of these tribunals include determining both the factual and the legal issues arising in cases concerning administrative offences (Verwaltungsübertretungen).
The instrument of ratification of the Convention deposited by the Austrian Government on 3 September 1958 contains, inter alia, a reservation worded as follows:
"The provisions of Article 5 (art. 5) of the Convention shall be so applied that there shall be no interference with the measures for the deprivation of liberty prescribed in the laws on administrative procedure, BGBl [Federal Official Gazette] No. 172/1950, subject to review by the Administrative Court or the Constitutional Court as provided for in the Austrian Federal Constitution."  
Mr Pfarrmeier applied to the Commission on 13 June 1990.  Relying on Article 6 (art. 6) of the Convention, he complained that he had not had access to a court with full jurisdiction and had not been able to examine witnesses.
On 10 May 1993 the Commission declared the application (no. 16841/90) admissible.
In its report of 19 May 1994 (Article 31) (art. 31), it expressed the opinion that there had been a violation of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) as regards access to a court (unanimously) and that no separate issue arose under Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) as to the failure to hold a hearing (unanimously) or under Article 6 para. 3 (d) (art. 6-3-d) as to the impossibility of examining witnesses.  The full text of the Commission's opinion and of the concurring opinion contained in the report is reproduced as an annex to this judgment . 
In their memorial the Government asked the Court to hold that
"Article 6 (art. 6) of the Convention is not applicable in the present case; or alternatively, that Article 6 (art. 6) of the Convention was not violated in the administrative criminal proceedings underlying the application".  