The case concerns the alleged unfairness of criminal proceedings against the applicant on account of the courts’ reliance on the testimony of a protected witness and the exclusion of the public from several hearings.
The applicant was born in 1960 and lives in Skopje. He was a former member of the Parliament and Minister of Internal Affairs of the respondent State. In 2009 he founded the political party “United for Macedonia” (Обединети за Македонија), of which he was the chairman at the time of the material events. The political party participated in the 2011 parliamentary elections, but did not win any seats in the national Parliament.
The applicant was represented by Mr K. Kratovaliev, a lawyer practising in Skopje. The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr K. Bogdanov, succeeded by their present Agent, Ms D. Djonova.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 6 June 2011, the day after parliamentary elections had taken place, the applicant was arrested in the context of an on-going investigation by the Financial Crime Unit of the Central Police Service of the Ministry of the Interior into a suspected abuse of office (злупотреба на службена положба и овластување) and breach of the rules on the funding of electoral campaigns (Злоупотреба на средствата за финансирање на изборната кампања) by him. He was brought before an investigating judge (истражен судија), Judge M.K. In the presence of a lawyer of his own choosing, the applicant remained silent. Judge M.K. remanded the applicant in custody, where he remained during the entire proceedings.
On the same day the investigators took a statement from a witness who stated that he was familiar with the applicant and had had contacts with him on several occasions. He went on to state that he had given the applicant cash on three occasions, in April, May and June 2011, in the amounts of 10,000 euros (EUR), EUR 20,000 and EUR 100,000 respectively, intended to finance the applicant’s electoral campaign. Lastly, the witness stated that fearing for his and his family’s safety, he would only cooperate with the investigation if he were to be examined as a protected witness.
In a separate decision taken on 6 June 2011, Judge M.K. decided that the above-mentioned witness would be examined under a special arrangement for protected witnesses whereby his identity and face would be concealed. He was to produce evidence under the pseudonym “3-1” with the use of a special streaming device, which would distort his voice and face.
The relevant part of the decision reads as follows:
“... having regard to the nature and gravity of the crimes subject to investigation and in respect of which the witness should produce evidence, the manner in which they were committed and the level of risk, the investigating judge considers that the conditions for special examination of a witness are fulfilled ...”
The applicant, who was served with the decision, did not appeal against it, although the decision contained an explicit legal instruction confirming the availability of an appeal to be lodged within three days of the day of service.
Later on the same day the protected witness 3-1 gave a statement before Judge M.K., a prosecutor, the applicant and his representative. The judge verified the identity of the witness, who stayed in a separate room, and proceeded to take his statement via video link, using software that distorted his face and voice. The witness stated that he had known the applicant for several years and was his friend. The applicant had asked him to help him with the financing of the political campaign, to which he had agreed. Witness 3-1 reiterated his earlier statement (see paragraph 6 above), adding that two of the meetings had taken place in restaurants but he could not recall the exact dates. He stated that the applicant had told him that he would use the money to finance his political campaign. Neither the applicant nor his representative had any questions for the witness.
Having taken the statement, Judge M.K. opened an official investigation in respect of the applicant for “abuse of official authority and power” (Злоупотреба на службената положба и овластување) in respect of his office as president of a political party and breach of the rules on the funding electoral campaigns, punishable under Articles 353 and 165a of the Criminal Code. The investigation concerned allegations that the applicant had received, on three occasions, EUR 10,000, EUR 20,000 and EUR 100,000 respectively, from the protected witness, a foreign national, to finance the electoral campaign of his political party.
On 25 July 2011 the applicant was indicted on charges of abuse of official authority and power and breach of the rules on the funding of electoral campaigns. He was accused, in his position as chairman of a political party and organiser of the electoral campaign, of breaching the applicable rules on the financing of political parties and electoral campaigns and of “relying on his long acquaintance with the protected witness”, from whom he had received, on 12 April, 28 May and 6 June 2011, the abovementioned amounts in foreign currency to finance his political party. The indictment relied on the statement given by the protected witness before the investigating judge; audio and video material, recorded on the basis of a court order in the course of the investigation, of the critical meetings between the applicant and the protected witness when money had changed hands; a statement given by a representative of the applicant’s political party; search records, fingerprint expert reports and other material evidence. An objection (приговор) to the indictment lodged by the applicant was to no avail.
The applicant’s case was heard by a five-judge panel of the Skopje Court of First Instance (Основен суд Скопје I – “the trial court”), presided over by Judge R.V. At the trial, the applicant was represented by four lawyers of his own choosing.
At a public hearing of 15 September 2011 the applicant stated that he would remain silent.
At the following hearings the trial court heard several witnesses, and several expert reports and other material evidence were adduced.
The trial court decided to exclude the public from the hearings of 20 and 25 October 2011 in spite of protests by the defence, holding that it would examine evidence gathered through special investigative measures. At those hearings, which were held in the presence of the applicant and his lawyers, the trial court examined audio and video recordings of the three meetings between the applicant and the protected witness (whose face was concealed) when money had changed hands. Furthermore, in the absence of the protected witness, who was outside the country at the time, the trial court read the statement which he had given before the investigating judge and admitted in evidence the order for the use of special investigative measures (посебни истражни мерки), namely, the secret surveillance of the applicant.
The public was also excluded from a hearing of 15 November 2011, in spite of protests by the defence that that would run contrary to domestic law. At that hearing, at which the protected witness was present, the trial court heard witness 3-1 after rejecting an objection lodged by the applicant about his being heard as a protected witness. Judge R.V. alone established the witness’s identity, and found that “the risk to (his) life, health and physical integrity” still persisted. Judge R.V. warned the witness that his testimony should be truthful and that giving false testimony was a criminal offence. The protected witness was placed in a special room that was physically separated from the courtroom in which the bench (including Judge R.V.), the prosecution as well as the applicant and his lawyers, were present. The examination of the witness was conducted via a streaming device using software which distorted the witness’s face and voice. In reply to questions put by the defence, the witness confirmed that the money had been intended to finance the electoral campaign. He stated that the meetings with the applicant had been previously arranged, but he “did not remember” who had chosen the meeting places. The witness stated that he still considered the applicant to be his friend. He replied to a number of questions with “I don’t know” and “I have the right not to reply to this question”. The trial court refused the defence leave to put several questions, including whether the applicant, his wife or any other close member of the applicant’s family had ever threatened the witness.
On 29 November 2011 the trial court convicted the applicant as charged and sentenced him to seven years’ imprisonment. The judgment was based on oral and material evidence, including several expert opinions (including one which had found the applicant’s fingerprints on the confiscated money), photographs of the confiscated money, audio and video recordings (see paragraph 14 above) and the statement of witness 3-1. The trial court held that the audio and video recordings had been lawfully obtained; that that material had enabled the court to establish the place where money had changed hands, its amount and purpose (namely to finance the electoral campaign of the applicant’s political party). The trial court further held that it was confirmed beyond doubt that the money had been given for the electoral campaign of the applicant’s party on the basis of the statement given by protected witness 3-1 (Од исказот на загрозениот сведок 3-1 ... неспорно произлегува да истиот во неколку наврати на обвинетиот му дал парични средства ...). Lastly, the court dismissed the defence’s argument about the exclusion of the public from some of the hearings, finding that it concerned only a limited number of hearings at which the audio and video recordings and the protected witness had been examined.
The applicant appealed against the judgment, arguing, inter alia, that witness 3-1 should not have been treated as a protected witness given that he was his friend, he knew his identity and home address, and the witness had never been threatened either by the applicant or by anyone else. In this connection, he argued that the trial court had not explained why it had considered that there had been a risk to the witness’s life and health. Furthermore, the screen showing the witness had been completely dark and the applicant could not see whether he had been alone in the room or whether there had been other people instructing him how to reply to the questions. Lastly, only Judge R.V. had established the witness’s identity before the examination had started, and not the entire judicial panel, and the trial court had not provided any reasons for excluding the public from a part of the trial.
The first-instance public prosecutor’s office and the higher public prosecutor’s office submitted observations in reply, urging the Appeal Court (Апелационен суд Скопје) to dismiss the applicant’s appeal.
On 23 April 2012 the Appeal Court held a public hearing in the presence of the applicant and three of his representatives. The Appeal Court partly accepted the applicant’s appeal and reduced his sentence to five years’ imprisonment, while upholding the remainder of the judgment. It held that the trial court had given sufficient reasons for excluding the public from the part of the trial regarding the evidence obtained with the use of special investigative measures and from the protected witness. It also agreed with the findings of the trial court that witness 3-1 should be treated as a protected witness. In this connection, it stated that “the risk is a personal feeling of the person concerned, and this witness felt that his life and physical integrity were seriously endangered, given the gravity (тежината) of his statement”.
The applicant challenged those judgments before the Supreme Court (Врховен суд) by applying for an extraordinary review of a final judgment (барање за вонредно преиспитување на правосилна пресуда), raising the same complaints as those mentioned in his appeal.
The State Public Prosecutor (Јавен обвинител на Република Македонија) submitted observations in reply, requesting that the Supreme Court dismiss the applicant’s request.
By a judgment of 30 January 2013 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s request and upheld the lower courts’ judgments. It held that the applicant had been convicted after the lower courts had correctly assessed all evidentiary material and had established the relevant facts. The court reiterated that all of the evidence against the applicant had been lawfully obtained. The protected witness had been examined in accordance with the law, and the use of a streaming device that distorted the witness’s face and voice was an established practice in other States. It added that the fact that the public had been excluded from the part of the trial concerning evidence obtained with the use of special investigative measures and from the protected witness did not violate the principle of publicity of the proceedings. This judgment was served on the applicant on 8 May 2013.
Section 142-b limits the use of special investigative measures. According to this section, such a measure can only be used following a court order and is limited to crimes punishable to a minimum of four years’ imprisonment and organized crime.
Under section 223 witnesses should be examined individually and separately from other witnesses. The trial court judge should issue a warning to witnesses that providing false testimony is punishable by imprisonment under the relevant provisions of the Criminal Code. Under section 223-a, where a witness or his or her family is likely to be exposed to a serious risk to their health, life and physical integrity, he or she can refuse to give information until adequate facilities for his protection are provided.
Under section 270-a, the trial court will decide on the measures to protect the status of a witness following a proposal by the public prosecutor. The prosecutor, the accused and the witness can lodge an appeal against that decision within three days. Under section 270-b, witness protection measures can entail the concealment of the identity and appearance of the witness. Concealing the appearance of a witness is done by means of special audio and video software, which alters his or her face and voice, while the witness is kept in a room separate from the courtroom. Under section 339 (3) a judgment cannot be based solely on testimony of a protected witness.
Under sections 280 and 281, the trial court may decide to exclude the public from a hearing proprio motu or following a proposal by one of the parties, if it is necessary to do so in order to protect State, military, official or business secrets, or to safeguard public order, the private life of the accused, a witness or the injured party, or to protect the safety of a witness or a minor. Such a decision has to be publicly pronounced and contain reasons.