The case originated in an application (no. 55339/07) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Ms Danuta Zbignevna Shestopalova (“the applicant”), on 19 November 2007.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr I. Lishchyna of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant complained under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention that there had been a violation of her right of access to a court.
On 27 May 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1971 and lives in Melitopol.
Between 2004 and 2006 the applicant was head of Melitopol City Council’s Disadvantaged Persons’ Welfare Centre (Центр по обслуговуванню одиноких, непрацездатних та малозабезпечених громадян Управління праці, соціального захисту та житлових субсидій Мелітопольської міської Ради – “the Centre”). On 21 April 2006 she was dismissed as part of a reorganisation of the Centre. Another person was subsequently appointed to a position similar to the one previously occupied by the applicant.
In May 2006 the applicant instituted civil proceedings in the Melitopolskyy Local Court (“the Melitopolskyy Court”) seeking reinstatement, salary arrears and compensation for non-pecuniary damage. On 24 October 2006 the court rejected the applicant’s claim. It found that the Centre had offered the applicant another position but that she had rejected this proposal, and that a more experienced person had been appointed as the head of the Centre. Following an appeal by the applicant, on 7 December 2006 the Zaporizhzhya Regional Court of Appeal upheld the decision of 24 October 2006. The applicant lodged a further appeal, and on 22 August 2007 the Supreme Court of Ukraine quashed these decisions and remitted the case to the first-instance court for fresh consideration. It held that the case was to be considered under the administrative justice procedure since it concerned a public-service dispute.
Accordingly, the applicant instituted administrative proceedings before the Melitopolskyy Court, which, on 21 February 2008, again found against her for reasons similar to those listed in its decision of 24 October 2006. The applicant appealed, and on 16 July 2008 the Dnipropetrovsk Administrative Court of Appeal quashed this decision and terminated the proceedings on the grounds that it fell to be examined under the civil justice procedure as the applicant was not a public servant. On 2 March 2011 the Higher Administrative Court of Ukraine upheld this decision. On 14 April 2011 the same court rejected the applicant’s request for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court of Ukraine against the decision of 2 March 2011.
On 28 March 2011 the applicant again lodged a civil claim seeking reinstatement, salary arrears and compensation for non-pecuniary damage. On 4 August 2011 the Melitopolskyy Court refused to examine the merits of the applicant’s civil claim as the applicant had sought to have adjourned previous court hearings in respect of her case on numerous occasions without good reason. On 5 October 2011 the Zaporizhzhya Regional Court of Appeal upheld the decision of the first-instance court.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of Ukraine read as follows:
“In Ukraine the system of courts is constituted in accordance with the territorial principle and the principle of specialisation and is defined by law.
A court is formed, reorganised and liquidated by [the enactment of] a law, a draft of which is presented to the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine by the President of Ukraine, after consultations with the Supreme Council of Justice.
The Supreme Court is the highest judicial body in the system of courts of Ukraine.
The higher specialised courts operate in accordance with the law.
Administrative courts function with the aim of protecting people’s rights, freedoms and interests in the public sphere.
The creation of extraordinary and special courts shall not be permitted.”
“1. The courts examine in civil proceedings cases concerning:
1) the protection of affected, unrecognised or disputed rights, and freedoms or interests arising from civil, housing, land, family, and labour relations;
2) other [types of] relations, in the event that the examination of such cases is not covered by the rules governing other [types of] proceedings.”
“1. The jurisdiction of the administrative courts extends to legal relations arising in connection with the implementation of authoritative powers by a public agency or officer, as well as in connection with the creation of such an agency or public [office] by means of elections or a referendum.
The jurisdiction of the administrative courts extends to public disputes, in particular:
1) disputes between individuals or legal entities and the public agency or officer concerning the challenging of their decisions (regulatory legal instruments or individual acts), actions or omissions;
2) disputes concerning the acceptance of citizens for public service posts, their duties in such posts, and their dismissal from the public service;
3) disputes between public agencies or officers concerning the implementation of their duties by their wielding their authority (including delegated authority);
4) disputes arising in connection with the conclusion, enforcement, termination, cancellation or acknowledgment of the invalidity of administrative contracts;
5) disputes initiated by a public agency or officer in cases stipulated by the Constitution and laws of Ukraine;
6) disputes concerning relations related to the electoral process or referendum process.
The jurisdiction of the administrative courts does not extend to cases of a publiclaw nature
1) that fall within the jurisdiction of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine;
2) that are to be examined under the rules of criminal procedure;
3) concerning the enforcement of administrative sanctions;
4) concerning relations which relate to the internal activities or exclusive authority of a public association under the law and the statute (that is to say the internal regulations) of a public association.”