The case originated in an application (no. 10633/15) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Ivica Tadić (“the applicant”), on 23 February 2015.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms L. Horvat, a lawyer practising in Zagreb. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged ill-treatment during his arrest and the absence of an effective investigation in that respect.
On 29 June 2015 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1969 and lives in Zagreb.
On 20 December 2012 at 4.55 p.m. V.B. and I.J., police officers of IV police station in Zagreb, caught the applicant in the act of attempting to rob an exchange office in Zagreb. The applicant started to run and fell. The police officers then arrested him. During his arrest some money fell out of the applicant’s pockets.
According to the Government, since the applicant was resisting arrest, the police officers had to apply force (the so-called armlock technique).
According to the applicant, he was beaten by the police officers while lying on the ground.
At 5 p.m. officers D.P. (the chief officer on duty in the IV Zagreb police station) and N.V. (the deputy head of IV Zagreb police station) were informed of the use of force against the applicant. The applicant was taken to the police station at 5.15 p.m. The applicant complained to Officer S.P. that his shoulder hurt. S.P. informed D.P. of this and the latter ordered that the emergency medical service be called. At 5.56 p.m. D.P. informed the Zagreb police operative centre about the use of force against the applicant. The applicant was seen by an emergency doctor between 7.40 p.m. and 7.57 p.m. He was transferred to the Sisters of Charity Hospital in Zagreb (Klinički bolnički centar Sestre milosrdnice) and was seen there by a surgeon at 8.11 p.m. An X-ray examination revealed that the applicant’s right shoulder was broken. The applicant told the doctor that he had fallen during his arrest. He was provided with medical assistance for these injuries and then returned to the police station at 9.40 p.m. Officer D.P. questioned the applicant in connection with the criminal offence for which he had been arrested and the applicant stated that he wished to remain silent.
The applicant was again seen by a surgeon in the same hospital on 24 December 2012 and surgery was recommended.
The applicant was hospitalised in the Sisters of Mercy Hospital between 27 and 31 December 2012. He underwent surgery and it was established that his shoulder was broken in four places; his upper arm was also broken. He had an artificial shoulder implanted.
An internal investigation into the use of force against the applicant was immediately initiated within the Zagreb police on 20 December 2012. Officer D.P. took a statement from the applicant who said that he had sustained an injury “by the police officers” and that he did “not want to say anything else”. Officers V.B. and I.J. compiled a joint report on the use of force against the applicant. Later on, each of them provided a separate report. All these reports alleged that the applicant, in attempting to flee from the police officers, had fallen and that while on the ground had actively resisted the police officers, who had then applied the armlock technique and handcuffed him.
On 21 December 2012 an internal police investigator of the Zagreb police, officer A.L., compiled a report on the basis of the documents, statements from Officers V.B., I.J. and D.P. and his interview with the applicant. In his report A.L. stated that the applicant had attempted to run from the said officers and had fallen. While on the ground he had actively resisted arrest and the officers had applied the armlock technique. A.L. concluded that the applicant had resisted the police officers since some money had fallen out of his clothes. A.L. was of the opinion that the force applied by officers V.B. and I.J. against the applicant had had a “basis in law and [had been] justified”.
On 21 December 2012 the head of IV police station in Zagreb, S.T., compiled a report for the public-order division of the Zagreb police, on the basis of the report of A.L. S.T. stated that the applicant had said that he had fallen and that the police officers had caught him and applied force against him and denied that he had resisted arrest. In a short report of 28 December 2012 the head of the Zagreb police, G.B., concluded that the information gathered had shown that the use of force by Officers V.B. and I.J. against the applicant had been lawful and justified.
On 28 December 2012 the head of the Zagreb police informed the head of IV police station in Zagreb that, on the basis of the report of A.L., he considered the force used by officers V.B. and I.J. against the applicant to have had a “basis in law and [to have been] justified”
On 3 January 2013 the head of the Zagreb police sent the case file concerning the internal police investigation to the Internal Control Service of the Ministry of the Interior. Upon inspecting the file the Internal Control Service instructed the police to forward the file to the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office (hereinafter the “ZMSAO”) for further assessment.
On the instructions of the head of the Zagreb police, on 5 February 2013 the IV police station in Zagreb sent a report on the events at issue together with the applicant’s medical report to the ZMSAO. The documents in the case file do not indicate that the ZMSAO carried out any further steps at that time.
On 6 February 2013, upon a request by the applicant’s lawyer, the head of the IV police station in Zagreb shortly informed the applicant’s lawyer that the force used against the applicant by the two police officers had had a basis in law and had been justified. The applicant’s request to have access to the internal report on the use of force against him was denied on 11 February 2013 on the grounds that it was a classified document.
On 15 May 2013 the head of IV police station in Zagreb compiled a report for the legal, financial and technical tasks division of the Zagreb police, where he described in detail the events at issue and the results of the internal police investigation with a final conclusion that the use of force against the applicant had had a basis in law and had been justified.
On 28 July 2014 the applicant lodged a criminal complaint with the ZMSAO against Officers V.B. and I.J.
The applicant alleged that during his arrest on 20 December 2012 police officers V.B. and I.J. had forced him to the ground and then hit, kicked and verbally insulted him and unnecessarily twisted his arm, owing to which he had sustained injuries, such as a broken arm and shoulder. The officers had then taken him to a police station where they continued to beat him. Only after three hours had he been taken to hospital. The doctors had recommended urgent surgery but the police officers had not allowed it. Instead, they had taken him back to the police station where they had continued to hit and insult him. In the evening he had been admitted to Zagreb Prison.
The prosecuting authorities obtained the statements previously given by the applicant and the police officers involved.
The ZMSAO attempted to contact the applicant on six occasions between 27 November 2014 and 15 September 2015. However, these attempts were unsuccessful since the applicant had changed his address and had not replied to the telephone calls on the mobile telephone number provided by his lawyer.
In July and August 2015 the ZMSAO obtained the medical documentation concerning the applicant’s injuries and medical treatment.
On 13 October 2015 the ZMSAO interviewed the applicant, who said that during his arrest on 20 December 2012 one of the police officers, when applying the armlock technique, had broken his right arm. He had complained to the officers of intense pain but they had ignored his complaints. During his transport to the police station he had again complained about the pain in his arm but the officers had only told him to shut up. Upon his arrival at the police station he had continued to complain about the pain in his arm, but had been ignored. Only after a few hours had a doctor been called. The applicant admitted that he had told the doctor that he had sustained the injury to his right arm and shoulder when he had fallen during his arrest. He also said that during the arrest and later on in the police station, none of the police officers had hit or kicked him. He said that in the relevant period he had been abusing both alcohol and drugs.
On 2 and 3 December 2015 Officers V.B., I.J. and D.B. also gave their statements denying any excessive use of force against the applicant.
On 8 January 2016 the ZMSAO interviewed J.H., an employee of the exchange office where the applicant had attempted the robbery. She had also witnessed the applicant’s arrest and said that she had not seen the police officers hitting or kicking the applicant.
On 13 January 2016 the ZMSAO interviewed B.Z., a witness to the applicant’s arrest, who said that the applicant had attempted to run from the police and had fallen and that he had not seen any police officers hitting or kicking the applicant.
The investigation is still pending.
On 28 August 2013 the applicant instituted civil proceedings in the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court (Općinski građanski sud u Zagrebu) against the State claiming damages in connection with his alleged ill-treatment by the police during his arrest and stay in the police station.
Those proceedings are still pending.
The relevant part of the Code of Criminal Procedure reads as follows (Zakon o kaznenom postupku, Official Gazette nos. 152/2008, 76/2009, 80/2011, 91/2012, 143/2012, 56/2013, 145/2013 and 152/2014):
“(1)  A victim and an injured party have the right to ask for information about the steps taken by a State attorney in connection to their criminal complaint ... within two months of the complaint being submitted. A State attorney shall inform them about the steps taken within a reasonable time and at the latest within thirty days of the date the complaint was received, save for when [providing the information] would compromise the efficiency of the proceedings. ...
(2)  When a State attorney does provide the requested information to the victim or the injured party or when they are not satisfied with the information received, they have the right to complain to a higher State attorney.
(3)  The higher State attorney shall verify the allegations of the complaint and where he or she finds the complaint well-founded, he or she shall order the lower State attorney to provide the complainant with the information about the actions taken or to carry out within a reasonable time the steps that should have been taken. When the higher State attorney finds that the actions of a lower State attorney infringed the rights of the complainant he or she shall inform the complainant of it and indicate the right that has been infringed.
(4)  The victim and the injured party may again seek information about the steps taken under paragraph 1 of this Article after [a period of] six months from the previous request for information, save for when they have lodged a complaint under Article 206.b paragraph 2 of this Code.”
“(1)  A State attorney shall adopt a decision on a criminal complaint within six months ...
(2)  After the expiry of the deadline from paragraph 1 of this Article or after the expiry of [a] six-month [period] after a State attorney acted in accordance with paragraph 5 of Article 205 of this Code, the person who submitted a criminal complaint, the victim and the injured party may lodge a complaint with a higher State attorney on account of the failure of a subordinate State attorney to carry out actions which resulted in a delay in the proceedings.
(3)  A higher State attorney shall request without delay a report on the allegations in the complaint.
(4)  When he or she finds the complaint well-founded the higher State attorney shall fix adequate time for adopting a decision on the criminal complaint concerned.
(5)  The higher State attorney shall inform the complainant of the measures taken within fifteen days.
(6)  The complainant may repeat his or her complaint when the complaint has not been processed within the time-limit under paragraph 4 of this Article.”
Section 5 of the Police Act (Zakon o policiji, Official Gazette no. 34/2011 and 130/2012) reads as follows:
“(1)  When a physical or legal person submits a petition or a complaint about the work of a police officer or other employee of the Ministry [of the Interior], a police entity or other entity of the Ministry, alleging that unlawful or incorrect acts of a police officer or other employee of the Ministry violated his or her or other’s rights or violated a statutory provision, a head of the relevant division shall inform the complainant about the facts established and measures taken within thirty days of the day the petition or complaint has been submitted.
(2)  If the complainant is not satisfied with the answer and the procedure by which his or her allegations have been assessed, the case file shall without delay be forwarded to further processing to the Ministry’s Complaints Committee.
(3)  The Committee under paragraph 2 of this section is composed of three members: police officer of the Ministry and two representatives of the public appointed by the Parliament’s Committee for Human Rights and the Rights of National Minorities at the suggestions of organisations of civil society, organisations of exerts and non-governmental organisations. The Ministry shall have a register of petitions and complaints.
...”
The relevant provisions of the Police Duties and Powers Act (Zakon o policijskim poslovima i ovlastima, Official Gazette no. 76/2009), as in force at the relevant time, provide:
“(1)  Means of force may be used in cases provided for in this Act in order to protect human lives, surmount resistance, prevent escape or resist an attack, when it is probable that warnings and orders would not achieve the aim sought.
...
(3)  The means of force shall be used [only] after an advance warning, save for when it is probable that the advance warning would put at risk the achieving of the aim sought.”
“(1)  A police officer has the right to use physical force in order to:
surmount resistance of a person breaching the public peace and order, or in respect of a person who should be brought [before the competent authority], confined or arrested;
prevent self-injury of a person;
resist attack against [the police officer] or another person or object or premises under his control;
prevent that person’s leaving a certain place of their own free will.
...”
“A police officer has the right to use means of restraint in order to prevent:
resistance or attack against the police officer;
escape of a person;
inflicting self-injury or injuries to another person.”
The relevant provisions of the by-law on the police conduct (Pravilnik o načinu policijskog postupanja, Official Gazette no. 81/2003) provide:
“A police officer may use force under the conditions provided for by law, in principle when warning and orders are insufficient to achieve the desired result.
The means of force may exceptionally be used before warning and orders when it is likely that giving warnings and orders would put at risk the achieving of the aim sought.
The police officer shall use the measure of force which, causing minimum consequences, achieves the aim sought and shall cease to use force as soon as the reason for using it ceases.”
“A police officer has the right to use physical force in order to surmount resistance of a person breaching the public peace and order, or in respect of a person who should be brought [before the competent authority], confined or arrested, or in order to prevent self-injury, resist attack against [the police officer] or another person or object or premises under his or her control or to prevent that person’s self-willed leaving a certain place.
The use of physical force shall mean: hitting with a bodily part, techniques of defence or attack capable of securing obedience of the person when the conditions prescribed by law are met.
The police officer shall apply the means of physical force by which the aim sought is achieved with the least negative consequences.”
“The use of measures of restraint is restriction of the freedom of bodily movement by tying [the arrestee’s] hands behind [his or her] back, the use of prescribed means of restraint (handcuffs) or other adequate means (belt, rope, tape and similar).
As an exception to paragraph 1 of this section, when there are justified reasons, and when a person is under the control of at least two police officers, his or her hands may be tied in front of his or her body.
The legs may also be tied when the means of force under paragraph 1 of this section have not achieved the aim sought.
The measure under paragraph 1 of this section shall be used by a police officer in a manner ensuring that it does not cause unnecessary physical injuries to the person restrained.
...
A police officer shall restrain a person who is to be brought [before the competent authority], confined or arrested when there is a danger of absconding, resistance or attack of that person on a police officers, or where there is a danger of his or her self-injury or injuring another person.
...”