The case originated in an application (no. 67482/14) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a French national, Mr Vincent Lebois (“the applicant”), on 11 October 2014.
The applicant was represented by Ms L. Tassone, a lawyer practising in Strasbourg, France. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Radkova of the Ministry of Justice.
On 25 August 2016 the Government were given notice of the complaints concerning (a) the conditions of the applicant’s detention; (b) the medical care provided to the applicant in custody; and (c) the restrictions on the applicant’s visits and telephone contacts in detention. The remainder of the application was declared inadmissible under Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
In a letter of 24 November 2016 the French Government, who had been notified of the application (Rule 44 § 1 (a) of the Rules of Court), stated that they did not wish to exercise their right under Article 36 § 1 of the Convention to submit written comments.
The applicant was born in 1986 and lives in Sofia, Bulgaria, where he apparently moved from France in November 2013.
At 12.40 a.m. on 24 January 2014 he was arrested in Sofia while breaking into cars with a view to stealing items from them. He was taken to the First District Police Station and placed under police detention. According to the applicant, he was not put in a cell, but handcuffed to a bench in the station’s corridor.
According to the applicant, throughout the whole time that he spent in the police station he was not given any food or drink, allowed to go to the toilet, or allowed to use a telephone. He was visited by an ex officio lawyer appointed for him by the authorities. However, the lawyer spoke no French and very little English – a language that the applicant is apparently familiar with – and did not explain to him anything about the procedure in his case.
In the late afternoon or the evening of 24 January 2014 the applicant was taken to a hospital for a medical examination, and then, at about 10 p.m. the same day, taken to a pre-trial detention facility in Sofia.
It appears that the next day, or one of the following days, the applicant was brought before the Sofia District Court with a view to a decision on whether he should be remanded in detention, and that it was decided that he should remain in custody pending trial. A subsequent request for release apparently made by his counsel in the end of February 2014 was rejected as well.
According to the applicant, upon his arrival in the pre-trial detention facility on the evening of 24 January 2014 (see paragraph 8 above), he was given a dirty mattress, pillow and blanket, but no bedlinen. Since he had arrived in the facility after suppertime, he could not eat or drink anything until lunchtime the following day, 25 January 2014.
According to the applicant, the cell in which he had been placed had been dirty, cold, poorly ventilated, infested with cockroaches, overcrowded, and with a toilet which was not properly separated from the rest of the cell.
According to the applicant, he was not able to maintain his personal hygiene, as he was not provided with toilet paper or other toiletries, and had had no money to purchase them. As a result, it had been impossible for him to go to the shower for two weeks. On the third day of his stay in the facility, he had seen spots erupt on his skin and had asked to be examined by a medical doctor. The doctor had come to see him three days later, and had only examined him from a distance, without entering the cell. On an unspecified date in March 2014, the applicant was given a blood test which revealed that he had a staphylococcus infection. He was given antibiotics for it but was not taken to a hospital.
According to the applicant, food had also been so poor and served so unhygienically that he had lost twenty-three kilogrammes during his stay in the detention facility. The space for out-of-cell exercise had also been so small that on many occasions he had chosen not to take his daily exercise.
In the detention facility, there was a cardphone which inmates could use to call outside numbers. It was located in the space where they could take their daily one-hour out-of-cell exercise. Since it had to be shared among them, each inmate had about six minutes to use it. As the applicant had had no money on him when arrested, he could not however purchase a phonecard. With the help of a co-detainee who spoke some English, about two weeks after his arrival in the facility he managed to obtain one minute of call time free of charge, and on 5 February 2014 contacted the consulate of France in Sofia. The consulate immediately informed the applicant’s Bulgarian girlfriend, a Bulgarian friend of his and his parents, who resided in France, that he had been arrested and detained, and the consul came to visit him. The same day the applicant’s mother, who lived in France, wired money to the consul so that she could purchase food and clothes for the applicant. The consulate also arranged for a lawyer to represent the applicant in the criminal case against him.
With the money that he received via the consulate, the applicant was able to purchase a phonecard. According to him, he had made many requests to that effect in the days after 5 February 2017, which the Government had not provided. The Government insisted that they had made available to the Court all documents in the applicant’s detention file. They submitted a declaration by him dated 24 February 2014 whereby he had asked the detention facility’s head to issue him a phonecard preloaded with 20 Bulgarian levs of credit and, as required under the relevant regulations (see paragraph 30 below), had submitted for approval a list of the persons – his Bulgarian girlfriend, a Bulgarian friend, his lawyer, and his mother and father in France – whom he wished to call. The same day the facility’s head approved the list. The applicant was apparently able to call his mother in France for the first time two days later, on 26 February 2014.
According to the applicant, the relevant order (see paragraph 31 below) had provided that detainees could purchase phonecards or recharge them twice a month. The Government did not comment on that point or submit a copy of the order. According to the official form used by the applicant to make his above-mentioned declaration, phonecards could be recharged once a month. The applicant alleged that the facility’s staff had often not complied with the recharging schedule and that on one occasion he had been unable to recharge his phonecard for five weeks. He did not provide further details in that respect, but from the documents submitted by him it appears that between 24 March and 14 April 2014, a period of three weeks, he had not spoken on the telephone to his mother in France.
Detainees in the facility could get two visits a month, each lasting up to twenty minutes. According to the Government, the applicant had received such visits on 5, 8 and 9 February and 23 March 2014. However, on one occasion on 22 March 2014 the applicant’s Bulgarian girlfriend, who had come to visit him, was turned away with the explanation that the same day he had been moved to a different wing, detainees in which could be visited on another date according to the schedule of visits. She was apparently able to visit him the next day. It appears that a Bulgarian friend of the applicant who had also come to visit him on 22 March 2014 was likewise turned away.
According to the Government, during his stay in the detention facility the applicant had been visited by his lawyer on twelve occasions in February and March 2014, and by consular staff on two occasions. He had also received parcels with food and other items on twenty-one occasions.
Throughout his stay in the detention facility, the applicant was able to correspond with his parents in France with letters passed via his lawyer or the staff of the consulate of France in Sofia.
On 17 April 2014 the applicant and the prosecution entered into an agreement whereby he pleaded guilty and accepted to serve a sentence of three months’ imprisonment. The same day the Sofia District Court approved the agreement, and the next day, 18 April 2014, the applicant was moved to Sofia Prison. Since his pre-trial detention was taken into account in calculating the amount of time that he had to serve under his sentence of imprisonment, he spent there only six days, until 24 April 2014, when he was released. According to the applicant, conditions in Sofia Prison were nearly identical to, or even worse than, those in the detention facility.
The applicant’s parents came from France to Bulgaria to see him on 25 April 2014, the day after his release. It appears that they could not do so earlier because it was not possible for his mother to take leave from work.
As a result of the Court’s pilot judgment in the case of Neshkov and Others v. Bulgaria (nos. 36925/10 and 5 others, 27 January 2015), in early 2017 Bulgaria put in place dedicated preventive and compensatory remedies in respect of inhuman or degrading conditions of detention in correctional and pre-trial detention facilities. The compensatory remedy came into effect on 7 February 2017. It is open not only to those in custody on or after that date, but also to those who have spent time in such facilities before that, if they have complained to this Court under Article 3 of the Convention about the conditions of their detention and if the Court declares their complaints inadmissible on the basis that they have not resorted to that remedy. The relevant provisions of the Execution of Punishments and PreTrial Detention Act 2009 (“the 2009 Act”), as amended in 2017, were set out in detail in the Court’s decision in Atanasov and Apostolov v. Bulgaria ((dec.), nos. 65540/16 and 22368/17, §§ 16, 26 and 27, 27 June 2017).
According to Article 63 § 7 of the 2005 Code of Criminal Procedure, when placing an accused in pre-trial detention, the authorities must notify (a) his or her family; (b) his or her employer, unless the accused opposes that; and (c) the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, if the accused is a foreign national. In practice, the courts order such notification in the operative provisions of the decisions whereby they impose pre-trial detention (see, for example, опр. № 68 от 09.02.2009 г. по ч. н. д. № 159/2009 г., РС-Велико Търново (the family); as well as опр. от 14.11.2012 г. по в. ч. н. д. № 1270/2012 г., ОС-Бургас, and опр. № 1189 от 22.07.2016 г. по ч. н. д. № 512/2016 г., РС-Сливница (the Ministry of Foreign Affairs)).
Article 36 § 1 (b) of the 1963 Vienna Convention on Consular Relations (596 UNTS 261), to which Bulgaria acceded in 1989, lays down the obligations to (a) inform a consular post if a national of the sending State is arrested or detained; (b) forward without delay any communication addressed to that post by the detainee; and (c) inform the detainee without delay of those rights. The Convention was published in the State Gazette on 25 May 1990 (ДВ, бр. 42/1990 г.), and is thus, by virtue of Article 5 § 4 of the 1991 Constitution, part of Bulgarian domestic law.
Section 74(2)(6)(e) of the Ministry of Internal Affairs Act 2014, which came into force on 1 July 2014, provides that an order for police detention must set out the detainees’ right to contact the consular authorities of their State of nationality if they are not Bulgarian nationals. The Ministry of Internal Affairs Act 2006 did not contain a similar provision. Section 74(2)(6)(d) of the 2014 Act also provides that the detention order must set out the detainees’ right to make a telephone call to inform someone of their detention. The 2006 Act did not contain such a provision, but laid down, in section 63(6), an obligation for the detaining authority to inform immediately a person specified by the detainee.
Section 243(1) of the 2009 Act provides that pre-trial detainees are entitled to inform their family or relatives of their placement in a detention facility. If they do not wish to do so, they have to sign a declaration to that effect, and in that case the facility’s administration cannot inform the family or relatives of its own motion. Section 243(2) provides that detainees must immediately be apprised of their entitlement to visits, telephone contacts, correspondence and parcels. Section 243(3) provides that detainees who are not Bulgarian nationals must be informed of their right to contact the diplomatic or consular authorities of their State of origin, and must immediately be provided with facilities to do so.
At the European Union level, the rights to (a) have a third person informed of the deprivation of liberty, (b) communicate, while deprived of liberty, with third persons, and (c) have the consular authorities of one’s State of nationality informed of the deprivation of liberty without undue delay and to communicate with those authorities are set out, respectively, in Articles 5 § 1, 6 § 1 and 7 § 1 of Directive 2013/48/EU of 22 October 2013 “on the right of access to a lawyer in criminal proceedings and in European arrest warrant proceedings, and on the right to have a third party informed upon deprivation of liberty and to communicate with third persons and with consular authorities while deprived of liberty”. The first two rights belong to all “suspects and accused persons in criminal proceedings” (Article 1), and the third one only belongs to “suspects or accused persons who are nonnationals” (Article 7 § 1). The deadline for the Directive’s transposition was 27 November 2016. In 2016 the Bulgarian Ministry of Justice drafted a bill for the amendment of the 2005 Code of Criminal Procedure with a view to doing so, on top of the already existing provisions in the Ministry of Internal Affairs Act 2014 (see paragraph 25 above). The bill proposes to give effect to the above-mentioned rights by amending Article 63 § 7 of the Code (see paragraph 23 above) and by adding a new paragraph 8. In October and November 2016 it was subjected to public consultation, with opinions taken from, inter alia, the Chief Prosecutor’s Office and the Chief Bar Council, but has not yet reached Parliament.
Section 256(1) of the 2009 Act provides that pre-trial detainees have the right to visits, food parcels, parcels with clothes and other items, and correspondence. Section 256(4) provides that the number of visits is fixed by order of the head of the General Directorate for the Execution of Punishments. Regulation 277(1) of the Act’s implementing regulations provides that pre-trial detainees are entitled to at least two visits a month. According to regulation 277(2), these may last up to forty minutes, and are to be carried out in a manner laid down by the head of the respective regional or district service for the execution of punishments or by the head of the respective territorial pre-trial detention service.
Several reported cases (реш. № 32 от 18.01.2013 г. по адм. д. № 280/2012 г., АдмС-Русе; реш. от 18.01.2013 г. по адм. д. № 342/2012 г., АдмС-Русе; and реш. № 25 от 04.07.2014 г. по адм. д. № 442/2013 г., АдмС-Русе) show that the schedule of visits in another pre-trial detention facility was fixed in an unpublished order (Заповед № Л-128 от 23.04.2012 г. на началник сектор „Арести“ при окръжна служба „Изпълнение на наказанията“ – Русе) issued by the head of the territorial pre-trial detention service by virtue of the powers which he had under the above-mentioned regulation 277(2). The Government did not provide a copy of the order or orders governing visits in the pre-trial detention facility in which the applicant had been held, or explain in what way these had been brought to his attention.
Section 256(2) of the 2009 Act provides that pre-trial detainees have the right to telephone contacts with their family and relatives in a manner laid down by the head of the Chief Directorate for the Execution of Punishments. According to regulation 281 of the Act’s implementing regulations, pre-trial detainees can use the telephone in the same manner as convicted prisoners. Regulation 79(1) provides that convicted prisoners can make calls at their own expense via a telephone provided by an operator contracted by the facility’s administration. At the relevant time, the list of persons that they could call had to be declared to, and approved by, the facility’s head (regulation 79(2), in force until February 2017). The facility’s head can also permit a detainee to use the telephone free of charge in a family emergency or when there exist “urgent legal grounds” (regulation 79(3)).
A recent reported case (реш. № 103 от 19.04.2017 г. по адм. д. № 488/2016 г., АдмС-Перник) shows that at the relevant time the details of the manner in which pre-trial detainees could use the telephone were set out in an unpublished order (Заповед № Л-6399 от 26.07.2010 г. за вътрешния ред в арестите) issued in 2010 by the head of the Chief Directorate for the Execution of Punishments in the exercise of his powers under the above-mentioned section 256(2) of the 2009 Act. The Government did not provide a copy of that order, or explain in what way it had been brought to the applicant’s attention.
Section 1(1) of the State and Municipalities Liability for Damage Act 1988 (“the 1988 Act”) provides that the State is liable for damage suffered by individuals or legal entities as a result of unlawful decisions, actions or omissions by State or municipal authorities or civil servants, committed in the course of or in connection with administrative action. Pretrial detainees and convicted prisoners often make claims under that provision.