The case originated in twenty applications (nos. 20578/08, 21159/08, 22903/08, 24519/08, 24728/08, 25084/08, 25558/08, 25559/08, 27555/08, 27568/08, 28031/08, 30511/08, 31038/08, 45120/08, 45124/08, 45131/08, 45133/08, 45141/08, 45167/08 and 45173/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”). Their details appear in Appendix I below.
Mr Andriyevskiy (application no. 21159/08) was represented by Mr A. Akhmedov, a lawyer practising in Samara. Ms Anisimova (application no. 45120/08) was represented by Mr V. Lenevich, a lawyer practising in Samara. The rest of the applicants were represented by Ms M. Isayeva, Ms I. Sergeyeva and Ms M. Suchkova, lawyers with Threefold Legal Advisors, a law firm incorporated in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that they had been deprived of their property in contravention of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 23 October 2013 and 18 March 2014 the complaint concerning the deprivation of property was communicated to the Government and the remaining parts of the applications were declared inadmissible.
The applicants are Russian nationals. They owned rooms in a dormitory building in the municipality of Samara. The municipality reclaimed the building, and the applicants’ title to the real property in question was annulled as a result of civil proceedings brought against them by a prosecutor on behalf of the municipality. According to the Government, the judgment has not been enforced and the applicants continue to reside in the rooms they had bought.
.  Ms Vasyukhina and Mr Vasyukhin (application no. 45173/08) submitted that they had never moved into the rooms as they were occupied by other individuals.
In 1993 a State-owned enterprise called Samaraavtotrans was privatised and reorganised into a joint-stock limited liability company called Stroitel. The privatisation plan was approved by the municipality and the Regional Property Fund signed the plan on its behalf. In accordance with the privatisation plan, all residential buildings previously listed on Samaraavtotrans’s balance sheet were to be transferred to the municipality, while the administrative buildings were to be taken over by Stroitel. The privatisation plan referred to a building located at no. 61 Yunykh Pionerov Avenue, Samara, as an administrative building (used for non-residential purposes), and it was transferred to Stroitel.
As a result of a number of reorganisations of Stroitel, the title to the building in question was transferred to the closed joint-stock company, Stroitel-M. Subsequently, separate rooms in the building were resold to third parties, including the applicants. The information concerning the applicants’ titles to the property can be found in the appendix below. According to the title deeds, the applicants were owners of non-residential premises.
The applicants moved into the rooms and resided there.
.  On 23 August 2002 the Samara Region Commercial Court found the Samaraavtotrans privatisation plan and the agreement of 10 November 1993 – which the Regional Property Fund and Stroitel had entered into, and which partly concerned the transfer of the title to the building to Stroitel – null and void.
On an unspecified date the Promyshlenniy district prosecutor, acting in the interests of the municipality, brought an action against Stroitel, Stroitel-M and the owners of the rooms in the former dormitory building, including the applicants. Referring to the invalidation of the privatisation of Samaraavtotrans, the prosecutor submitted that the subsequent transactions relating to the building were also null and void, and asked the court to return the title to the building to the municipality.
According to the applicants, on 27-28 October 2003 the Promyshlenniy District Court of Samara (“the District Court”) dismissed the prosecutor’s claim. On 20 January 2004 the Samara Regional Court (“the Regional Court”) quashed that judgment and remitted the matter to the District Court for fresh consideration.
On 14 June 2005 the District Court dismissed the prosecutor’s claim. On 2 August 2005 the Regional Court upheld the judgment of 14 June 2005 on appeal.
On 18 May 2006 the Presidium of the Regional Court quashed the judgments of 14 June and 2 August 2005 by way of supervisory review, and remitted the matter to the District Court for fresh consideration. The Presidium noted that the lower courts had erroneously applied substantive and procedural laws when deciding the matter.
On 14-19 November 2007 the District Court allowed the prosecutor’s claim in full. The court recognised that the owners of the rooms were bona fide purchasers, but ordered that the title to the building be transferred to the municipality. The municipality, the true owner of the building, had not authorised the purchase of the rooms in the building by their current owners. Accordingly, the sale of the building in the absence of authorisation by the municipality meant that the municipality had lost possession against its will, and could recover its property from bona fide purchasers.
On 12 February 2008 the Regional Court upheld the District Court’s judgment of 1419 November 2007 on appeal.
The applicants in the present application, Mr Vitaliy Vasyukhin and Ms Darya Vasyukhina, were minors at the relevant time.
On an unspecified date, acting on their behalf, the applicants’ mother sued Mr B. (the person who had sold the rooms to the applicants) for damages.
On 10 December 2010 and 16 June 2011 the Oktyabrskiy District Court of Samara granted her claims and awarded damages in the amount of 600,000 Russian roubles (RUB) to each of the applicants. On 10 February and 4 July 1011 the Regional Court upheld the above-mentioned judgments on appeal.
On an unspecified date a bailiff initiated enforcement proceedings. On 4 March 2014 he discontinued the enforcement proceedings, noting that it was impossible to establish Mr B.’s whereabouts or identify his assets, if any such assets existed.
It appears that the enforcement proceedings in respect of the judgment of 16 June 2011 are still pending.
The relevant provisions of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation provide as follows:
“1.  The invalidation of a transaction shall have no legal consequences except for those connected with the invalidation, and the transaction shall be considered invalid from the date of the transaction.
If a transaction has been declared invalid, each of the parties shall return to the other the consideration it has received under the transaction, and if the return is impossible in kind (including where the transaction concerns the use of property, work performed or services rendered), its cost shall be reimbursed in the form of money - unless other consequences of the invalidity of the transactions have been stipulated by law.
If it follows from the content of the disputed transaction that it may not be terminated until a future date, the court, while declaring the transaction invalid, shall fix a future date for its termination.”
“1.  If a property has been purchased from a person who had no right to sell it, and the purchaser is unaware and could not have been aware [of this fact] (bona fide purchaser), the owner shall have the right to reclaim the property from the purchaser, if the said property was lost by the owner or by the person into whose possession the owner had conveyed the property, or if it was stolen from either of them, or if it left their possession in any other way against their will.
If the property has been acquired without consideration from a person who had no right to convey it, the owner shall have the right to reclaim the property in all cases.
Money and bearer securities shall not be reclaimed from a bona fide purchaser.”
In a ruling of 21 April 2003 (6-P) the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation interpreted Article 167 of the Code as not allowing the original owner to reclaim a property from a bona fide purchaser unless there was a special legislative provision to that effect. Instead, a claim asserting prior rights (виндикационный иск) could be lodged under Article 302 of the Code if the conditions indicated in paragraphs 1 and 2 were met, in particular if the property had left the owner’s possession without his or her intention to divest himself or herself of it, or if the property had been acquired without consideration.
.  Further interpretation of Article 302 of the Civil Code was provided by the Plenary of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation and the Plenary of the High Commercial Court of the Russian Federation. Their joint ruling of 29 April 2010 (no. 10/22) on certain questions arising in judicial practice in respect of resolution of disputes connected with the protection of property rights and other real rights stated as follows:
“39.  Article 302 § 1 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation provides that the owner may reclaim his or her property ... regardless of the respondent party’s claim that he or she is a bona fide purchaser, if the owner proves that the property has left his or her possession ... against his or her will.
The fact that the transaction ... has been declared invalid does not by itself signify that the property left the [owner’s] possession against his or her will. It is incumbent on the court to establish whether the owner expressed his or her will to convey [the property] to another person.”
In its ruling no. 188OO of 27 January 2011, the Constitutional Court relied on the interpretation of Article 302 provided by the Plenaries when verifying the said Article’s compliance with the Constitution.
On 1 October 2014 the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation approved the overview of the case-law concerning proprietary claims lodged by State and municipal bodies against bona fide owners of housing. It stated, in particular, as follows:
“...
Where a property transaction has been declared invalid, this shall not be construed as meaning that the Russian Federation, a constituent entity of the Russian Federation or a municipality has lost ownership of the property against its will.
For example, a district court dismissed a municipality’s claims against M., as regards the recovery of the flat and transfer of the ownership rights, for the following reasons.
It was established that the flat had been assigned to L. under the social housing agreement. L. had submitted a false certificate alleging that [he was eligible for priority assignment of social housing]. Later on, the title to the flat was transferred to L. under the privatisation agreement. Subsequently, L. sold the flat to M.
Regard being had to the fact that the municipality was a party to both the social housing agreement and the privatisation agreement, and had an opportunity to verify the validity of the documents submitted by L. but failed to do so with due diligence, the court concluded correctly that the municipality had transferred the disputed flat to L. wilfully and, pursuant to Article 302 § 1 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation, could not reclaim the flat from the bona fide purchaser M., who had bought the flat from L.
...
If the respondent party has bought real property from a person who had no right to sell it, and the plaintiff and the respondent are not parties to the same transaction in respect of the real property, Articles 301 and 302 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation apply, regardless of the type of civil claim lodged by the plaintiff (recovery of the housing, claim that the transaction in respect of the housing should be declared null and void, or both).
For example, a district court considered a civil action brought by the prosecutor on behalf of a municipality against M., S. and N., claiming that the social housing agreement and the [subsequent] privatisation, gift and sale [of the flat] should be recognised as null and void, and the flat returned to the municipality.
The court established that the disputed flat had been owned by the municipality, and had been classified as special housing which could be assigned only to persons on the housing list under an agreement for its use without consideration. However, [the management agency] entered into a social housing agreement with M., who later became the flat’s owner under the privatisation scheme.
gave the flat, under a gift agreement, to S., who sold it to N.
According to [the ruling of the Plenary of the Supreme Court and the Plenary of the High Commercial Court of the Russian Federation], in the event the plaintiff brings an action seeking the invalidation of a property transaction against, inter alia, a person who bought the property from a party who had no right to sell it, Articles 301 and 302 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation apply.
The court took into consideration the fact that the plaintiff was seeking recovery of the flat and applied Articles 301 and 302 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation when considering the dispute. Having established that the disputed flat had been transferred by its owner to the [management agency]; that the latter had disposed of the flat of its own will. and that N. had purchased the flat for a consideration and in good faith from a person who did not have a legal right to sell it, the court dismissed the claims that the transactions for the gift and sale of the flat ... should be declared null and void and ... the flat returned to the municipality.
At the same time ... the court accepted that the prosecutor’s request for the social housing and privatisation agreements to be declared null and void ... should be granted, given that the agreements had been executed in contravention of the applicable legislation.
The court further noted that the municipality had a legal interest in having the transactions in question declared null and void ..., because it had a right to claim damages from the person who had interfered with its possession.”