The case originated in an application (no. 32907/07) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Albanian national, Mr Ali Gjyli (“the applicant”), on 13 July 2007.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by
The applicant complained about the non-enforcement of two court judgments.
On 7 November 2007 the application was given priority under
On 12 December 2007 the President of the Chamber to which the case was allocated decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it was decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant and the Government each filed written observations (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1945 and lives in .
The applicant was employed by the National Employment Service (NES) as the Director of Durrës Vocational Training Centre (“the Durrës VTC”). The NES is responsible to the Ministry of Labour.
In its judgment of 27 September 2005, the Durrës District Court found the dismissal void due to a flawed procedure and ordered the applicant to be reinstated. On 1 November 2005 the NES filed an appeal with the Durrës Court of Appeal, (“the Court of Appeal”).
By judgment of 12 December 2005, the Durrës Court of Appeal declared the appeal inadmissible as having been filed out of time. That judgment became final as no appeal was filed with the Supreme Court.
For the purposes of executing the Durrës District Court’s judgment of 27 September 2005, an execution writ was issued by the court on 22 December 2005 pursuant to Articles 510 (a) and 511 (a) of the Code of Civil Procedure (see “Relevant domestic law and practice” below).
On 23 January 2006 the bailiff’s office imposed a fine on the Minister of Labour concerning the failure to enforce the Durrës District Court’s judgment. To date, the Durrës District Court’s judgment of 27 September 2005 has not been executed.
On an unspecified date the applicant lodged a complaint with the Durrës District Court requesting payment of salary arrears since 9 July 2005.
On 24 October 2006 the Durrës District Court found in the applicant’s favour and ordered the NES to pay the applicant his salary from 9 July 2005 until the date of his actual reinstatement.
On 14 June 2007 the Durrës Court of Appeal rejected an appeal by the NES. The NES appealed to the Supreme Court. According to the information before the Court, it appears that these proceedings are pending before the Supreme Court.
On 6 December 2006, at the applicant’s request, the Durrës District Court issued an execution writ in respect of its judgment of 24 October 2006.
On an unspecified date the NES sought the immediate suspension of execution. The Durrës District Court decided that the case fell outside its territorial jurisdiction and transferred the case file to the Tirana District Court.
On 31 January 2008 the Tirana District Court dismissed the NES action. On an unspecified date the NES appealed. It appears that the proceedings are pending before the Tirana Court of Appeal.
The relevant parts of the Albanian Constitution read as follows:
“Article 42 § 2
In the protection of his constitutional and legal rights, freedoms and interests, or in defending a criminal charge, everyone has the right to a fair and public hearing, within a reasonable time, by an independent and impartial court established by law.”
“Article 131
The  shall determine: ... (f) complaints by individuals alleging a violation of their constitutional rights to a fair hearing, provided all legal remedies for the protection of those rights have been exhausted.”
“Article 142 § 3
State bodies shall comply with judicial judgments.”
The Constitutional Court Act, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“Article 81 – Execution of decisions
The Constitutional Court’s judgments are binding.
The execution of the ’s judgments is ensured by the Council of Ministers by virtue of respective State administration bodies.
The Constitutional Court may assign another body responsible for the execution of its judgment and, as necessary, the method of its execution.
The persons who do not enforce or prevent the enforcement of the ’s judgments, when their action does not constitute a criminal offence, are liable to a fine (...) imposed by the President of the , whose decision is final and constitutes an executive title.”
The case concerned a labour dispute arising out of the appellant’s dismissal from work. The domestic courts ruled in favour of the appellant’s reinstatement and ordered the payment of his salary arrears. Since the bailiff was ineffective in enforcing the final ruling against a municipality, the appellant seized the .
By judgment no. 6 of 31 March 2006, the Constitutional Court, having considered this Court’s judgment in Qufaj Co. Sh.p.k. v. Albania, (no. 54268/00, 18 November 2004), found that there had been a violation of the appellant’s right to a fair hearing on account of the non-enforcement of a final court ruling. However, no award was made to the appellant.
The case concerned the non-enforcement of a domestic court ruling concerning the payment of the appellant’s salary arrears by a local government administrative unit (Këshilli i Rrethit).
The  held that the defendant’s argument about lack of funds was insufficient and could not justify the non-fulfilment of the obligation towards the appellant. The judgments reads, in so far as relevant, as follows.
“(...) the  does not find any reasonable grounds that justify a violation of the appellant’s right to a fair hearing on the account of the competent authorities’ refusal to enforce a final court judgment. It considers that, in the proceedings at issue, the debtor (pala debitore) had all means available throughout the entire period, from the date of the adoption of the judgment and onwards, to pay the appellant the amount owed by virtue of the court judgment. Moreover, during the examination of the case the  could not discern any concrete steps of the debtor which would demonstrate any willingness to enforce the obligation that resulted from a final court judgment.
Additionally, as regards the authority responsible under the law for the enforcement of final court judgments, namely the bailiff, the  considers that they should have diligently (me korrektësi) applied the relevant procedural law, notwithstanding the fact that the debtor is a State institution. All parties, whether they are private or public entities, bear the same responsibility when confronted with the obligation to enforce a final court judgment.
To conclude, having regard to the above reasoning, in the proceedings at issue the Constitutional Court observes (konstaton) that the non-enforcement of the final (...) court judgment constitutes a violation of the appellant’s right to a fair hearing, as envisaged by Article 42 of the Constitution and Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.”
However, no awards were made to the appellant.
The judgment no. 1/09 concerned the non-enforcement of a final administrative decision in relation to the appellant’s reinstatement and the payment of his salary arrears. The judgment no. 6/09 concerned the non-enforcement of a final court judgment as regards the vacation of a plot of land.
In both judgments the  declared that there had been a violation of the appellants’ right of access to court on the account of the non-enforcement of a final administrative decision and a court judgment, respectively. The  did not order the appellant’s reinstatement in relation to judgment no. 1/09. No pecuniary or
The relevant parts of the Code of Civil Procedure read as follows:
Article 451 – Final judgments
“A court judgment becomes final when:
(a) no further appeal lie against it;
(b) no appeal has been filed against it within the time-limits prescribed by the law or when the appeal has been withdrawn;
(c) the appeal has not been accepted;
(d) it was upheld, amended or the case was dismissed (pushuar) in the appeal proceedings.”
Article 479 – Suspension of the enforcement of a [court’s] judgment
“The Supreme Court decides on the suspension of a judgment when:
its immediate enforcement would result in serious, irreparable damage;
the party who filed an appeal makes a deposit that ensures the enforcement of the judgment.”

Article 510 – Executive titles
“Enforced execution can be made only on the basis of an executive title. Executive titles include:
(a) civil court’s judgments which have become final. ...”
“Article 511 – The execution writ
“The executive title is executed at the request of the creditor. An execution writ is issued for this purpose:
by the court which gave the judgment in cases provided for in [Article 510 (a)];
(...).”