The case concerns the applicants’ allegations that they were ill-treated by law-enforcement officers during their arrest and subsequent detention, and that the ensuing criminal investigation into that matter was not effective.
The first applicant was born in 1978 and resides in the town of Ivanovo, in the Ivanovo Region. The second applicant was born in 1966 and resides in the town of Nalchik, in the Kabardino-Balkariya Republic (“the KBR”). The applicants, who were granted legal aid, were represented by Ms I. Sokolova, a lawyer practising in Ivanovo.
The Government were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 27 September 2006 the T. Centre (“Центр Т” МВД КБР), a counterterrorism department with the Ministry of the Interior located in the KBR, in cooperation with the Consolidated Rapid Reaction Unit (Сводный Отряд Быстрого Реагирования, hereinafter “the SOBR”) and the Federal Security Service (Федеральная Служба Безопасности (ФСБ), hereinafter “the FSB”) carried out a special operation in respect of the applicants in relation to suspected illegal possession of firearms.
On that day at about 6.20 p.m. a group of SOBR officers in a white Gazel minivan, four officers from the T. Centre (Officers A., E., K., and M.), and one FSB officer arrived at the first applicant’s sister’s house in Nalchik and arrested the applicants, who were outside the house at the time.
As submitted by the applicants and not disputed by the Government, the arrest was carried out in a violent manner. Armed officers in camouflage uniforms and balaclavas ran towards the applicants, knocked them to the ground with the butts of their rifles, handcuffed them and put dark plastic bags over their heads.
According to the Government, as soon as the applicants were immobilised, the arresting officers carried out a personal inspection (личный досмотр) in respect of them in the presence of two attesting witnesses, and found a handmade gun and a grenade on them. The applicants contested the latter submission, stating that law-enforcement officers had planted the gun and the grenade on them.
The applicants were then forced into the Gazel minivan and, as appears from the statement by Officers A. and E. (see paragraph 37 below), were driven to the T. Centre in Nalchik.
According to the applicants, the arresting officers continued to beat them while they were being transported to the T. Centre. At the premises, Officers A., E., K., M. and other law-enforcement officers put pressure on them, forcing them to confess to the illegal possession of the gun and the grenade allegedly found on them. The officers kicked and punched the applicants and gave them electric shocks. The ill-treatment continued until the early hours of 28 September 2006.
In the early hours of 28 September 2006 the applicants were taken to Prokhladnyy police station. At about 7.00 a.m. they were admitted to the temporary detention unit of that facility (ИВС Прохладненского ГОВД). According to the registration logs and the Government’s submissions, at that time the first applicant had contusions on his back and forehead, and the second applicant had a haematoma on his right eye and contusion of the ribs. Subsequent records, dated 29 and 30 September 2006, mentioned contusion of the applicants’ backs and kidneys.
On the evening of 27 September 2006 the applicants’ relatives noticed that the applicants were absent and started looking for them.
It appears that at 11.30 p.m. on 27 September 2006 the second applicant called his superior – the military commander of the Prokhladnyy District, Mr P. – at work, and informed him about his arrest and detention in the T. Centre. Mr P. passed that information to the applicants’ families. Immediately after receiving the call he went to the T. Centre, together with his wife and Mr S. (a neighbour). Upon their arrival they saw the second applicant at one of the windows of the T. Centre, and saw that he had blood on his face. Despite Mr P.’s attempts to enter the T. Centre to see the applicants, he was not let in (see paragraph 41 below).
In the meantime the applicants’ relatives had gone to operationalsearch bureau no. 2 (ОРБ-2) in Nalchik. At their request, an officer on duty had made a telephone call to the T. Centre and had confirmed that the second applicant was detained there.
On 28 September 2006 at 5.15 a.m. a deputy chief of the investigative department at Prokhladnyy police station opened a criminal case against the applicants in relation to suspected illegal possession of a gun and a grenade.
On 29 September 2006 the applicants were questioned as suspects in the criminal case. They denied the charges against them and stated that the arresting officers had beaten them and then driven them to the T. Centre, where they had been ill-treated for hours and tortured by means of electric shocks to make them confess to crimes which they had not committed.
On 29 September 2006 the investigators ordered a forensic medical examination of the applicants. On the same day the applicants were taken to the Forensic Medical Bureau of the KBR, where a forensic expert questioned and examined them.
At the interview, the first applicant stated that during the arrest on 27 September 2009 law-enforcement officers had forced him to the ground, hitting him with the butts of their rifles; the officers had then handcuffed him and kicked him in the head. They had then dragged him into their vehicle. Inside the vehicle, they had put a black plastic bag over his head, and had punched and kicked him. He had then been driven to the T. Centre, where the law-enforcement officers had beaten him on his back and passed an electric current through his body via an electric wire attached to his left ear, forcing him to confess.
The second applicant provided a similar description of the events. He mentioned that while he had been lying handcuffed in the vehicle with a plastic bag over his head, the arresting officers had jumped on his back. In the T. Centre he had been beaten on different parts of his body. The officers had also attached an electric wire to his right ear and to his handcuffs, and had passed an electric current through it.
The expert established that the first applicant had numerous bruises and abrasions on his nose, forehead, shoulders, shoulder blades, wrists, right leg and left foot, as well as an abrasion on his left earlobe and wounds on his left forearm and left wrist. He found that the bruises, abrasions and wound on the first applicant’s wrists could have been sustained as a result of impact from solid blunt objects with a rather long surface area. The abrasion on his left ear could have been caused by a high-frequency current, possibly from an electroshock device. The remaining bruises and abrasions could have been sustained as a result of blows from solid blunt objects with a limited surface area. Overall, the expert concluded that the first applicant could have sustained his injuries at the time and in the circumstances which he had described. Lastly, the expert noted that in order to establish whether the first applicant had broken any ribs, he needed the conclusions of a traumatologist and a radiologist, which had not been submitted to him, therefore any finding on the issue was impossible.
As regards the second applicant, the expert noted that he had numerous bruises and abrasions on his forehead, temple, cheeks, right eye socket, thorax, abdomen, back, forearms, shoulders and right thigh. He also had abrasions on both ears. The expert concluded that the injuries to the second applicant’s wrists and forearms could have been caused by handcuffs, and the abrasions on his ears could have been caused by a highfrequency current, possibly from an electroshock device. The other bodily injuries could have been sustained as a result of blows from solid blunt objects with a limited surface area.
Overall, the expert considered that the second applicant could have sustained his bodily injuries at the time and in the circumstances which he had described. Lastly, the expert noted that it was impossible to establish whether the second applicant had sustained a closed craniocerebral injury or rib fracture, because the relevant X-ray was of bad quality and the second applicant had not been examined by a neurologist.
On 29 September 2006 the Prokhladnenskiy District Court of the KBR authorised the applicants’ pre-trial detention. The pre-trial detention was subsequently extended several times until the applicants were convicted.
On 13 October 2006 the investigators interviewed eyewitnesses to the applicants’ arrest. One of them, Mr V.D., stated that the applicants had been arrested by six officers in camouflage uniforms and balaclavas. The second applicant had attempted to run away, but the officers had thrown him and the first applicant to the ground. The witness had been unable to see if the applicants had been beaten while they had been on the ground. Officers had then taken the applicants to their (the officers’) vehicle. On the way to the vehicle, one of the escorting officers had punched the first applicant in his side.
Another witness, Ms S. Sh., had seen three to four officers in camouflage uniforms and balaclavas approaching the applicants. She had not seen the arrest, but had heard screams and the sounds of a fight. The remaining witnesses had only seen a group of officers arriving at the scene of the incident.
On 5 October 2006 the applicants were charged with the unlawful acquisition, storage and possession of arms, and they were questioned. The first applicant said that he had nothing to add to his statement of 29 September 2006. The second applicant mentioned that the officers had not only beaten them for hours, but had also insulted and threatened them. He was unable to describe the appearances of the officers involved in the illtreatment, because they had been in balaclavas.
On an unspecified later date the applicants’ case was sent to the Prokhladnenskiy District Court of Nalchik for trial. Throughout the proceedings they consistently denied having committed the crimes of which they were accused.
On 5 April 2007 the Prokhladnenskiy District Court of Nalchik found the applicants guilty as charged. The first applicant was sentenced to one year and six months’ imprisonment, and the second applicant to seven months’ imprisonment.
On 22 June 2007 the Supreme Court of the KBR upheld the judgment on appeal.
According to the applicants, on 28 September and 5 October 2006 the second applicant’s relatives complained to the Prokhladnyy town prosecutor and the KBR prosecutor of the second applicant’s abduction and subsequent ill-treatment by law-enforcement officers.
On 20 October 2006 the Nalchik prosecutor refused to open a criminal case in respect of the incident, for lack of any evidence of a criminal offence. He held that the complaints of abduction and ill-treatment were no more than allegations, and noted that the person who had lodged them had not been witness to the events in question.
On 8 November 2006 the first applicant asked the KBR prosecutor to open a criminal case in respect of his ill-treatment by law-enforcement officers, including Officer E. The first applicant’s allegations were substantiated by the medical report of 29 September 2006 (see paragraph 19 above). The KBR prosecutor sent the request to the Nalchik prosecutor.
On 24 November 2006 the Nalchik prosecutor opened a criminal investigation into the alleged ill-treatment under Article 286 § 3 of the Criminal Code (abuse of power with the use of violence).
On 28 and 29 November and 1 December 2006 the investigators questioned the applicants’ wives, the first applicant’s mother, and the second applicant’s sister and two nieces. Those relatives had learned about the applicants’ arrest from eyewitnesses to the incident and Mr P., who had said that the second applicant was detained in the T. Centre. According to the applicants’ relatives, an officer on duty at operational-search bureau no. 2 had confirmed that information at their request.
On 28 November and 7 December 2006 respectively the second applicant’s wife and the first applicant’s wife handed to the investigators the clothes which the applicants had been wearing at the time of their arrest. The clothes of the second applicant were stained with blood. The first applicant’s clothes had been cleaned by his relatives, so no visible blood traces remained.
On 8 December 2006 the investigators questioned the eyewitnesses to the applicants’ arrest. They confirmed the statements which they had made during the interview on 13 October 2006.
On 12 February 2007 the applicants were granted victim status in the criminal proceedings and questioned. They said that during the trial court hearings they had recognised that prosecution witnesses – Officers A., E., K. and M. – had been involved in their ill-treatment. On the same day the investigators took blood samples from the applicants (apparently to compare these with the traces of blood found on their clothes).
On 20 February 2007 the investigators questioned Officers A. and E. They stated that on 26 September 2007 law-enforcement authorities had planned a special operation to arrest the applicants on suspicion of illegal possession of a firearm and an explosive device. The arrest had been entrusted to four officers from the T. Centre (Officers A., E., K., and M.), one officer from the FSB, and a group of officers from the SOBR. The group from the SOBR had carried out the arrest itself. During the arrest the applicants had attempted to escape. To prevent them from doing so, the SOBR officers had had to force them to the ground. As soon as the applicants had been immobilised, Officers A. and E. had inspected them and found a gun on the second applicant and an explosive device on the first applicant. The arrest and the inspection had been observed by two attesting witnesses. After the arrest the applicants had been put in a Gazel minivan and taken to the T. Centre. Officers A. and E. had followed them in another vehicle. The officers stated that the applicants had been driven to the T. Centre instead of being directly transported to Prokhladnyy police station, to ensure that there was an expert examination of the gun and the explosive device found on them. The applicants had remained at the T. Centre premises from 8 p.m. until 3 a.m. while the investigators had prepared the relevant documents, including personal inspection records. Thereafter they had been taken to the Prokhladnyy police station.
On 2 March 2007 the investigators questioned the two attesting witnesses. They stated that the law-enforcement officers had forced the applicants to the ground and immobilised them to prevent their escape. The applicants had not resisted the arrest or had any visible injuries on their bodies. The witnesses had not seen the applicants’ ill-treatment.
On 17 and 18 March 2007 respectively the investigator questioned Officers M. and K. They denied any involvement in the applicants’ illtreatment. According to them, they had not left their vehicle during the applicants’ arrest, and had been unable to see it properly.
On 19 March 2007 the investigators asked the T. Centre to provide them with a list of the SOBR officers who had been involved in the special operation. On the same day the T. Centre replied that it was unable to do so, because the SOBR officers were on a mission in the Republic of Dagestan.
On 2 May 2007 the investigators questioned Mr P.’s wife. She stated that at 11.30 p.m. the second applicant had called her husband and told him that he was detained in the T. Centre. She, Mr P. and their neighbour had gone to the T. Centre. Mr P. had asked an officer on duty if the second applicant had been brought to the premises, but the officer had denied that. Another officer had then opened a window on the first floor and told Mr P. that the second applicant was not in the building. At the same time, the second applicant (who had heard the conversation between the officer and Mr P.) had appeared at the neighbouring window. He had shouted that he was inside. His face had been bloody. Immediately afterwards someone had pulled the second applicant away from the window. Mr P. had insisted on meeting with the second applicant, but to no avail. He had not been allowed to go in.
On 20 June 2007 the investigators questioned the second applicant in the presence of Officer M. and then Officer K. The second applicant maintained his allegation of ill-treatment, and the officers contested it.
On 24 June 2007 the investigators suspended the proceedings because it was not possible to ensure the participation of Officers A. and E., on account of the fact that they had left to go on a mission in Chechnya.
On 27 November 2007 the second applicant appealed against the above decision to the prosecutor of the KBR, who dismissed the claim.
On an unspecified date in November 2009 the first applicant complained to the Supreme Court of the KBR that the investigating authorities were delaying the investigation. He asserted that under the relevant regulations of the Ministry of the Interior, the police officers’ official mission could not last more than a year, yet the investigation had been suspended three years earlier on the grounds that they were away from the KBR on a mission. The KBR Supreme Court rejected the complaint on formal grounds.
On 7 March 2010 the first applicant challenged the decision of 24 June 2007 before the Nalchik Town Court, alleging that the authorities had deliberately delayed the investigation.
On 2 April 2010 the Nalchik Town Court dismissed the claim, finding that the impugned decision had already been overruled on 31 March 2010.
On 6 April 2010 the deputy chief of the Nalchik investigative committee overruled the decision of 24 June 2007 on the basis that it was ill-founded, because it contained no reasoning and the case file did not contain any documents confirming that the suspects had left the KBR. The proceedings were resumed and the investigators were ordered to carry out a number of investigative steps, in particular: establishing the whereabouts of Officers A. and E; identifying and questioning the FSB officer who had been involved in the operation; ordering a medical examination of the applicants’ clothes which had been included in the case material; questioning Mr P. and his neighbour, who had arrived at the T. Centre after the second applicant’s telephone call; examining the T. Centre’s detainee registration logs; questioning an officer who had been on duty in the T. Centre at the time of the events (if necessary); and cross-examining the applicants in the presence of officers who had been involved in the special operation.
On 6 May and 10 October 2010 the investigators suspended the proceedings on the same grounds as before. The deputy chief of the Nalchik investigative committee overruled those decisions on 4 August 2010 and 20 May 2013 respectively, on account of the investigators’ failure to comply with the order given to them on 6 April 2010. It appears that the investigation is still ongoing.
For a summary of relevant provisions of the Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation, see, in so far as relevant, Ryabtsev v. Russia (no. 13642/06, §§ 42-52, 14 November 2013) and Lyapin v. Russia (no. 46956/09, §§ 99-102, 24 July 2014).