The case originated in an application (no. 29309/16) against the Republic of Albania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Albanian national, Mr Fatos Prizreni (“the applicant”), on 16 May 2016.
The applicant was represented by Ms E. Skendaj, of the Albanian Helsinki Committee. The Albanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their then Agent, Ms Alma Hicka of the State Advocate’s Office.
The applicant complained of the lack of an effective investigation into the death of his brother while he was serving a prison sentence, contrary to Article 2 of the Convention. He also complained of the inhuman and degrading treatment of his brother as a result of the lack of medical treatment and of the fact that his brother had been handcuffed while in hospital, contrary to Article 3 of the Convention.
On 4 October 2016 the Government were given notice of the complaints concerning the alleged lack of an effective investigation into the death of the applicant’s brother while he was serving a prison sentence and the alleged inhuman and degrading treatment as a result of the lack of medical treatment and the fact that he had been handcuffed while in hospital. The remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1963 and lives in Elbasan, Albania. He is the brother of Sh.P., born in 1973. Sh.P. died on 22 February 2011.
On 29 March 2010 the Shkodër District Court sentenced Sh.P. to four years’ imprisonment for attempted murder. The trial was held in absentia. On 2 December 2010 the Shkodër Court of Appeal upheld the Shkodër District Court’s decision. On 3 February 2011 the latter decision was executed and Sh.P. was sent to serve his prison sentence in the Lezhë detention facility.
It appears from the case file that Sh.P. was diagnosed by the doctor of the Lezhë detention facility as suffering from psoriasis, parapanesis inferior (partial paralysis of both legs) and elephantiasis. On 9 February 2011 Sh.P. was urgently transferred to Tirana Prison Hospital (Qendra Spitalore e Burgjeve) because according to the doctor of the Lezhë detention facility, he could not be properly treated in an ordinary prison setting. On 17 February 2011 he was transferred to Tirana University Hospital Centre (Qendra Spitalore Universitare Tiranë). It appears from the hospital file of 17 February 2011 that the applicant’s brother had been diagnosed with elephantiasis, morbid obesity and multi-organ insufficiency, and was prescribed medication.
It appears that on 22 February 2011 Sh.P. died in the intensive care unit of Tirana University Hospital.
On 22 February 2011 a group composed of a judicial police officer, a criminalist and a forensic medical expert carried out an on-site investigation (kqyrjen e vendit të ngjarjes) at Tirana University Hospital Centre and an external examination of the corpse (kqyrjen e kufomës) of Sh.P, and took photographs at the scene. On the same day, the judicial police officer seized Sh.P’s medical file (sekuestroi kartelën klinike) kept at Tirana University Hospital Centre.
On 22 February 2011 the judicial police officer in charge of the case ordered a forensic examination of Sh.P. and put the following questions to the forensic medical experts:
“1. What kind of injuries were noticeable on the deceased?
What caused them?
What was the cause of his death?
Was he subjected to negligent medical treatment?”
On 22 February 2011 the applicant was questioned as a person with knowledge of the event. He stated that his family members had informed him that his brother was being sent to Lezhë detention facility. On 17 February 2011 his mother had told him that his brother had fallen ill and was being transferred to the hospital in Tirana. When he had arrived at the hospital he had found his brother unconscious and tied to the bed with the sheets. He had noticed that the mattress and the blankets were wet and that the area around the bed was very dirty. At approximately 6 a.m. on 22 February 2011, his sister had called him to say that their brother’s condition had deteriorated. When he had arrived at the hospital, he had found his brother dead. He added that he wanted to know the cause of his brother’s death.
On 25 February 2011 the judicial police officer in charge looked at the admissions register of Tirana Prison Hospital, where it was recorded that Sh.P. had been transferred to that facility on 9 February 2011.
On 9 March 2011 and again on 25 March 2011 the Tirana prosecutor’s office requested Sh.P.’s file from the Lezhë detention facility. On 21 March 2011 the Lezhë detention facility replied by letter stating that the applicant had been suffering from dyspnea, his lower limbs had both had oedemas, and that he had therefore been urgently transferred to Tirana Prison Hospital. In addition, they attached Sh.P.’s prison file.
On 10 March 2011, the prosecutor in charge of the case ordered a series of investigative actions to be carried out by a judicial police officer:
“(1)  to contact forensic experts who would carry out a forensic examination to find out the cause of death of the deceased; (2)  to seize the criminal and medical files of Sh.P. from the prison facilities, as well as from the hospital; (3)  to search the registers of the Tirana Prison Hospital, Tirana University Hospital and Shkodër civilian hospital in order to find out when he had been hospitalised, what the diagnosis had been, how long he had stayed, etc.; the pages of the register relevant to the search would have to be attached to the report; (4)  to question Tirana prison employees, medical staff who had taken care of Sh.P., and his family members about his medical history, his treatment, when he had last been hospitalised, etc.; and (5)  to carry out any other action which might be deemed necessary before 29 March 2011.”
On 25 March 2011 I.O., one of the doctors who had been taking care of the applicant’s brother in the hospital, when questioned by the judicial police officer, stated that while under their supervision Sh.P. had been manifesting respiratory and hepatic insufficiency. According to him, Sh.P. had been diagnosed with multi-organ insufficiency and morbid obesity. Sh.P. had been treated like any other patient and the treatment prescribed had been administered in accordance with the rules.
On 25 March 2011 P.D., one of the doctors who had been taking care of the applicant’s brother in the hospital, when questioned by the judicial police officer, stated that Sh.P. had been transferred to Tirana Prison Hospital from Lezhë prison hospital. He had been treated like any other patient and the treatment prescribed had been administered in accordance with the rules.
On 30 March 2011 a group of forensic experts carried out an examination of Sh.P. The forensic medical report stated, inter alia:
“...1. Two ecchymoses were noticed on both forearms. Oedemas on the lower extremities. Psoriasis. ...
... Ecchymosis caused by blunt objects (sende të mbrehëta). Rest of the lesions are a consequence of the other illnesses of the deceased ...
... No traces of medication or narcotic or psychotropic substances could be detected in Sh.P.’s blood. ...
... The death of Sh.P. was a result of acute cardio-respiratory insufficiency due to complications of the generalised metabolic illness of the deceased ...
With regard to the question whether Sh.P. underwent a negligent medical treatment, this would be the subject of an inquiry by another forensic medical commission once they had the investigative file at their disposal ...”
On 24 February 2011 the police reported Sh.P.’s death to the Tirana prosecutor’s office, which registered it in a criminal file. After having carried out some investigative actions, on 13 April 2011 the Tirana prosecutor’s office decided not to institute criminal proceedings (mosfillimin e procedimit penal) and to give notice of that decision to the interested parties. The decision was based on the medical report of 30 March 2011, which had found that the death of Sh.P. had been the result of acute respiratory and cardiac insufficiency and other diseases. Furthermore, the decision stated that there was no fact, evidence or indication that a criminal offence could have been committed. On 13 May 2011 the applicant was notified of the Tirana prosecutor’s decision.
On 17 May 2011, the applicant lodged a complaint with the Tirana District Court against the decision of the Tirana prosecutor’s office. On 20 October 2011 the Tirana District Court rejected the applicant’s complaint on the grounds that he did not have legal standing to complain against the impugned decision, because he had only been notified of it as a family member of the deceased. The first-instance court also stated that under Article 291 of the Criminal Procedural Code, only the persons who had reported an offence could complain against a decision not to institute criminal proceedings.
On 20 April 2012 the Tirana Court of Appeal upheld the Tirana District Court’s decision of 20 October 2011. On 23 January 2014 the Supreme Court rejected an appeal lodged by the applicant. On 17 November 2015 the Constitutional Court rejected the applicant’s complaints against the ordinary domestic courts’ decisions, with the argument that the statutory denial of standing to challenge the prosecutor’s decision did not violate the essence of the applicant’s right of access to a court.
On 16 February 2015 the applicant reported the death of his brother to the Tirana prosecutor’s office. On 27 March 2015 the Tirana prosecutor’s office decided not to institute criminal proceedings based on the applicant’s report. On an unspecified date the applicant lodged a complaint with the Tirana District Court about the above-mentioned decision. On 18 November 2015, the Tirana District Court, making reference to the first set of proceedings and evidence used in those proceedings, decided without hearing the applicant to reject his complaint.
Article 21 of the Constitution provides that everyone’s life is protected by law. Article 25 provides that no one may be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment or treatment.
The relevant provisions of the CCP provided, at the relevant time, as follows:
“1. The injured party of a criminal offence or his heir has the right to request the prosecution of the perpetrator and to claim damages.
The injured party who has no legal capacity to act may exercise his rights recognised by law through his legal representative.
The injured party has the right to present his claims to the prosecuting authority and require the obtaining of evidence. If the claim is not accepted by the prosecutor, he has the right to appeal to a court within five days of receiving notice.”
The person injured by the criminal offences provided for in Articles 90, 91, 92, 112 § 1, 119,119/b, 120, 121, 122, 125, 127, 148, 149 and 254 of the Criminal Code may apply to a court to participate as a party in the trial in order to confirm the indictment and to claim damages.
The prosecutor participates in the trial of such cases and, as the case may be, requests either the conviction or acquittal of the defendant.
If the accusing injured party or his/her defence lawyer fails to appear at the hearing without reasonable grounds, the court shall dismiss the case.
“1. Criminal proceedings may not commence or, if they have commenced, shall be terminated at any stage if:
a) the accused person has died;
b) the accused person lacks criminal responsibility or has not reached the age of criminal liability;
c) the complaint of the injured person is missing or has been withdrawn;
ç) the law does not define the act as a criminal offence or it has been clearly proven that the offence was not committed;
d) the criminal offence has ceased [to exist];
dh) an amnesty has been issued; 	
e) in all other cases provided for by law.”
“1. Where circumstances preventing the initiation of proceedings exist, the prosecutor shall issue a reasoned decision not to institute proceedings.
Notice of the decision shall be served forthwith to those who have lodged a criminal report or a complaint; they may appeal against the decision to a court within five days of being served notice of the decision.”
“1.  The injured party and the defendant are entitled to appeal to a district court against a decision to dismiss the charge or the case.
If the court finds the injured party’s complaint well founded, it shall decide that the investigation should be continued, whereas if it accepts the defendant’s complaint, the court shall change the decision to terminate the proceedings into a more favourable formulation for the defendant.
The decision of the court is amenable to appeal by the prosecutor, the injured party and the defendant.”