The case of Young, James and Webster was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission"). The case originated in two applications against the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland lodged with the Commission in 1976 and 1977 under Article 25 (art. 25) of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ("the Convention") by three  citizens, Mr. Ian McLean Young, Mr. Noël Henry James and Mr. Ronald Roger Webster. The Commission ordered the joinder of the applications on 11 May 1978.
The Commission’s request was lodged with the registry on 14 May 1980, within the period of three months laid down by Articles 32 par. 1 and 47 (art. 32-1, art. 47). The request referred to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48) and to the declaration made by the  recognising the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46) (art. 46). The purpose of the Commission’s request is to obtain a decision from the Court as to whether or not the facts of the case disclose a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Articles 9, 10, 11 and 13 (art. 9, art. 10, art. 11, art. 13) of the Convention.
The Chamber of seven judges to be constituted included, as ex officio members, Sir Gerald Fitzmaurice, the elected judge of British nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr. G. Balladore Pallieri, the President of the Court (Rule 21 par. 3 (b) of the Rules of Court). On 4 June 1980, the President drew bij lot, in the presence of the Registrar, the names of the five other members, namely Mr. G. Wiarda, Mr. J. Cremona, Mr. Thór Vilhjálmsson, Mr. R. Ryssdal and Mrs. D. Bindschedler-Robert (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 par. 4) (art. 43). Sir Gerald Fitzmaurice was subsequently replaced by Sir Vincent Evans (Rule 2 par. 3).
Mr Balladore Pallieri assumed the office of President of the Chamber (Rule 21 par. 5). He ascertained, through the Registrar, the views of the Agent of the Government of the  ("the Government") and the Delegates of the Commission regarding the procedure to be followed. On 25 June 1980, he decided that the Agent should have until 25 September 1980 to file a memorial and that the Delegates should be entitled to file a memorial in reply within two months from the date of the transmission of the Government’s memorial to them by the Registrar. On 20 August, 24 October and 13 November, the President agreed to extend the first of these time-limits to 25 October, 14 November and 5 December 1980, respectively.
On 25 November 1980, the Chamber decided under Rule 48 to relinquish jurisdiction forthwith in favour of the plenary Court.
The Government’s memorial was received at the registry on 5 December 1980. On 4 February 1981, the Delegates transmitted to the Court a memorial which had been submitted to them on behalf of the applicants, and indicated that they reserved the right to present their own observations at the oral hearings.
On 29 January, the President instructed the Registrar to obtain certain documents from the Commission and from the Government. These documents were produced on 4 and 19 February, respectively.
After consulting, through the Registrar, the Agent of the Government and the Delegates of the Commission, Mr. Wiarda, who had been elected President of the Court following the death of Mr. Balladore Pallieri, directed on 10 February 1981 that the oral hearings should open on 3 March 1981.
Some further documents were filed by the Government on 27 February.
On 3 March immediately before the opening of the hearings, the Court held a preparatory meeting. On that occasion it decided proprio motu, in pursuance of Rule 38 par. 1 of the Rules of Court, that during the oral proceedings it would hear, on certain questions of fact (including English law and practice) and for the purpose of information, a representative of the British Trades Union Congress.
The oral hearings were held in public at the , , on 3 and 4 March.
There appeared before the Court:
- for the Government:
- for the Commission:
The Court heard the Delegates and those assisting them, Sir Ian Percival for the Government and also, in accordance with its decision of 3 March, Lord Wedderburn of Charlton, Barrister-at-Law, Professor of Law in the University of London, for the Trades Union Congress.
The Delegates of the Commission filed various documents during the hearings, including one entitled "memorial (submissions on fact and law) of the Trades Union Congress". The Court decided that it would take the latter document into account as regards any factual information, but not any arguments of law, which it contained.
In accordance with decisions taken by the Court after the hearings, the following documents were filed with the registry:
- on 3 April 1981, replies by the Government to certain questions put by the Court at the hearings to those appearing before it;
- on 6 April 1981, replies by the applicants to the aforesaid questions, together with their observations on the submissions made by Sir Ian Percival in his address to the Court;
- on 22 April 1981, observations of the applicants on the submissions made by Lord Wedderburn in his address to the Court and on issues of fact contained in the "memorial" mentioned at paragraph 10 above;
- on 11 May 1981, comments by the Government on the aforesaid observations filed on 6 April.
The documents emanating from the applicants were transmitted to the Court by the Commission’s Delegates.
Mr. Young, Mr. James and Mr. Webster are former employees of the British Railways Board ("British Rail"). In 1975, a "closed shop" agreement was concluded between British Rail and three trade unions, providing that thenceforth membership of one of those unions was a condition of employment. The applicants failed to satisfy this condition and were dismissed in 1976. They alleged that the treatment to which they had been subjected gave rise to violations of Articles 9, 10, 11 and 13 (art. 9, art. 10, art. 11, art. 13) of the Convention.
In general
In essence, a closed shop is an undertaking or workplace in which, as a result of an agreement or arrangement between one or more trade unions and one or more employers or employers’ associations, employees of a certain class are in practice required to be or become members of a specified union. The employer is not under any legal obligation to consult or obtain the consent of individual employees directly before such an agreement or arrangement is put into effect. Closed shop agreements and arrangements vary considerably in both their form and their content; one distinction that is often drawn is that between the "pre-entry" shop (the employee must join the union before engaged) and the "post-entry" shop (he must join within a reasonable time after being engaged), the latter being more common.
In the , the institution of the closed shop is of very long standing. In recent years, closed shop arrangements have become more formalised and the number of employees covered thereby has increased (3.75 million in the 1960’s and 5 million in 1980, approximately). Recent surveys suggest that in many cases the obligation to join a specified union does not extend to existing non-union employees.
The law in force until 1971
There was no legislation explicitly directed to the practice of the closed shop until 1971. Nevertheless, the courts had since the 1920’s recognised the legitimacy of the trade union object of advancing the union’s interests even to the point of enforcing the dismissal, or a ban on the hiring, of non-union employees. However, it was an unlawful conspiracy at common law to pursue a closed shop against individuals beyond the point which the courts regarded as the defence of genuine trade union interests (Huntley v. Thornton [1957] 1 All England Law Reports 234; Morgan v. Fry [1967] 2 All England Law Reports 386).
The Royal Commission on Trade Unions and Employers’ Associations, which reported in 1968, whilst rejecting the possibility of prohibiting the closed shop, considered the question of safeguards for individuals in a closed shop situation. In particular, a majority of that Commission took the view that an existing employee who was dismissed for refusal to join a union following the introduction of a closed shop should be able to succeed against his employer in a complaint of unfair dismissal so long as he could show that he had reasonable grounds for that refusal.
Prior to 1971, the rights and liabilities of the parties to a contract of employment were for the most part governed by common law. Leaving aside cases of justified summary dismissal, it was lawful to dismiss an employee, even without cause, provided that he was given due notice. The remedy open to an employee dismissed without due notice was merely to sue for the balance of wages he would have earned during the appropriate notice period; the courts would not order his employer to re-engage him. These principles applied, for example, to dismissals motivated by an employee’s joining, or refusing to join, a trade union.
The Industrial Relations Act 1971
Since 1971, there has been increased Parliamentary intervention in the areas under consideration, and changes of Government have led to changes in the scope and content of the legislation in force. The first major enactment was the Industrial Relations Act 1971 which radically altered the common law position in two respects.
In the first place, the 1971 Act conferred on employees (with certain exceptions) the right not to be unfairly dismissed. Dismissal of an employee without cause became unlawful, even if he had been given due notice. An individual who considered that he had been unfairly dismissed could present a complaint to an industrial tribunal; unless the dismissal had been motivated by one or more reasons specified in the Act (for example, qualifications, conduct, redundancy) or some other substantial reason and unless the employer was found to have acted reasonably in treating that or those reasons as a sufficient reason for dismissal, the tribunal could award compensation to the employee or recommend that he be re-engaged. The employee’s common law rights were unaffected by the Act, although after 1971 little reliance was placed on them in practice by those entitled to the new right.
In the second place, the 1971 Act introduced specific provisions which were designed to make the operation of the majority of closed shops unlawful. In addition to stipulating that pre-entry closed shop agreements were void, the Act, subject to certain exceptions, gave every worker the right to be a member of no trade union or to refuse to be a member of any particular union. In the context of the rules on unfair dismissal and in contrast to the position at common law (see paragraph 15 in fine above), the Act laid down that dismissal motivated by the employee’s exercise of, or intention to exercise, that right was be to regarded as unfair.
A Green Paper on Trade Union Immunities, published by the British Government in January 1981, states that the 1971 Act "met considerable resistance from trade unions and in practice its closed shop provisions were circumvented by many employers and unions. The closed shop continued much as before".
The law in force at the time of the events giving rise to the applicants’ complaints
The industrial Relations Act 1971 was repealed by the Trade Union and Labour Relations Act 1974 ("TULRA"). The provisions of TULRA relevant to the present case came into force on 16 September 1974.
The repeal of the Industrial Relations Act 1971 removed from the statute book both the prohibition on closed shops and the employee’s right not to belong to a union. However, the law did not fully return to its pre-1971 condition. This was because TULRA maintained the protection against unfair dismissal; since one result of a closed shop is that an individual who declines to join a specified union may have his employment terminated, it was necessary to spell out the precise conditions in which dismissal for this reason was to be regarded as fair. Accordingly, TULRA:
(a) set out - by reference to the concept of "union membership agreement", which it defined - the circumstances in which a closed shop situation was to be regarded as existing;
(b) laid down the basic rule that, if such a situation existed, the dismissal of an employee for refusal to join a specified union was to be regarded as fair for the purposes of the law on unfair dismissal;
(c) provided that, by way of exceptions, such a dismissal was to be regarded as unfair if the employee genuinely objected
(i) on grounds of religious belief to being a member of any union whatsoever; or
(ii) on any reasonable grounds to being a member of a particular union.
The powers of an industrial tribunal under the 1971 Act to award compensation to an unfairly dismissed employee were also re-enacted by TULRA. However, the power to recommend his re-engagement was later replaced, by the Employment Protection Act 1975, by a discretionary power to order reinstatement or re-engagement in certain circumstances (notably, where this was considered "practicable"). It was provided that, if the order were not complied with, the employee should be awarded the normal compensation for unfair dismissal and, in specified cases, an additional sum.
TULRA was modified in various respects by the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Amendment) Act 1976 ("the Amendment Act") which came into force on 25 March 1976. In particular, the second of the exceptions mentioned in paragraph 21 (c) above was abolished, so that the action for unfair dismissal remained available only to genuine religious objectors. With the object of achieving greater flexibility, the Amendment Act also modified the concept of "union membership agreement".
Subsequent legislative developments
The Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978 repealed and re-enacted the then existing provisions concerning unfair dismissal.
The 1978 Act was in turn amended, without retroactive effect, by the Employment Act 1980. It remains the basic rule that the dismissal of an employee for refusal to join a specified union in a closed shop situation is to be regarded as fair for the purposes of the law on unfair dismissal. However, with effect from 15 August 1980, this rule became subject to three exceptions whereby such dismissal is to be regarded as unfair if:
(a) the employee objects on grounds of conscience or other deeply-held personal conviction to being a member of any or a particular union; or
(b) the employee belonged, before the closed shop agreement or arrangement came into effect, to the class of employees covered thereby and has not been a member of a union in accordance therewith; or
(c) in the case of a closed shop agreement or arrangement taking effect after 15 August 1980, either it has not been approved by the vote in a ballot of not less than 80% of the employees affected or, although it is so approved, the employee has not since the balloting been a member of a union in accordance therewith.
A Code of Practice, issued with the authority of Parliament and coming into effect on 17 December 1980, recommended, inter alia, that closed shop agreements should protect basic individual rights and be applied flexibly and tolerantly and with due regard to the interests of individuals as well as unions and employers. The Code is admissible in evidence, but imposes no legal obligations.
The green Paper on Trade Union Immunities (see paragraph 19 above) rehearsed arguments for and against various proposals and indicated that the Government would welcome views on whether further changes in legislation affecting the closed shop were desirable and would be likely to prove effective.
Since 1971, there has been statutory protection of the right to belong to a trade union. The exact content of the provisions has varied over the years, but their essence is that an employee is entitled to compensation if he is dismissed or penalised for, or deterred or prevented from, being or seeking to become a member or taking part in the activities of a trade union (Industrial Relations Act 1971, section 5; TULRA, Schedule 1, paragraph 6 (4); Employment Protection Act 1975, section 53; Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978, sections 23 and 58).
At the end of 1979, there were 477 trade unions in the , with 13.5 million members; in 1980, 108 unions with 12.1 million members, were affiliated to the Trades Union Congress.
The Congress adopted in 1939 a series of morally binding recommendations ("the Bridlington Principles") designed to minimise, and laying down procedures for dealing with, disputes between affiliated unions over membership questions. The current version of the Principles states, inter alia, that dual membership is valid only if the two unions concerned have jointly agreed to it.
The Trade Union Act 1913, as amended, attaches certain conditions to the application by a union of its funds for a number of political objects specified in section 3 (3), without prejudice to the furtherance of any other political objects. In particular, payments for the specified object must be made out of a separate "political fund" and any member of the union has the right to exemption from contributing thereto. A person so exempted may not be placed at any disadvantage as compared with other members, and contribution to the said fund may not be made a condition for admission to the union.
In 1970, British Rail had concluded a closed shop agreement with the National Union of Railwaymen ("NUR"), the Transport Salaried Staffs’ Association ("TSSA") and the Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen ("ASLEF"), but, with the enactment of the Industrial Relations Act 1971 (see paragraph 18 above), it was not put into effect.
The matter was, however, revived in July 1975 when British Rail concluded a further agreement with the same unions. It was provided that as from 1 August 1975 membership of one of those unions was to be a condition of employment for certain categories of staff - including the applicants - and that the terms of the agreement were "incorporated in and form[ed] part of" each contract of employment. Like other staff of British Rail, Mr. Young, Mr James and Mr. Webster had, it appears, been supplied when engaged with a written statement containing a provision to the effect that they were subject to such terms and conditions of employment as might from time to time be settled for employees of their category under the machinery of negotiation established between their employer and any trade union or other organisation.
The membership requirement did not apply to "an existing employee who genuinely objects on grounds of religious belief to being a member of any Trade Union whatsoever or on any reasonable grounds to being a member of a particular Trade Union". The agreement also set out the procedure for applying for exemption on these grounds and provided for applications to be heard by representatives of the employer and the unions.
In July/August 1975, notices were posted at the premises of British Rail, including those where the applicants were then working, drawing the attention of staff to the agreement with the unions and the change in conditions of employment.
A further notice of September 1975 stated that it had been agreed that the exemption on religious grounds would be available only where a denomination specifically proscribed its members from joining unions. The notice added that "confining exemption only to religious grounds depends upon the passing through Parliament of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Amendment) Bill" and that staff would be advised further on this point. As recorded in paragraph 23 above, the Amendment Act came into force on 25 March 1976.
On the same date, a further agreement between British Rail and the railway unions came into effect. It was in identical terms to the July 1975 agreement, except that the words "or on any reasonable grounds to being a member of a particular Trade Union" (see paragraph 29 above) were omitted.
The applicants and the representative of the Trades Union Congress informed the Court that NUR, TSSA and ASLEF were the only unions actually operating in 1975 in those sectors of the railway industry in which Mr. Young, Mr. James and Mr. Webster worked. According to the Government, other unions did have members in, although they were not recruiting amongst, the relevant grades.
It appears that, prior to the conclusion of the 1975 closed shop agreement, between 6,000 and 8,000 British Rail employees, out of a total staff of 250,000, were not already members of one of the specified unions. In the final event, 54 individuals were dismissed for refusal to comply with the membership requirement.
The applicants were not eligible for membership of ASLEF. As regards NUR and TSSA, intending members were required to sign an application form which, at the relevant time, embodied an undertaking to abide by the Rules of the union and "loyally to promote" its objects (NUR), or to use their "best endeavours to promote its objects and interests" (TSSA).
The stated objects of NUR included the following:
"... to secure the complete organisation of all workers employed by any Board, Company or Authority in connection with railways and other transport and ancillary undertakings thereto in the United Kingdom; to improve the conditions and protect the interests of its members; ... To further, if and when and so far as the same shall be or become a lawful object of a Trade Union, the interests of members by representation in Parliament and on local governing bodies, and to employ the Political Fund of the Union procuring such representation. To work for the suppression of the capitalist system by a Socialistic order of society. ... To make grants to and share in the management and control of any college or institution having for its object to educate and train Trade Unionists in social science in, and to take part in, the political and industrial life of the Labour Movement. ..."
The stated objects of TSSA included the following:
"(a) To organise the whole of the Clerical, Supervisory, Administrative, Professional and Technical employees in all Departments of any British or Irish Railway undertaking, or of any Railway Carting Agency, associated or other undertaking as defined in Rule 2.
(b) To improve the conditions and protect the interests of its members.
 ...
(g) To establish a Fund, or Funds, including the Political Fund referred to in Rules 45 and 46.
...
(i) To secure or assist in securing legislation and the more effective administration of the existing laws which may affect the general and material welfare of its members and of any other workmen.
(j) To provide financial assistance and to lend money, with or without interest or other equivalent, to any such organisation (incorporated or not incorporated) as the Executive Committee may deem advisable in the interests of or for carrying out the objects of the Association, and so far as the law for the time being in force may permit.
 ..."
The objects of both unions also included the furtherance of the political objects specified in section 3 of the Trade Union Act 1913 and their Rules contained provisions reflecting that Act’s requirements in the matter of a political fund (see paragraph 28 above). In the case of TSSA, payments from its political fund could not be made unless the beneficiary was an individual member of the Labour Party or the purpose of the payment was in support of Labour Party policy; its general funds could be used for providing financial assistance for political purposes other than the "political objects" listed in the 1913 Act.
Mr. Young, who was born in 1953, commenced employment with British Rail in 1972.
In September 1975, he had a meeting with his supervisor and a representative of TSSA who informed him about the closed shop agreement - the effect of which in his case was that, as a clerical officer, he was required to join either TSSA or NUR - and of the grounds of exemption applicable at that time (see paragraph 29 above).
The applicant objected, though not on grounds of religious belief, to being a member of any trade union and in particular of TSSA or NUR. He believed that union membership should be a matter of personal choice based on conscience and political conviction. His reasons for not wanting to join TSSA, which he said also applied to NUR, may be summarised as follows:
(a) he did not subscribe to the political views of TSSA;
(b) money from the main union fund was used to produce a monthly newspaper biased in favour of the Labour Party and he had not received sufficient assurances that that fund was not utilised for other political purposes;
(c) he disapproved of TSSA’s support for nationalisation of industry and its forcing of inflationary pay awards; he also objected to being obliged to participate in strikes, this being action which in the case of a key service industry he saw as collective blackmail of the country as a whole;
(d) TSSA showed itself intolerant of the expression of individual freedom by seeking to enforce a closed shop and it acquired by that means an unacceptably extensive control over the hiring and firing of employees.
On 17 October 1975, Mr. Young submitted a written claim for exemption. On 30 April 1976, that is after the entry into force on 25 March 1976 of the Amendment Act (see paragraph 23 above), he was informed by letter that his claim would be heard on 5 May. On that day, he appeared before an appeal body composed of three persons representing, respectively, British Rail, TSSA and NUR.
By letter of 27 May, British Rail advised the applicant that the claim had been disallowed and gave him notice of dismissal - of one month, in accordance with his contract - expiring on 26 June 1976.
Mr. James, who was born in 1928, was engaged by British Rail on 27 March 1974 as a leading railwayman. He had previously been employed by British Rail for two periods of some years.
In 16 October 1975, he had a meeting with his immediate superior and a representative of NUR who informed him that, as a result of the closed shop agreement, he was required to join NUR and that, as a shunter, he was not eligible for membership of any other union. Mr. James was willing to join - in fact, he had previously been a member of NUR - but he was not convinced that membership was advantageous and he believed in freedom of choice. He deferred his final decision pending clarification of a question, submitted by one of his colleagues to NUR, regarding an apparent difference between his salary and that of his colleague who was working the same hours. Before applying for membership, Mr. James wished to see NUR’s reply in order to assess how members’ problems were dealt with. In the event, he formed the view that the union’s examination of the matter and explanation of its conclusions were unsatisfactory and that it had not looked after its member’s interests properly; therefore he did not wish to join the union.
By letter of 18 December 1975, the applicant indicated that he refused to join the union since it had not replied to his own query about his hours of work.
On 23 February 1976, he received a dismissal notice stating that, by reason of his non-compliance with the July 1975 agreement, his services would no longer be required as from 5 April 1976.
On 8 April 1976, Mr. James presented a complaint of unfair dismissal to an industrial tribunal, before which he appeared on 18, June. On 6 July, he received a copy of its decision rejecting his complaint. The grounds were, firstly, that the applicant had never sought exemption from union membership in accordance with the procedure laid down in the closed shop agreement and, secondly, that as he had at no time based his refusal to join NUR on religious grounds, the tribunal was bound under paragraph 6 (5) of Schedule 1 to TULRA (as modified by the Amendment Act) to find that the dismissal was fair.
Mr. Webster, who was born in 1914, commenced employment with British Rail on 18 March 1958.
At the time of the conclusion of the 1970 closed shop agreement (see paragraph 29 above), the applicant had objected to joining a union on grounds which he set out in a letter to the Administrative Services Officer. However, as that agreement was not put into effect, he was not called upon to appear before the appeal body to which he had agreed to submit his claim.
In or around September 1975, the applicant had a meeting with his immediate supervisor and the local representative of TSSA who informed him about the closed shop agreement - the effect of which in his case was that, as a clerical officer, he was required to join either TSSA or NUR - and of the grounds of exemption applicable at that time (see paragraph 29 above).
Mr. Webster was opposed to joining a union for reasons - in his eyes equally valid for TSSA and NUR - which included the following:
(a) he was opposed to the trade union movement as it currently operated since it was unrepresentative, had detrimental effects - particularly through unjustified collective wage demands - in the economic, industrial and social spheres, and did not act in the best interests of workers or of the country in general; he also found it utterly repugnant to be obliged to participate in any strike which caused loss to the general public or workers elsewhere;
(b) he believed that the individual should enjoy freedom of choice as regards union membership and should be able to express and abide by his opinions and convictions without being threatened with the loss of his livelihood as a result of the closed shop practice, which practice would not remedy the disabilities inherent in the trade union system.
On 29 October 1975, Mr. Webster wrote to his supervisor explaining some doubts which he had as to the courses open to him to claim exemption and seeking guidance on certain aspects. He said that he wished to apply for exemption on conscientious grounds (other than specifically religious grounds) and he asked that, if this was still possible, his 1970 submissions be accepted as his case, though he also indicated that he would again wish to present a full and closely argued case. He added that he was an opponent of the trade union movement "as it operates today". On 2 April 1976, that is after the entry into force on 25 March 1976 of the Amendment Act (see paragraph 23 above), he was advised by letter that his application would be examined four days later by representatives of British Rail and the unions in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the 1975 agreement. The applicant requested two weeks’ postponement to enable him to prepare written submissions. On 28 April, by which time he had received replies, through his solicitors, to only some of the questions posed in his October letter, he was instructed to attend a hearing on 6 May. On that day, he appeared before an appeal body composed of three persons representing, respectively, British Rail, TSSA and NUR.
On 3 June 1976, Mr. Webster received a dismissal notice stating that his application had been disallowed and that his contract of employment would terminate on 28 August 1976.
Mr. Young and Mr. James applied to the Commission on 26 July 1976 and Mr. Webster on 18 February 1977; they each made identical complaints, relying on Articles 9, 10, 11 and 13 (art. 9, art. 10, art. 11, art. 13) of the Convention. They submitted that the enforcement of TULRA and the Amendment Act, allowing their dismissal from employment when they objected on reasonable grounds to joining a trade union, interfered with their freedom of thought, conscience, expression and association with others. They further complained that no adequate remedies had been available to them.
The application of Mr. Young and Mr. James and that of Mr. Webster were declared admissible by the Commission on 11 July 1977 and 3 March 1978, respectively.
In its report of 14 December 1979 (Article 31 of the Convention) (art. 31), the Commission expressed the opinion:
- by fourteen votes to three, that there had been a violation of Article 11 (art. 11);
- that it was not necessary to deal separately with the issues arising under Articles 9 and 10 (art. 9, art. 10);
- by eight votes to two, with two abstentions, that there was no additional breach of Article 13 (art. 13).
The report contains four separate opinions.
At the hearings on 4 March 1981, the Government maintained the submissions set out in their memorial, whereby they had requested the Court:
"(I) With regard to Article 11 (art. 11)
(2) With regard to Articles 9 and 10 (art. 9, art. 10)
(3) With regard to Article 13 (art. 13)