The case originated in an application (no. 34425/04) against the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro, lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by, at that time, a citizen of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro, Mr Ljubiša Stojanović (“the applicant”), on 10 August 2004.
As of 3 June 2006, following the Montenegrin declaration of independence,  remained the sole respondent in the proceedings before the Court.
The applicant was represented by the Belgrade Centre for Human Rights, a human rights organisation based in . The Government of the State Union of Serbia and  and, subsequently, the Government of Serbia (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr S. Carić.
The applicant, a convicted prisoner, complained in particular about the refusal of the respondent State to provide him with dentures free of charge, as well as the opening of his correspondence by the prison authorities.
On 6 September 2005 the Court decided to communicate these complaints to the Government and declared the remainder of the application inadmissible. Under Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it was also decided that the merits of the communicated complaints would be examined together with their admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1956.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
Following his conviction by a court of law, between 20 June 1999 and 28 August 2002, the applicant served his first term in the Niš Penitentiary (Kazneno-popravni zavod u Nišu; hereinafter “the prison”).
During this time the prison dentist diagnosed that he had been suffering from paradontosis (i.e. “shaky teeth and their spontaneous falling out”). On two separate occasions extractions were carried out and on a third occasion the applicant complained about facial paresis, which was determined to be unrelated to his dental problems.
After his release, on 17 March 2003 the applicant was apparently placed in detention on remand, as part of a separate criminal case.
Following yet another conviction, on 5 January 2004 the applicant started serving his second prison term in the Niš Penitentiary.
On the same date his medical file was opened. Several medical problems, involving his knees and facial paresis were apparently identified, but no dental examination appears to have been carried out.
On 13 February 2004 the applicant was first examined by the prison dentist, who confirmed his complete toothlessness (terminalna krezubost).
On 5 March 2004 the dentist proposed that the applicant be provided with dentures.
On 4 May 2004 the applicant sent a letter to the Ministry of Health (Ministarstvo zdravlja), requesting dentures.
On 25 June 2004 the said Ministry’s inspectorate (Sektor za zdravstveni nadzor) informed the applicant that convicted persons had to exercise their rights through the Ministry of Justice (Ministarstvo pravde) rather than the Ministry of Health.
By letter of 21 July 2004 the Health Inspection (Zdravstvena inspekcija Ministarstva zdravlja - odsek Niš) observed that, in accordance with Article 4 of the Decision on the Participation of Insured Persons in the Costs of Health Care (Odluka o učešću osiguranih lica u troškovima zdravstvene zaštite; see paragraphs 46 and 47 below), blood donors, such as the applicant, were not exempted from the obligation to cover 60% of the cost of obtaining dentures (pokretne stomatološke nadoknade od akrilata.)
On 21 October 2004 the applicant was admitted to the prison hospital, where his loss of appetite was noted, while on 2 December 2004 he complained of anxiety.
On 23 December 2004 the applicant fainted during a head count and sustained an injury above his left eye.
On an unspecified date in 2004 the applicant was informed by the prison authorities that he had to pay 10,000 dinars (at that time approximately 110 euros) towards meeting the total cost of his dentures. The applicant instead proposed that he be allowed to pay this amount in instalments corresponding to his monthly prison salary.
On 1 February 2005 the applicant again fainted and sustained an injury to his left cheekbone, requiring maxillofacial surgery, which was performed on 4 February 2005.
The applicant alleges that throughout this time he had continued having problems with his eating. In particular, he could eat no solid foods, including meat or even fruit. The prison authorities, however, attempted to alleviate the applicant’s plight by providing him with additional soft bread at each meal.
On 7 June 2006 the applicant repeated his request concerning the payment of his dentures through monthly instalments.
On 30 January 2007 the prison governor informed the applicant that the prison would cover the full costs of his dentures. In so doing, he noted that the reason for this was humanitarian and that the relevant domestic legislation imposed no such obligation on the authorities. Lastly, the governor emphasised that the price of the dentures in prison was, in any event, 50% less than the normal price since the prisoner’s income was itself below the average monthly salary in .
On 25 June 2007 the applicant was provided with the dentures in question.
As noted above, by letter of 21 July 2004 the Health Inspection informed the applicant about his health insurance coverage. This letter bore the prison stamp dated 22 July 2004 and registration number 713/9033.
The applicant’s letter of 10 August 2004, sent to the Court, also bore the prison stamp dated 10 August 2004, as well as registration number 24/9684.
In its own letter of 21 December 2004, inter alia, the Court’s Registry therefore informed the applicant in Serbian of the said stamp, assuming that he may not have been aware of it.
In his subsequent letter of 11 January 2005, the applicant stated that all his mail addressed to the Court, as well as to other bodies, had to go through the prison administration, where it was opened, and alleged that this was standard practice based on the provisions of the applicable prison regulations. This letter also bore the prison stamp dated 11 January 2005 and registration number 24/267.
In June 2006 the applicant provided the Court with a statement signed by 78 prisoners confirming, inter alia, that their correspondence had been routinely opened by the prison authorities.
As of 2002 the applicant had a limited liability company registered in his name. It would appear, however, that this company never became operational.
By October 2005 the applicant seems to have inherited 25% of a one-bedroom flat from his mother.
On 12 February 2006 and 16 May 2006, respectively, the applicant apparently sent two separate letters to the prison governor, seeking an audience.
On 26 October 2006 the Ministry of Justice forwarded a complaint of the applicant to the prison governor for consideration.
On 24 November 2006 the Social Care Centre (Centar za socijalni rad) in Jagodina confirmed, inter alia, that the applicant had been receiving unemployment benefits between 1 December 1994 and 31 May 1999.
Whilst in prison the applicant appears to have received a salary in the total amount of 19,000 dinars, through monthly instalments. As of July 2006, however, 3,537 dinars remained on his personal prison account as part of a “compulsory savings scheme”.
The relevant provisions of this Charter provided as follows:
Article 24 §§ 1 and 3
“Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his correspondence.
...
The confidentiality of letters and other means of communication shall be inviolable. Exceptions shall be permitted for a limited period of time and only on the basis of a court decision, if necessary for the purposes of conducting criminal proceedings or the defence of the country, in a manner prescribed by law.”
The relevant provisions of this Constitution provided as follows:
Article 19
“The confidentiality of letters and other means of communication shall be inviolable.
Laws may provide that, on the basis of a court decision, ... [this principle] ... may be departed from, if it is indispensable for the conduct of criminal proceedings or the defence of the .”
Article 30
“Everyone is entitled to the protection of his health.
Children, pregnant women and the elderly shall have the right to health care financed from public funds, if this right is not secured on some other ground, while other persons shall enjoy such care under the conditions provided by law.”
Article 40
“Under the obligatory insurance scheme, in accordance with the law, employed persons ...[enjoy] ... the right to health care and other rights in the event of sickness, ... pregnancy, childbirth, impairment or loss of the ability to work, unemployment and old age ... , as well as rights to other forms of social security ...
Social security rights for those citizens who are not covered by the obligatory social insurance scheme shall be regulated by law.”
The relevant provisions of this Act read as follows:
Article 6 § 1
“Individual decisions concerning the rights and obligations of persons subjected to criminal sanctions may not be challenged through the judicial review procedure.”
Article 21
“The health care unit [of the penitentiary] shall provide preventive assistance, treat convicted persons and persons detained on remand, and supervise the hygiene and quality of the food and water.”
Article 23
“Details concerning the life and work of convicted persons shall be further regulated in the Prison Rules.
Prison Rules shall be adopted by the Minister of Justice”
Article 56
“Everyone shall respect the dignity of a convicted person.
No one may endanger the physical and mental health of a convicted person.”
Article 61
“Convicted persons shall have the right to nutrition capable of sustaining their good health and strength ...”
Article 65 §§ 1 and 3
“Convicted persons shall have the right to send written communications to competent State bodies.
...
Convicted persons shall receive and send written communications through the prison authorities.”
Article 66
	“Convicted persons shall have an unrestricted right to correspond.”
Article 90 §§ 1 and 2
“Convicted persons shall enjoy free health care.
Convicted persons who cannot receive adequate medical treatment in the penitentiary shall be transferred to the prison hospital, a psychiatric ward or another medical institution.”
Article 103
“Convicted persons shall have the right to complain to the governor [of the penitentiary] concerning a violation of their rights or other irregularities which they have suffered.
The governor is obliged to examine such complaints carefully and take a decision.
Convicted persons who do not receive a response to their complaints or are not satisfied with the decision adopted shall have the right to submit a written application to the head of the Directorate [for the Enforcement of Institutional Sanctions].
Convicted persons shall have the right to complain to the official authorised to supervise the operation of the penitentiary, without the prison staff or the officials appointed to serve in the institution being present.
The substance of the complaint as well as the application shall be confidential.”
In addition, according to Articles 346-352, the Directorate for the Enforcement of Institutional Sanctions (“the Directorate”), as a constituent part of the Ministry of Justice, had the competence to monitor the implementation of the relevant legislation concerning the enforcement of criminal sanctions. The Directorate proceeded ex officio. It could interview convicted persons without the prison staff being present and ultimately adopt binding recommendations addressed to respective governors which the governors themselves could subsequently appeal to the Minister of Justice. In addition, Article 353 provided, inter alia, that the quality of health care in prisons had to be monitored by the Ministry of Health.
This Act entered into force on 1 January 2006, thereby repealing the Enforcement of Criminal Sanctions Act 1997.
The relevant provisions of these Rules read as follows:
Article 23 §§ 1 and 2
“Convicted persons shall have an unrestricted right to correspond, in accordance with the law.
Their mail shall be received and dispatched through the prison authorities.”
These Rules entered into force on 8 April 2006, thereby repealing the Prison Rules 2001.
Articles 148-153 set out the principles for the treatment of persons detained on remand (pritvorenici) and do not apply to those serving their prison sentences.
Article 28 § 1 of this Act provided as follows: “With respect to certain kinds of health care, it may be provided that insured persons have to contribute towards the costs ... [incurred,] ... while taking into account that this contribution must not deter them from making use of their health coverage.”
The relevant provisions of this Decision read as follows:
Article 1
“This decision sets out the modalities and the level of contributions by insured persons to the costs of health care ..., any exemptions from paying such contributions, as well as the location and manner of payment.”
Article 3
“A contribution is to be made for ... the production or procurement of prosthetics ... [as follows:] ...
[for] dental prosthetics ...
2. removable dental prosthetics ... 60% ... [of the price set by the health insurance board]”
Article 4 § 2
“Blood donors are exempt from paying contributions within a period of 12 months following each blood donation, except the contribution referred to in [Article 3] paragraphs 15, 16, 17, 19 and 20 ...”
This Decision repealed the above decision in 2004 but the relevant participation remained the same.
The relevant provisions of this Code read as follows:
Article 72
“1. Whoever, without authorisation, opens a letter or a telegram or any other closed communication or item of mail of another person, or in some other way violates their privacy, or without authorisation, keeps, conceals, destroys or delivers to another a person’s letter, telegram, closed communication or item of mail shall be punished by imprisonment not exceeding one year.
...
If the offence referred to in paragraph 1 ... of this Article is committed by an official in the performance of his public duties, that person shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.”
Under Articles 199 and 200, inter alia, anyone who has suffered fear or physical pain or, indeed, mental anguish as a consequence of a breach of his or her “personal rights” (prava ličnosti) or has been subjected to adverse circumstances seriously affecting health (umanjenje životne aktivnosti) may, depending on their duration and intensity, sue for financial compensation before the civil courts and, in addition, request other forms of redress which may be capable of affording adequate non-pecuniary satisfaction.