The case originated in two applications (nos. 18938/07 and 36069/09) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Bulgarian nationals, Mr Plamen Todorov Radkov and Mr Miroslav Sabev Sabev (“the applicants”), on 13 February and 11 June 2007 respectively.
The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V. Obretenov, from the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged that their handcuffing during a court hearing on 26 January 2007 had breached their right not to be subjected to inhuman and degrading treatment.
On 21 January 2013 the applications were communicated to the Government.
The applicants were born in 1972 and 1966 respectively. At the time of the events in question they were detained in Lovech Prison, serving sentences of life imprisonment, after being convicted of numerous crimes, including murder, rape and armed robberies.
On an unspecified date in 2006 the two applicants brought proceedings against the Ministry of Justice under the State and Municipalities Responsibility for Damage Act, seeking damages for the allegedly poor conditions of detention in Lovech Prison. The case was examined by the Sofia City Court, which accepted a request by the applicants to have two of their fellow inmates questioned as witnesses regarding the living conditions in the prison.
A special court hearing for that purpose took place on 26 January 2007 in a hearing room in Lovech Prison.
The applicants were brought to the hearing with their arms handcuffed behind their backs and their ankles shackled. Once the hearing began, Mr Radkov requested that his handcuffs be removed because he was uncomfortable. The judge presiding over the hearing refused, without giving any specific reasons. Mr Sabev then asked that it be noted in the record of the hearing that his handcuffs had not been removed either. The applicants’ arms remained handcuffed behind their backs until the end of the hearing.
The two witnesses heard by the court – who were from the same group of life prisoners – had their handcuffs removed.
A prosecutor was also present at the hearing.
The hearing continued for about an hour.
At the time of the events at issue, the prisoners’ regimes were governed by the 1969 Execution of Punishments Act and the regulations for its implementation. The regime of life prisoners was governed by sections 127a-127e of the 1969 Act, which were added in 1995. Section 127b(1) provided that when imposing a life sentence, the sentencing court had to order the prisoner’s detention under the strictest of regimes, which entailed heightened security and supervision (regulation 56(1) of the implementing regulations).
Sections 84b-84e of the 1969 Act regulated the use of force, including handcuffs, by the prison administration. It was, in particular, provided that force could be used where and in so far as necessary.
Article 106 of the Code of Civil Procedure as in force at the relevant time, provided, inter alia, that during court hearings the presiding judge was responsible for maintaining order in the hearing room.
The State and Municipalities Responsibility for Damage Act 1988 (“the SMRDA”) provides in section 1(1) that the State and the municipalities are liable for damage caused to private individuals and legal entities as a result of unlawful decisions, acts or omissions on the part of their own authorities or officials while discharging their administrative duties. Section 2 of the same Act governs the State’s liability for damage caused to private individuals as a result of exhaustively specified types of decisions and actions by the courts, the prosecution or the investigative authorities; these do not include security arrangements in the courtrooms.