The case originated in an application (no. 32268/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mrs Antonina Malahov (“the applicant”) on 9 July 2002.
The applicant was represented by A. Petrenco, a lawyer practicing in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V. Pârlog.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the domestic courts' refusal to examine her claims due to her inability to pay court fees had violated her rights guaranteed under Articles 6 § 1 and 13 of the Convention and that she had been discriminated against because of her ethnicity.
The application was allocated to the Fourth Section of the Court. On 22 September 2005 a Chamber of that Section decided to communicate the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1942 and lives in Chişinău. She is a pensioner.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant worked for a company in Chişinău. Besides her salary, she allegedly received fees, which were transferred to an account opened for her in the company's name. After retirement, she requested the company to transfer to her account all the fees accumulated (which she estimated at 25,278 United States Dollars (USD)). When the company refused to do so, she initiated court proceedings.
She asked the court to waive the obligation to pay court fees on the ground of her poor financial situation. In particular, she produced evidence showing that her only income was a monthly State pension of 102 Moldovan lei (MDL), equivalent to 8.7 euros (EUR) which barely allowed her to survive.
On 28 April 2000 the Râşcani District Court exempted the applicant from the payment of court fees because of her poor financial situation. On 31 January 2001 the court rejected her action and ordered the applicant to pay court fees of MDL 9,600 (EUR 826).
The  requested pre-payment of additional court fees for examining her appeal. The court reduced those fees by half (from the original MDL 7,200 to MDL 3,600 (EUR 307)) “taking into account the provisions of Article 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure and the financial situation of [the applicant]”.
The applicant signed two summonses forms informing the parties about the dates of the next hearings (30 October 2001 and 20 November 2001), which also included the phrase “[Appellant] Malahova A.S. shall pay in court fees 3,600 [MDL]”.
On 29 October 2001 the applicant requested the court to waive the court fees altogether given her financial situation (her pension was MDL 143 (EUR 12.2) by that time) and the labour-related character of her claim (she argued that her unpaid fees amounted to “other claims related to work activities” and, according to the law, she should be exempted from court fees). She relied on Article 88 (1) of the Code of Civil Procedure (see paragraph 16 below).
On 20 November 2001 the court refused to examine her case because she had failed to pay the court fees. It did not analyse her financial situation or respond to her claim that the case concerned payment for work performed and, as such, was not subject to the payment of court fees.
In her appeal the applicant invoked her inability to pay the court fees and relied on the evidence of her small pension, as well as on the fact that her husband was unemployed and had no income. She relied on Article 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure (see paragraph 16 below).
On 10 January 2002 the Court of Appeal upheld the lower court's decision. The court, without referring to the applicant's sources of income or analysing her financial situation other than referring to the documents already in the file, found that the applicant had not presented proof of her inability to pay the court fees. The decision was final.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, in force at the relevant time, read as follows:
“Article 83. Litigation expenses
Litigation expenses include court fees and expenses related to the court proceedings.
Article 84. The amount of court fees
Court fees shall be due for actions lodged by natural persons ..., for appeals and appeals in cassation...:
(1) For court actions of a pecuniary nature, lodged by natural persons – 3% of the value of the action or of the amount sought...;
(11) For appeals – 75% of the court fees due when lodging the action ...;
(12) For appeals in cassation – 50% of the court fees due when lodging the action ...;
Article 88. Exemption from court fees
The following shall be exempted from paying court fees:
(1) plaintiffs (natural persons) – in actions regarding the payment of sums for work performed and other labour-related claims;...
Article 89. Waiver of court fees
In certain cases the court (the judge) may exempt partly or entirely a person from paying court fees, taking into account the person's financial situation ...”