The case originated in an application (no. 4176/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Zakhar Olegovich Danilin (“the applicant”), on 8 January 2003.
The applicant was represented by Mr Oleg Danilin, a lawyer practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mrs V. Milinchuk, former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the conditions of his detention had been appalling, that his pre-trial detention had been unlawful, that the criminal proceedings against him had been unfair and the authorities had erred in application of the domestic law.
On 5 April 2007 the President of the First Section decided to communicate the complaint concerning the applicant's conditions of detention to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1979 and lives in .
In April 2000 the authorities brought criminal proceedings against the applicant on suspicion of robbery. During the trial the applicant was also accused of theft.
By a judgment of 20 July 2001 the Zelenogradskiy District Court (“the District Court”) convicted the applicant on both counts.
The applicant appealed against the judgment and on 23 October 2001 the Moscow City Court (“the City Court”) quashed the conviction on appeal and remitted the case for a fresh examination at the first instance.
On 4 June 2002 the District Court again convicted the applicant of robbery and theft and sentenced him to nine years' imprisonment.
The applicant's appeal against the judgment was dismissed by the City Court on 9 July 2002.
On 15 April 2004 the City Court, acting by way of supervisory review, upheld the judgment of 4 June and the decision of 9 July 2002 in part relating to the count of robbery and quashed the rest of the applicant's conviction.
The court established that there had been various irregularities in the criminal proceedings in so far as they related to the count of theft and, in particular, the fact that the applicant had not been given a reasonable opportunity to prepare his defence and state his case properly. The applicant was accordingly acquitted on this charge and the overall sentence was reduced to five years.
The applicant was taken into custody by the authorities on 6 April 2000 and remained in pre-trial detention until 19 July 2002.
From 6 April 2000 to 26 July 2001 and from 22 November 2001 to 9 June 2002 the applicant was held in pre-trial detention centre IZ-77/5 in the city of  (“SIZO no.5”).
From 26 July to 22 November 2001 and from 9 June to 19 July 2002 the applicant was detained in pre-trial detention centre IZ-77/3 in the city of  (“SIZO no. 3”)
The applicant submitted that throughout his detention the cells in SIZO no. 5 and SIZO no. 3 had been heavily overcrowded and that the prisoners had had to take turns to sleep.
In both prisons the cells were dirty and lacked ventilation. The applicant also submits that the food was of poor quality.
In respect of SIZO no. 5 the Government submitted that the applicant had been held in cells 205 (measuring 25.3 square metres and containing two windows and ten sleeping places), 303 (measuring 37.1 square metres and containing three windows and fourteen sleeping places), 312 (measuring 33.5 square metres, containing two windows and twelve sleeping places), 322 (measuring 27.4 square metres) and 403 (measuring 36.8 square metres, containing three windows and fourteen sleeping places).
The Government were unable to provide the Court with original documentation concerning numbers of prisoners detained in SIZO no. 5 along with the applicant. They relied on record no. 50/5-8 dated 31 March 2006 of the administration of SIZO no. 5 confirming the destruction of the relevant prison records in this respect.
As to SIZO no. 3, the Government submitted that the applicant had been detained in cells 213 (measuring 28.5 square metres, containing two windows and twenty-eight sleeping places) and 608 (measuring 32.7 square metres, containing two windows and thirty-two sleeping places.)
The Government submitted that there had been twenty-five to twenty-eight detainees in cell 213 along with the applicant and were unable to provide information in respect of detainees in cell no. 608. They relied on record no. 176 dated 16 February 2004 issued by administration of SIZO no. 3 and confirming the destruction of the relevant prison records.
The Government submitted that the applicant had been provided at all times with an individual sleeping place and bed linen. All cells had been naturally and artificially ventilated and lit. The cells had been equipped with heating devices and regularly cleaned with toilet facilities having been partitioned with a wall. The applicant underwent regular medical examinations.
Rule 42 provided that all suspects and accused persons in detention had to be given, among other things: a sleeping place; bedding, including a mattress, a pillow and one blanket; bed linen, including two sheets and a pillow case; a towel; tableware and cutlery, including a bowl, a mug and a spoon; and clothes appropriate to the season (if the inmate had no clothes of his own).
Rule 44 stated that cells in pre-trial detention centres were to be equipped, among other things, with a table and benches to seat the number of inmates detained there, sanitation facilities, running water and lighting for use in the daytime and at night.
Rule 46 provided that prisoners were to be given three hot meals a day, in accordance with the norms laid down by the Government of Russia.
Under Rule 47 inmates had the right to have a shower at least once a week for at least fifteen minutes. They were to receive fresh linen after taking their shower.
Rule 143 provided that inmates could be visited by their lawyer, family members or other persons, with the written permission of an investigator or an investigative body. The number of visits was limited to two per month.
Order no. 7 of the Federal Service for the Execution of Sentences of 31 January 2005 deals with the implementation of the “Pre-trial detention centres 2006” programme.
The programme is aimed at improving the functioning of pre-trial detention centres so as to ensure their compliance with the requirements of Russian legislation. It expressly acknowledges the issue of overcrowding in pre-trial detention centres and seeks to reduce and stabilise the number of detainees in order to resolve the problem.
Amongst those affected, the programme mentions pre-trial detention centres SIZO no. 3 and SIZO no. 5. In particular, the programme states that on 1 July 2004 SIZO no. 3 had a capacity of 1,109 inmates and in reality housed 1,562 detainees, in other words, 48.9% more than the permitted number. The programme also mentions SIZO no. 5, stating that on 1 July 2004 the detention centre had a capacity of 1,117 inmates but actually housed 1,495 detainees, or 33.8% more than the permitted number.
The relevant extracts from the General Reports of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“the CPT”) read as follows:
Extracts from the 2nd General Report [CPT/Inf (92) 3]
“46.  Overcrowding is an issue of direct relevance to the CPT's mandate. All the services and activities within a prison will be adversely affected if it is required to cater for more prisoners than it was designed to accommodate; the overall quality of life in the establishment will be lowered, perhaps signiﬁcantly. Moreover, the level of overcrowding in a prison, or in a particular part of it, might be such as to be in itself inhuman or degrading from a physical standpoint.
A satisfactory programme of activities (work, education, sport, etc.) is of crucial importance for the well-being of prisoners ... [P]risoners cannot simply be left to languish for weeks, possibly months, locked up in their cells, and this regardless of how good material conditions might be within the cells. The CPT considers that one should aim at ensuring that prisoners in remand establishments are able to spend a reasonable part of the day (8 hours or more) outside their cells, engaged in purposeful activity of a varied nature ...
Speciﬁc mention should be made of outdoor exercise. The requirement that prisoners be allowed at least one hour of exercise in the open air every day is widely accepted as a basic safeguard ... It is also axiomatic that outdoor exercise facilities should be reasonably spacious ...
Ready access to proper toilet facilities and the maintenance of good standards of hygiene are essential components of a humane environment ...
The CPT would add that it is particularly concerned when it ﬁnds a combination of overcrowding, poor regime activities and inadequate access to toilet/washing facilities in the same establishment. The cumulative effect of such conditions can prove extremely detrimental to prisoners.
It is also very important for prisoners to maintain reasonably good contact with the outside world. Above all, a prisoner must be given the means of safeguarding his relationships with his family and close friends. The guiding principle should be the promotion of contact with the outside world; any limitations upon such contact should be based exclusively on security concerns of an appreciable nature or resource considerations ...”
Extracts from the 7th General Report [CPT/Inf (97) 10]
“13.  As the CPT pointed out in its 2nd General Report, prison overcrowding is an issue of direct relevance to the Committee's mandate (cf. CPT/Inf (92) 3, paragraph 46). An overcrowded prison entails cramped and unhygienic accommodation; a constant lack of privacy (even when performing such basic tasks as using a sanitary facility); reduced out-of-cell activities, due to demand outstripping the staff and facilities available; overburdened health-care services; increased tension and hence more violence between prisoners and between prisoners and staff. This list is far from exhaustive.
The CPT has been led to conclude on more than one occasion that the adverse effects of overcrowding have resulted in inhuman and degrading conditions of detention ...”
Extracts from the 11th General Report [CPT/Inf (2001) 16]
“28.  The phenomenon of prison overcrowding continues to blight penitentiary systems across  and seriously undermines attempts to improve conditions of detention. The negative effects of prison overcrowding have already been highlighted in previous General Reports ...
In a number of countries visited by the CPT, particularly in central and eastern Europe, inmate accommodation often consists of large capacity dormitories which contain all or most of the facilities used by prisoners on a daily basis, such as sleeping and living areas as well as sanitary facilities. The CPT has objections to the very principle of such accommodation arrangements in closed prisons and those objections are reinforced when, as is frequently the case, the dormitories in question are found to hold prisoners under extremely cramped and insalubrious conditions ... Large­capacity dormitories inevitably imply a lack of privacy for prisoners in their everyday lives ... All these problems are exacerbated when the numbers held go beyond a reasonable occupancy level; further, in such a situation the excessive burden on communal facilities such as washbasins or lavatories and the insufficient ventilation for so many persons will often lead to deplorable conditions.
The CPT frequently encounters devices, such as metal shutters, slats, or plates ﬁtted to cell windows, which deprive prisoners of access to natural light and prevent fresh air from entering the accommodation. They are a particularly common feature of establishments holding pre-trial prisoners. The CPT fully accepts that speciﬁc security measures designed to prevent the risk of collusion and/or criminal activities may well be required in respect of certain prisoners ... [E]ven when such measures are required, they should never involve depriving the prisoners concerned of natural light and fresh air. The latter are basic elements of life which every prisoner is entitled to enjoy ...”