The case originated in an application (no. 21318/12) against the Republic of Cyprus lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Robert Tadeusz Danilczuk (“the applicant”), on 8 April 2012.
On 18 November 2013 the applicant’s complaint about his conditions of detention at Nicosia Central Prisons was communicated to the Government under Article 3 of the Convention and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
Following the communication of the application, the applicant appointed Mr D. Stremecki, a lawyer practising in Szprotawa in Poland, to represent him before the Court. By a letter dated 18 January 2017 he informed the Court that he no longer wished to be represented by him. The Cypriot Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, the Attorney General, Mr C. Clerides.
The Polish Government were informed of their right to intervene in the proceedings, in accordance with Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 of the Rules of Court. They chose not to avail themselves of that right.
The applicant was born in 1965 and is currently detained in Czarne Prison in Poland.
The applicant was placed in detention on remand at Nicosia Central Prisons on 14 September 2010 pending criminal proceedings against him before the Limassol District Court (case no. 25536/10).
On 11 January 2011 the applicant was convicted of a number of offences (including burglary, theft, various road traffic offences and unlawful residence). On 24 January 2011 the court imposed four sentences ranging from six months’ to two years’ imprisonment, to run concurrently from 5 September 2010.
The applicant was released on 18 May 2012 following the suspension of his sentence by virtue of a decree issued by the President of the Republic concerning a number of prisoners.
In his application form the applicant, without specifying the exact period of his detention, submitted that he had been held in overcrowded cells at Nicosia Central Prisons, where there was only 0.5 to 1.7 sq. m of personal space for each detainee. He stated that the cells were cold and lacked adequate light. Furthermore, there were no toilets in the cells. He sometimes had to wait two to three hours to use the toilet, and, when the cells were locked, he had to urinate into a bottle and defecate into a waste bag.
The Government submitted that the applicant had been detained from 14 September 2010 until his release on 18 May 2012 in three different parts of Nicosia Central Prisons. Between 14 September 2010 and 24 January 2011 he had been detained in Block 5, which accommodated remand prisoners. Following his conviction and sentence he had been transferred to Block 2B, where he had been detained between 24 January 2011 and 5 October 2011. On the latter date he had been placed in Block 2A, where he had been detained until his release on 18 May 2012. Both Block 2B and 2A accommodated sentenced prisoners. The Government provided copies of Nicosia Central Prisons’ daily occupancy records (ημερήσιες χωρητικότητες των κεντρικών φυλακών) indicating the number of prisoners in each block per day. However, they submitted that no records were kept in relation to occupancy of particular cells in the blocks.
Block 5 could accommodate up to sixty-eight remand prisoners; it had thirty-four double occupancy cells measuring 6.21 sq. m, eight toilets and eight showers. Block 5 included Block 5A, which had twenty-three double occupancy cells of the same size as Block 5, accommodating forty-three remand prisoners. It was almost certain that during his detention in Block 5 the applicant had shared a cell with another inmate and that therefore he had had 3.10 sq. m of personal space.
At the time the applicant had been detained there Block 2B had not yet been renovated. It had twenty-six double occupancy cells measuring 9.98 sq. m; two large cells measuring 19.55 sq. m, which accommodated five to seven detainees, and a common room which had been made into a dormitory for between twenty and fifty inmates. The dormitory measured 90 sq. m and had nineteen windows. Prisoners with short-term sentences had been kept in the dormitory. Block 2B had six toilets and six showers.
Based on the daily occupancy records for the relevant period, the number of inmates in the block varied from 80 to 124 per day. The Government stated that it was possible that the applicant had spent time in all the different types of cells in this block during his detention. In the double occupancy cell the applicant would have had 4.99 sq. m of personal space; in the larger cell he would have had from approximately 2.8 to 3.9 sq. m, depending on whether he had shared the cell with five, six or seven inmates; and, lastly, in the dormitory he would have had from 1.8 sq. m to 4.5 sq. m of personal space, depending on the number of inmates detained there with him. If the applicant had been held in the dormitory in early spring or during the winter (see paragraph 49 below), he would have disposed of between 2.04 and 3.2 sq. m of personal space as the daily occupancy records indicated that the block had accommodated between 94 and 110 inmates per day during those periods.
On 5 October 2011 the applicant was transferred to Block 2A, which had been renovated. The block had forty-one double occupancy cells, accommodating eighty-two prisoners. The cells measured 9.80 sq. m and thus the applicant had had 4.9 sq. m of personal space at his disposal. There were six toilets, six showers and three urinals.
The various parts of the prison were equipped with a central heating system which covered all the blocks and cells. The central air conditioning system which functioned in the summer months was in the corridors and there were individual electrical fans in the cells. All the cells had properly insulated windows, which provided natural light and ventilation. The dimensions of the windows varied. Detainees were free to move outside their cells in the closed prison, including the yard, workshops, kitchen and school from 6 a.m. to 5 p.m. (winter time) or to 6 p.m. (summer time). After that, the detainees could move freely within their blocks until 9 p.m. on weekdays and 10 p.m. on weekends and public holidays.
Following the 2012 report of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (“CPT”) on its visit to Cyprus from 12 to 19 May 2008, the prison administration discontinued the practice of switching off cell bells during the night, hence detainees had access to the toilets during those hours (see paragraphs 26-27 and 30 below). The administration of the prison had issued order no. 32/2008 concerning prisoners having access to the toilet facilities whenever necessary. The order had also directed prison staff to check and ensure that the call panel in the warden’s room was active at all times, especially during the evening, so that prisoners could be assisted and emergencies prevented. A violation of the order constituted a disciplinary offence. According to a letter by the prison director dated 27 February 2014, records were not kept of when cells were opened for toilet visits during the night, that is between 9 p.m. and 6 a.m. However, a detainee could leave his cell for up to three toilet visits during that period.
Article 8 of the Constitution safeguards the right not to be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading punishment or treatment.
The law applies to detainees whose detention has been permitted by Article 11 § 2 (b), (c) and (f) of the Constitution (which are equivalent to Article 5 § 1 (b), (c) and (d) of the Convention), as well as detainees who are being detained for the purposes of the imposition of a sentence (section 2).
Section 19 provides as follows:
“(1) Every detainee has the right:
(a) to respect for his right not to be subjected to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment or any other physical or psychological or mental violence,
(b) to decent treatment, behaviour and living conditions (αξιοπρεπούς μεταχείρισης, συμπεριφοράς και διαβίωσης),
(c) to be in (διαβιεί) a cell of a reasonable size, in which basic facilities and conditions of hygiene, sufficient light and ventilation, and suitable furniture for rest (εξοπλισμός ξεκούρασης) are provided.
(2) It is the State’s responsibility to safeguard the rights mentioned in paragraph (1).
(3) All the persons responsible for a detention facility shall provide for the adequate and appropriate nutrition, physical and mental health, safety and physical integrity of detainees.”
Section 36(1) provides that a person who has suffered a violation of his or her rights granted to him or her by the law in question has a cause of action for damages against the State and the member of the police, member of staff of the prison or the person in charge of the detention centre who is responsible for the violation, whether or not the person suffered any actual injury, damage or pecuniary or other loss as a result. Under section 36(2) a person who has a cause of action under section 36(1) is not prevented from claiming damages or another remedy on the basis of an actionable right/cause of action provided or recognised by any other law. Such claims can be made simultaneously.
Law 2(III)/2009 ratified the Optional Protocol to the United Nations Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment of 18 December 2002. Under section 4(1) the Office of the Commissioner of Administration (“the Ombudsman”) is designated as the national preventive mechanism.
Under section 5 of the law the Ombudsman is empowered to freely conduct visits to places of detention, following notification to the competent authorities, and has free access to all areas, premises and facilities; to examine the treatment of detainees and the general conditions of detention; and to carry out interviews with detainees and any other person. By virtue of section 6, the competent detention authorities are also required to provide the Ombudsman with all information, data, documents and material and access to records and registers upon request. Section 7 states that following a visit the Ombudsman can make recommendations in a report to the competent detention authority concerning the place of detention with a view to strengthening the protection for and improving the treatment and conditions of detainees, a particular detainee or persons deprived of their liberty in the said place or places of detention, and to prevent the torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of such persons. The competent authority must then consider the recommendations, conduct a dialogue and hold consultations with the Ombudsman and any other authority of the Republic which may be involved in their implementation in order to adopt the appropriate measures. In addition, the Ombudsman, with the express authorisation of the detainee or person concerned, has to bring to the attention of the Attorney General any allegations of human rights violations made during interviews, regardless of whether or not they concern punishable criminal acts, so that that official can take the matter up (sections 9(1), (2) and 10).
In Takis Yiallouros v. Evgenios Nicolaou ([2001] 1 C.L.R. 558), which concerned an alleged violation by another individual of the claimant’s right to a private life and correspondence, the Supreme Court, sitting as a full bench, held that claims for human rights violations were actionable rights that could be pursued in the civil courts against those responsible, with a view to recovering from them, inter alia, just and reasonable compensation for any damage suffered as a result. The Supreme Court thus confirmed the existence of an obligation to award general damages for breaches of the fundamental human rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution, even when the violation did not constitute a tort in civil law. It pointed out that the provisions of Article 13 of the Convention formed part of the domestic law and safeguarded the right to an effective remedy for a violation of rights guaranteed by the Convention.
In the joined cases of Evripidis Evripidou v. the Attorney General and Petros Patsalidis v. the Attorney General (action nos. 7252/06 and 141/07, decision of 16 October 2008, unreported), the Nicosia District Court held that the State had breached Article 10(2) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the domestic law that had ratified it (Law no. 16/69) by not segregating the plaintiffs, who were being held on remand, from convicted persons and by not affording them different treatment appropriate to their status. Relying on Takis Yiallouros, the court found that the applicants had a right to compensation for the breach of their rights under the law and awarded them damages of 4,000 euros each. The plaintiffs had been detained on remand for just under eight months at Nicosia Central Prisons and had brought the actions following their release.
On 6 December 2012 the CPT released its report on its visit to Cyprus from 12 to 19 May 2008.
In its report the CPT pointed out, inter alia, that high levels of overcrowding prevailed in nearly all the detention blocks at Nicosia Central Prisons. It also observed the following:
“B. Nicosia Central Prisons
Preliminary remarks
Since the CPT’s previous visit to Nicosia Central Prisons in 2004, the establishment’s official capacity of 340 has not changed, whereas the number of inmates has risen from 480 to 520. 80 inmates were on remand and 440 sentenced (296 to long sentences, 18 of which were life sentences); 27 inmates were women and 11 were juveniles under 21 years old. About 54% of the prisoners were foreign nationals.
In its report on the visit in 2004, the CPT outlined its concerns as regards the rampant overcrowding at Nicosia Central Prisons. Since then the situation has further deteriorated, and the Committee understands that the establishment had to cope with even greater overcrowding in 2007 (with 662 inmates reported on 30 July); the population reduction since 2007 was largely due to a general amnesty, rather than to a strategic approach. An occupancy rate of over 152%, as observed during the visit in 2008, represents severe overcrowding, posing challenges to the general infrastructure of the prison, including issues of order and security and classification of prisoners. ...
...
Ill-treatment
...
Further, the vast majority of inmates had no access to the toilet during the night, when, as the delegation learned, call bells were switched off. As a result, inmates were frequently obliged to urinate and defecate in makeshift receptacles in their cells. The CPT considers that to oblige an inmate to discharge human waste, and more particularly defecate, in a bucket or other receptacle in a confined space used as a shared living area, is degrading, both for the inmate concerned and for all other persons occupying the cell.
...
Conditions of detention
material conditions
High levels of overcrowding prevailed in nearly all of the detention blocks, with older Blocks (1 and 2) being the most severely affected. For example, Block 2B had an official capacity for 36 persons, yet accommodated 73 prisoners. In Blocks 1B, 2A and 2B many persons were obliged to sleep four to a room measuring 10m², or in bunk beds in the blocks’ TV-rooms. Further, several cells in Blocks 1B, 2A and 2B had no window at all, resulting in poor ventilation and reduced access to natural light. Sanitary facilities in those Blocks were also severely dilapidated; however, the delegation noted that work was in progress to construct new sanitary facilities for Blocks 1 and 2.”
The Government’s response to the CPT’s report, also published on 6 December 2012, included the following observations.
“Paragraph 71, page 31
The Administration of the Prison Department has issued an order No. 32/2008, concerning the access of prisoners to toilet facilities whenever necessary. By this order the personnel of the Prison is directed to check and ensure that the call panel in the warden’s room is active at all times and especially during the evening hours, so that the prisoners can be assisted and emergency cases can be prevented. It also informs the personnel that the violation of the order consists a disciplinary offence.
...
Page 32, paragraph 74
...
(i) In order to expand the Prison areas, renovations are being made in Blocks 1A, 1B, 2A, 2B, so that 40 new cells as well as additional hygienic places will be built. Renovations are expected to be completed within the year 2011.”
On 9 December 2014, the CPT released a report on its visit to Cyprus from 23 September to 1 October 2013.
As regards Nicosia Central Prisons, the CPT welcomed the steps that had been taken by the authorities to improve the material conditions within the prison, notably as concerned Block 2, which had undergone a complete renovation. It observed that overcrowding continued. It also stated the following:
“C. Nicosia Central Prisons
Preliminary remarks
At the time of the visit, Nicosia Central Prisons was accommodating 609 inmates for an official capacity of 455. The establishment held 101 male remand prisoners and 451 male sentenced prisoners (308 sentenced to long sentences, of which 23 were life sentences); 46 prisoners were women, 27 sentenced (of whom two were sentenced to life imprisonment) and 19 on remand; and there were 14 male young offenders (18 to 21 year-olds) and four juvenile prisoners (16 and 17year-olds). About 52% of the prison population were foreign nationals.
Since the previous visit in 2008, the prison capacity had been increased by 105 places through inter alia the creation of 23 double-occupancy cells on the upper floor of Block 5, the transformation of Block 9 into a young offenders’ unit with 30 places, and the provision of additional places in the open prison. Further, Block 2 (A and B) for sentenced prisoners had been completely renovated. However, despite these improvements, the overcrowding in the closed prison remained significant with 523 inmates for 324 places.
...”.
Conditions of detention
material conditions
The CPT welcomes the steps taken by the authorities to improve the material conditions within the prison, notably as concerns Block 2 which underwent a complete renovation, including the installation of air conditioning units in the cells. It is intended that Block 1 will also be renovated to the same standard. Despite some wear and tear, Blocks 5 and 8 continued to offer essentially satisfactory material conditions. However, apart from Block 5A, serious overcrowding was evident throughout the prison. It was particularly evident in Blocks 1 and 2, where all the cells designed for single occupancy (some 6m²) were accommodating two persons. Cells of this size are hardly suitable for accommodating one person, never mind two. Further, in Block 1, the two association/television rooms had been converted into multi-occupancy dormitories with prisoners sleeping on bunk-beds. As a result, Block 1B which had an official capacity for 35 persons was accommodating 90 prisoners. The communal sanitary facilities were in an acceptable state of repair although greater efforts should be made to repair promptly the non-functioning urinals and toilets. Many complaints were also received of difficulties in accessing the toilet at night, including in Block 2 where an electronic recording system was in place which could note the time taken for a cell to be unlocked following a request to access the toilet. ...
...
The CPT recommends that:
...
- measures be taken to reduce the occupancy levels in Blocks 1, 2, 3, 5 and 8 throughout the prison. To this end, it should be ensured that those cells measuring under 7m² is only used to accommodate one prisoner and that the living space in multi-occupancy cells is at least 4m² per prisoner;
- steps be taken to ensure that a system is in place to ensure that prisoners who need to access the sanitary facilities during periods of lock-up are able to do so in a timely manner.
...
	b. regime
Prisoners continue to benefit from an open-door regime, which allows them to be out of their cells from 6 a.m. until 9 p.m. during weekdays and to spend some three hours a day in the outdoor exercise yards.
However, from discussions with inmates and prison staff, the lack of activities remains the most problematic aspect of the prison. ...”
In their response, also published on 9 December 2014, the Government repeated the comments they had made in their reply to the 2012 report concerning access to toilet facilities at night (see paragraph 27 above).
On 6 September 2011, the Ombudsman released a report on the conditions of detention and the treatment of detainees at Nicosia Central Prisons. The Ombudsman reiterated the CPT’s findings after its 2008 visit and, on the issues of overcrowding and unhygienic conditions, observed:
“[I]t is evident that detainees are kept in crowded and unsuitable areas for detention. There appears to be an insufficient number of hygiene facilities and showers in comparison to the number of detainees.
...
Furthermore, it appears that prison staff are unable to cope with the demands created by the high number of detainees. For instance, my office received a complaint that during the night cell bells are deactivated and detainees cannot notify on-duty staff to have access to the toilet or alert them in the case of an emergency. As a result, detainees are obliged to relieve themselves in their cells using bottles and waste-bags.
...
I am of the opinion that the above treatment is extremely degrading ... and it creates unhygienic conditions for everyone in the prison.”