The case originated in an application (no. 16812/17) against Georgia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two companies registered under Georgian corporate law, Rustavi 2 Broadcasting Company Ltd (hereinafter “Rustavi 2”) and TV Company Sakartvelo Ltd (hereinafter “TV Sakartvelo”), and two Georgian nationals, Mr Levan Karamanishvili and Mr Giorgi Karamanishvili, on 3 March 2017.
The applicants were represented by Ms T. Muradashvili and Mr D. Sadzaglishvili, lawyers practising in Tbilisi. The Georgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr B. Dzamashvili, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged that their various rights under Articles 6 § 1, 10 and 18 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention had been breached during the judicial examination of a civil dispute concerning the ownership of Rustavi 2 shares.
On 28 November 2017 notice of the application was given to the Government. The applicants and the Government each submitted written observations on the admissibility and merits of the application.
Submissions were also received from the Public Defender (ombudsman) of Georgia’s Office and the Georgian Young Lawyers’ Association who were granted leave by the President of the Section to intervene as third parties in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
On 27 May 2019 the applicants, referring in substance to Rule 28 § 2 of the Rules of Court, raised an objection to the impartiality of Judge Lado Chanturia. The Chamber examined it, pursuant to Rule 28 § 4 of the Rules of Court, and decided, by unanimous vote, to reject it as wholly unfounded on 11 June 2019.
The first applicant, Rustavi 2, is a television channel in Georgia that has been operating under this name since 27 August 1996. Its headquarters are situated in Tbilisi.
The second applicant, TV Sakartvelo, is a media company registered in Georgia on 16 July 1997. TV Sakartvelo is owned by the third and fourth applicants. In particular, the third applicant is a 60% shareholder, whilst the fourth applicant owns 40% of the shares in the second applicant.
The third and fourth applicants, Mr Levan Karamanishvili and Mr Giorgi Karamanishvili, are brothers and Georgian nationals who were born on 21 October 1971 and 11 January 1966 respectively and live in Tbilisi.
Rustavi 2 was registered on 27 August 1996 by three founding members – J.A., D.D. and E.K. It was established as the result of a reorganisation of the advertising agency Gama Plus Ltd, previously registered on 23 February 1995 by decision no. 2/38 of the Ministry of Justice of Georgia and owned by the above-mentioned three people. Thus, by 27 August 1996, the date of the original registration of the company, the only three owners of Rustavi 2 were J.A. (33.3%), D.D. (33.3%) and E.K. (33.3%).
On 29 November 2001 a private individual, N.T., purchased 10% of Rustavi 2 shares from the three founding members. The transaction was recorded by the Vake-Saburtalo District Court on 10 December 2001. Starting from the latter date the shares in the company were distributed as follows: J.A. (30%), D.D. (30%), E.K. (30%) and N.T. (10%).
On 16 June 2004, by two separate share-purchase agreements, a certain P.K. acquired 60% of the shares of Rustavi 2 from J.A. and D.D. (30% from each of them). On the very same day, P.K. sold his newly acquired 60% of Rustavi 2 shares to K.K., a businessman. Thus, starting from 16 June 2004 the shareholders of Rustavi 2 were K.K. (60%), E.K. (30%) and N.T. (10%).
On 22 June 2004 E.K. sold his 30% of Rustavi 2 shares to Panorama Ltd, a limited liability company exclusively owned by K.K.
On 22 October 2004, at a partners’ meeting of Rustavi 2 Ltd, N.T. ceded his shares of Rustavi 2 Ltd in favour of the remaining two shareholders, K.K. and Panorama Ltd. The cession of the shares was recorded by the Vake-Saburtalo District Court on 25 October 2004. Consequently, by 25 October 2004 K.K. and Panorama Ltd, the company exclusively owned by the businessman, became the sole owners of Rustavi 2 (both the individual and the corporate entity will be hereinafter jointly referred to as “K.K.”).
By a share-purchase agreement of 26 December 2005, K.K. ceded 22% of his shares in Rustavi 2 to a third party, H. Ltd.
On 13 September 2006 H. Ltd sold its 22% of Rustavi 2 shares to H.G.I.G. Ltd.
By two separate share-purchase agreements dated 17 November 2006, K.K. ceded the remaining 78% of his shares in Rustavi 2 to another third party, G.-T. Ltd.
On 29 November 2006 G.-T. Ltd disposed of 23% of its newly obtained Rustavi 2 shares to the above-mentioned H.G.I.G. Ltd.
On 1 December 2006 G.-T. Ltd ceded the remaining 55% of its shares in Rustavi 2 to an offshore company, D.R. Ltd. In that transaction, the latter company was represented by the third applicant.
On 2 February 2007 D.R. Ltd disposed of its newly acquired 55% of shares in Rustavi 2 to another company, G.G. Ltd.
On 10 October 2008 H.G.I.G. Ltd gifted 15% of its 45% of shares in Rustavi 2 to a certain individual, I.Ch. On the same day, and as another gift, I.Ch. received 15% of the 55% of Rustavi 2 shares owned by G.G. Ltd at that time.
On 18 March 2009 G.G. Ltd transferred the remaining 40% of its shares in Rustavi 2 to another new party, D. Ltd, for a symbolic price of 1 (one) Georgian lari (GEL – approximately 0.40 euros (EUR)).
On the same day, 18 March 2009, I.Ch. transferred 30% of his Rustavi 2 shares to the above-mentioned D. Ltd for a symbolic price of GEL 1 (approximately EUR 0.40).
On 28 November 2011 H.G.I.G. Ltd ceded the remaining 30% of its Rustavi 2 shares to a new actor, Ch.I. Ltd, for a price of GEL 160,000.
On 6 December 2011 Ch.I. Ltd ceded its newly acquired shares in Rustavi 2 (30%) to the third applicant for an unknown price – the value of the ceded shares were to be determined by an additional confidential agreement.
On 6 December 2011 D. Ltd transferred 60% of its shares to the third applicant and the remaining 10% to another individual, G.G for an unknown price – the value of the ceded shares was to be determined by additional confidential agreements.
On 4 October 2012 the third applicant ceded 40% of its 90% of shares in Rustavi 2 to M.G. Ltd.
On 9 October 2012 M.G. Ltd transferred its newly acquired shares in Rustavi 2 company (40%) to the fourth applicant.
On 13 and 14 November 2012, by a decision of the Rustavi 2’s board of shareholders, the company’s share capital was increased by an injection of additional real-property assets, and the second applicant, the company owned by the third and fourth applicants (see paragraph 8 above), was given 51% of the shares in Rustavi 2.
As a result of all the transfers of the Rustavi 2 shares detailed above, by the time the civil proceedings in the present case were initiated on 4 August 2015 (see paragraphs 48 and 74 below), Rustavi 2 was owned by the second applicant (51%), the third applicant (22%), the fourth applicant (18%) and N. (9%). N. was the wife of G.G., and she had inherited his shares on an unspecified date following his death (see paragraph 26 above and 74 below).
On 1 October 2012 a parliamentary election took place in Georgia. The Georgian Dream Coalition (“the GDC”), led by Mr Bidzina Ivanishvili, who had founded that political entity several months before the election, in April 2012, won the election with 54.97% of the votes, whilst the former ruling party, the United National Movement (“the UNM”), who had been founded by and closely associated with the then President of the country, Mr Mikheil Saakashvili, obtained 40.34% of the votes. As a result, the GDC formed the new Government and Mr Ivanishvili became Prime Minister. President Saakashvili, who had held the office of President for two consecutive terms from 25 January 2004, remained in the office until the expiry of his second mandate on 17 November 2013. Thus, between 1 October 2012 and 17 November 2013, there was a period of “political cohabitation” between the GDC and the Prime Minister, on the one hand, and President Saakashvili on the other.
The applicants brought to the Court’s attention a number of incidents which, whilst appearing to be independent of each other at first sight, revealed, in their opinion, signs of a well-orchestrated campaign led in the background by the GDC-formed Government against Rustavi 2.
According to the applicants, the 2012 parliamentary election campaign and the period afterwards were characterised by extreme polarisation. The GDC and its leaders voiced several threats against political opponents, with Rustavi 2 being a primary target. In that connection, the applicants referred to a televised interview that Mr Ivanishvili had given on 2 August 2012, that is to say prior to the parliamentary election, in which he had expressed views about an ownership row over Rustavi 2 and the interests of E.K. (one of the founders and former owners of the channel, see paragraph 10 above) and K.K. (another former owner of the channel, see paragraph 14 above).
The case file contains a full recording of that interview. It shows that the leader of the then opposition, Mr Ivanishvili, stated that he believed that E.K. had deceived Rustavi 2’s two other co-founders during the initial transfers of the shares in the company, by profiting the most at the expense of the others. He added that the details of those old transactions were, however, no longer worthy of any attention. Mr Ivanishvili further stated during the interview that, although he did not know K.K. in person, he had a good opinion of the latter, the businessman who, wishing to see the country develop, had initially been a supporter of the UNM. During the interview, Mr Ivanishvili pledged his support for the journalists of Rustavi 2 and stated that he hoped that they served the interests of the Georgian society.
On 5 October 2012 Rustavi 2’s two other co-founders, D.D. and J.A., who had founded the channel together with E.K. in 1996 (see paragraph 10 above), made a public announcement about their intention to institute legal proceedings to restore their title in respect of the company, which they had lost.
On 17 October 2012, during a televised interview on Maestro TV (another channel), K.K. stated the following:
“My main goal is to salvage [Rustavi 2] from the hands of liars and abusers, so that this channel can start serving the interests of truth [and] the interests of the Georgian people rather than the interests of falsehood.”
In the same interview, K.K. also stated that he was planning to claim back certain other business interests misappropriated from him by the former ruling forces, emphasising that “unlike Rustavi 2, those other companies [had] always [been] profitable entities.”
On 15 November 2012 Mr N.Gv., who had served as Deputy Chief Public Prosecutor, Minister of Justice and Minister of Education under the previous, UNM-formed government (see paragraph 31 above), was appointed Director General of Rustavi 2.
Shortly after his appointment, on 19 December 2012 a criminal case was instituted against N.Gv. for corruption offences allegedly committed in 2009, when he had held the position of Deputy Chief Public Prosecutor. He was released on bail pending trial. On 14 November 2013 the Tbilisi City Court cleared N.Gv. of all charges. The acquittal was subsequently upheld in full by the appellate and cassation courts.
On 25 December 2012 E.K., one of the founders of Rustavi 2 (see paragraphs 10 and 33 above), held a large news conference focusing on the details of the interview given by Mr Ivanishvili back in August 2012. During that conference, E.K. publicly announced his interest in claiming back Rustavi 2. In particular, E.K. stated the following:
“If [D.D.] and [J.A.] are the rightful owners, then I am a rightful owner too ... If [K.K.] is right, then I have the right to claim too ... No court can determine this property dispute without me ... I also want to tell Bidzina Ivanishvili to look into my eyes when he talks about Rustavi 2, since both of us know many things which, if revealed, could harm a lot of people.”
On 24 February 2014 the State Revenue Service commenced an inventory check of TV MR Georgia (hereinafter “TV MR”), the only company in Georgia which measured viewing figures at that time. Within the framework of that inventory, State auditors asked the company to reveal the addresses of all households across Georgia where so-called “people-meters” – electronic devices connected to television sets to monitor people’s viewing behaviour – had been installed. The company’s management refused to comply with the request, referring to the fact that the information requested was strictly confidential in accordance with a contract between the company and the participants of the survey. In reply, the State Revenue Service formally assured TV MR that the requested information would be kept strictly confidential as long as under Article 39 § 3 of the Tax Code of Georgia such type of information was classified as a tax secret, disclosure of which attracted administrative and/or criminal liability. The State agency further assured the company that there had been not a single incident of its having breached the confidentiality rules. Despite those assurances, TV MR refused to abide by the State Revenue Service’s orders, and that refusal resulted in the company being fined GEL 400 (approximately EUR 130) in accordance with the relevant domestic legal provisions.
On 19 March 2014 the Director General of Rustavi 2, N.Gv., publicly labelled the audit inspection of TV MR as a campaign against private television channels which received income from advertising. N.Gv. claimed that if TV MR revealed which households had “people-meters”, the relevant equipment would then need to be relocated to different, anonymous households, which would be a time-consuming exercise. N.Gv. expressed his concerns that Rustavi 2’s budget would shrink by half if viewing figures were not measured, since the amount of private advertising on the channel was largely determined by those figures.
On 6 May 2014 Rustavi 2 announced publicly that the Government had been illegally wiretapping its premises, and broadcast video footage anonymously obtained from the Ministry of Internal Affairs as evidence. The video footage was a recording of a conversation between the channel’s Director General, N.Gv., and his deputy. The Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office launched on the same day an investigation into the matter. Subsequently, N.Gv. rejected the investigation’s preliminary version of events, which asserted that the surveillance equipment might have been installed by the former ruling Government. On the contrary, he accused the new Government of having illicitly installed hidden cameras on the premises of the television channel through its “confidants” employed by the company. Shortly after the incident, the chief and the deputy chief of Rustavi 2’s security service were dismissed by N.Gv. for their purported role in the illicit wiretapping.
According to the applicants, various representatives of the GDC and members of the Government intensified their verbal attacks against Rustavi 2 during that period. Thus, on 2 July 2014 the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr K.Ka. (hereinafter “K.Ka.”), when solicited by journalists for his views concerning the history of numerous transfers of Rustavi 2 shares from one private party to another, made the following statement:
“Hopefully, Rustavi 2 will be returned to its owners, probably this time will come.”
In an interview given to a newspaper on 14 July 2015, E.K. (see paragraph 9 above) commented on the Deputy Prime Minister’s abovementioned statement:
“The Government is trying to gain influence over Rustavi 2 by entering certain alliances with my former partners [D.D. and J.A.]. ... [K.Ka.’s] statement regarding Rustavi 2 is a very interesting detail in that connection. He said that the channel would go back to its owners ... I openly declare that if any decision is taken with regard to the ownership of Rustavi 2, it will be a purely political decision rather than a legal one.”
In an extensive public interview given to a newspaper on 26 October 2015, one of the leading members of parliament from the GDC ruling coalition, G.T., referred to the court proceedings which had already been initiated at that time by K.K. in the following terms:
“[Rustavi 2] has not been an objective channel. It has been very partial. We have been in power for three years, we have done so much good for the country, and [Rustavi 2] has not said a single positive word about [our work] ... Only negative and subjective news ... It is natural that those in government are fed up with [this] misinterpretation of the facts ... They have found ... a true owner [who] has now appeared [მონახეს ... გამოჩნდა რეალური მეპატრონე] ... And it is only natural that the true owner is asking for a fair trial.”
On the following day, 27 October 2015, G.T. made another spontaneous statement during an argument with Rustavi 2 journalists:
“Tomorrow, Rustavi 2 will cease to exist.”
On 15 July 2015 E.K. was found dead in his car. A criminal investigation conducted by the Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office subsequently resulted in a finding that he had committed suicide.
On 4 August 2015 K.K., one of the former owners of Rustavi 2 (see paragraph 14 above), lodged a civil action against all four applicants. Details about the relevant court proceedings are provided below (see paragraphs 74-174 below). According to the applicants, K.K. was not randomly chosen by the State to carry out a judicial battle over the ownership of the company, as he was a proxy of the ruling forces, and his close relatives were open supporters of, and financial contributors to, the GDC.
On 21 October 2015 the Director General of Rustavi 2, N.Gv., made a public statement saying that middlemen with links to the law-enforcement authorities had attempted to blackmail him by threatening the safety of his family members and threatening to publish illegally obtained videorecordings allegedly depicting his private life if he refused to step down from his position.
After notice of the present application had been given to the Government, they objected to part of the facts as presented by the applicants for being deliberately misleading, incomplete or unrelated to the subject-matter of the dispute before the Court. They supplemented the contested facts with additional information. This information has either been already incorporated into the applicant’s version above (in so far as the correction of minor errors in relation to certain dates and figures, translation of the quotes from Georgian and other information of a purely editorial nature was at stake) or is presented in a summary manner below (where the objection to the facts was of a more substantive nature). The Government’s comments are structured around the same headings as those used in the applicants’ account of the events.
The Government contested the applicants’ statement that the 2012 parliamentary election campaign and the period afterwards had been characterised by extreme polarisation and that the GDC and its leaders had voiced several threats against political opponents, with Rustavi 2 being a primary target (see paragraph 33 above). They noted that the applicants had not provided any sources for such a strongly worded assertion.
As regards the public interviews given by Mr Ivanishvili and K.K. on 2 August and 17 October 2012, the Government did not contest the relevant quotations (see paragraphs 34 and 36 above), but insisted that those statements did not demonstrate any connection between the State and K.K. in relation to the civil proceedings instituted by the former against the current owners of Rustavi 2.
The Government further commented that the fact that a criminal case had first been instituted against Rustavi 2’s Director General for corruption offences allegedly committed in 2009, of which he had been subsequently cleared by the domestic courts (see paragraph 38 above), did not show that the State had been trying to silence Rustavi 2 or that the domestic judiciary had lacked independence.
The Government did not contest the applicants’ account of the interview made by E.K. on 25 December 2012, nor did it submit any additional comments in that connection.
As regards the inventory check that the State Revenue Service had conducted with respect to TV MR, the company monitoring people’s television viewing behaviour (see paragraphs 40 and 41 above), the Government submitted that the procedure in question, which had started long before the initiation of the judicial proceedings by K.K. against Rustavi 2’s owners (see paragraph 48 above), had been wholly unrelated to the latter proceedings and the subject-matter of the present application. The Government added that the inventory check could not have been used to target Rustavi 2 specifically, as any alleged negative consequences would have affected all other television companies in the country equally.
Concerning the incident of eavesdropping on the premises of Rustavi 2, the Government submitted documents confirming that, as soon as its Director General had made a public announcement (see paragraph 42 above), the Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office immediately launched a criminal investigation under Article 158 of the Criminal Code (breach of secrecy of private communication).
In the course of that investigation, the Chief of Rustavi 2’s security service, when interviewed on 8 May 2014, stated that on 21 December 2012 he had seen guards of the then President of Georgia, Mr Mikheil Saakashvili, who had been conducting certain technical work, with the use of special devices and a metal folding ladder, in the offices of Rustavi 2’s Director General and Deputy Director General. Having had no advance knowledge of that project, the chief security officer had immediately informed the Director General, N.Gv. The latter, however, had appeared to be calm and advised the former not to worry about anything and “to refrain from any extra initiatives in the future”.
The Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office also obtained, within the framework of the criminal investigation, footage from Rustavi 2’s surveillance cameras dated 21 December 2012 which showed images of men who had been, according to the prosecution authority, identified as former officers of the Special State Protection Service directly subordinated to the former President, Mr Saakashvili. The Government submitted a copy of that footage to the Court.
N.Gv., Rustavi 2’s Director General, was also interviewed by the Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office as a witness. He denied having had a conversation with the television channel’s chief security officer regarding the possible planting of the wire-tapping devices by men associated with President Saakashvili.
While not contesting the quotations from K.Ka.’s and E.K.’s public interviews concerning Rustavi 2 (see paragraph 43 and 44 above), the Government stated that the applicants had resorted to presenting selective quotations that had been purposefully detached from the overall context of the interviews. The Government emphasised that, since the civil proceedings concerning the ownership row over Rustavi 2 had attracted significant public attention, leading figures of the ruling party, such as K.Ka. and Prime Minister Ivanishvili, had often had questions put by journalists in relation to those proceedings to which they had obviously had to respond. Thus, the Government submitted excerpts from a number of other interviews given by the above-mentioned two public figures.
For instance, on 31 May 2016 K.Ka., when questioned by journalists, stated that “the civil proceedings [concerning Rustavi 2] represented a legal dispute between private parties, to be determined by the courts”, concluding that he was “unable to comment on the legal case.”
As regards E.K.’s claim that Mr Ivanishvili had envisaged gaining control over the independent media in Georgia (see again paragraph 44 above), the Government submitted that that had merely been E.K.’s personal opinion. There was no evidence to support such accusations against the then Prime Minister. On the contrary, the Government submitted documents which disclosed that, shortly after Mr Ivanishvili had become Prime Minister in 2012, he had sold a private TV company, called Channel 9, that he had owned for many years before that. In a public interview dated 19 August 2013, Mr Ivanishvili explained the rationale for his gesture stating that “the idea of [an official in] high political office owning a media company was not acceptable”.
During other public interviews, such as those given by him on 24 October 2015 and 7 June 2016, Mr Ivanishvili, who by that time had already stepped down from the office of Prime Minister, had stated that the civil proceedings concerning Rustavi 2’s ownership had been a purely private dispute, and that the current owners of the company should wait for the final outcome of the dispute, which could very well be in their favour. During the latter interview, he further stated that “even though [he] believe[d] that Rustavi 2 had been disseminating many lies, [he] personally still wish[ed] the TV company to continue broadcasting without any change, for the benefit of the upcoming 2016 parliamentary election.”
As regards the statements of G.T. (see paragraphs 45 and 46 above), the Government again objected that the applicants had been manipulating the Court by submitting only selective information. According to the Government, the truth was that two days after G.T.’s ill-worded statement, the Prime Minister and other senior members of the Government had stated that they had “categorically rejected the personal opinion of the member of parliament [G.T.] concerning Rustavi 2 TV company”. In general, the Government continued, G.T. was known for his extravagant public statements. Owing to his continued disagreements with the GDC, fuelled by his repeated scandalous public statements, G.T. had decided to step down from his parliamentary seat on 9 November 2015 and had quit the party. During the 2016 parliamentary election, G.T., already standing as an opposition candidate, had even contested a seat against the GDC.
On the other hand, the Government submitted that a truly leading figure of the GDC, the then Prime Minister I.Gh., had made the following statements in respect of the Rustavi 2 property row at the material time, that is to say in October-November 2015:
“Media freedom is of the utmost importance ... and the parties should let the impartial court reach an unbiased decision. ... [The Government] was happy to see the [Rustavi 2] channel broadcasting during the [civil] proceedings. The outcome of the case is however in the hands of the independent court, and should not be a matter of comment for political gain by any party.”
The Government contested the applicants’ reference to E.K.’s suicide as an attempt to make unsubstantiated insinuations with respect to the “tragic incident” (see paragraph 47 above). The suicide case had no relevance whatsoever to the civil proceedings disputed by the applicants.
The Government submitted a copy of the criminal-case-file material relating to E.K.’s suicide. From those documents it appeared that more than six hundred people had been questioned as witnesses and dozens of forensic examinations had been conducted with the participation of E.K.’s family members, lawyers and independent forensic experts nominated by his family members. All these investigative measures had led to the conclusion that E.K. had committed suicide. The Government emphasised that neither E.K.’s family members nor his lawyer had ever officially challenged any of the official findings of the investigation.
As regards the applicants’ claim that K.K. had been a proxy of the GDC (see paragraph 48 above), the Government contested that argument for being unsupported by any tangible evidence. In that connection, they added that K.K. had attempted to claim back ownership of Rustavi 2 as early as 1 December 2008, that is to say long before the GDC had been created (see paragraph 31 above).
The Government also submitted additional information concerning the civil proceedings initiated by K.K. aimed at correcting certain factual errors in the initial account submitted by the applicants. This additional information has been incorporated, where necessary, into the relevant text below (see paragraphs 74-174 below).
The Government contested N.Gv.’s allegations of blackmail (see paragraph 49 above) as unsubstantiated. They referred to the results of the domestic criminal investigation conducted in that connection.
According to the statements given by N.Gv. to the investigators, he had met on 21 October 2015 with his friend, A.A., who had allegedly conveyed a warning from the GDC that unless he stepped down as the Director General of Rustavi 2 and/or stopped disrupting the civil proceedings initiated by K.K., “they” would make public information about his private life contained in different telephone conversations, including one with the former President of Georgia, Mr Saakashvili, regarding the management of the broadcasting company.
On the basis of N.Gv.’s above-mentioned statements, A.A. had been questioned as a witness. The latter had confirmed his close friendship with N.Gv., as well as the fact that they had met on 21 October 2015. However, A.A. had categorically denied having delivered any type of message from anybody. Both N.Gv. and A.A. confirmed that no one else had been present at their meeting and neither side had recorded their conversation. Consequently, it had not been possible to take any other investigative measures. It had been merely N.Gv.’s word against that of A.A. The investigation had consequently been discontinued for absence of a crime.
The facts concerning the judicial determination of the Rustavi 2 ownership dispute, as submitted by both parties, may be summarised as follows.
As stated above, on 4 August 2015 K.K., who had been the owner of Rustavi 2 between 2004 and November 2006, lodged with the Tbilisi City Court an action against Rustavi 2, the first applicant, and its owners – the second, third and fourth applicants, as well as N. who owned 9% of the shares in the company (see paragraph 30 above). The two other defendants in the case were H. Ltd and G.-T. Ltd, companies to which K.K. had ceded 100% of his shares in Rustavi 2 by virtue of share-purchase agreements dated 26 December 2005 and 17 November 2006 (see paragraphs 15 and 17 above).
As regards the defendants H. Ltd and G.-T. Ltd, K.K. claimed that he had been coerced into selling his shares in the company to those companies by the leaders of the then governing party, UNM. He claimed that, as the then President Saakashvili had been dissatisfied with the editorial policy of Rustavi 2, he had summoned K.K. into his office and ordered him to cede his shares in the company to the two above-mentioned companies, which had been owned by trusted people from the President’s entourage. President Saakashvili had threatened K.K. by saying that the State would create problems for him and his family in the event that he refused to cooperate. Subsequently, K.K. had met with a number of other high-ranking State officials, such as the Minister of the Interior and the Chief Public Prosecutor, and they had all told him to comply with the President’s instruction. Consequently, K.K. had had no other choice but to sell his shares in the company to the other two companies under share-purchase agreements dated 26 December 2005 and 17 November 2006 for the total price of GEL 571,400 (approximately EUR 214,000). That price, which had been imposed on K.K. by the State, had been far below the actual value of the television channel. In his claim, K.K. thus requested that the impugned agreements be declared null and void ab initio for having been concluded in contravention of legal order and good morals and/or under duress, in accordance with Article 54 and/or 85 of the Civil Code (see paragraphs 183 and 186 below).
In support of his allegation of having been coerced into ceding Rustavi 2, K.K. submitted a valuation report assessing the market value of Rustavi 2. He also referred to the fact that, after having disposed of Rustavi 2 and many of his other business interests in Georgia, he had been obliged to leave the country together with his family for fear of further political persecution, and had been granted political asylum in Germany. In that connection, K.K. also submitted that, when residing in Germany, he had lodged, through his lawyers, a criminal complaint with the Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office on 1 December 2008 (“the criminal complaint of 1 December 2008”), exposing in detail all the circumstances surrounding the threats that he had received from the then President Saakashvili and certain other high-ranking State officials. As an additional proof of the existence of the criminal complaint of 1 December 2008 and of the fact of his political persecution, K.K. attached to his statement of claim the relevant excerpt from the US Department of State’s report on Georgia (see paragraph 223 below). He also attached a copy of his criminal complaints lodged with the Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office on 28 January and 12 March 2009 which reiterated the allegations that he had made in his first criminal complaint of 1 December 2008.
As regards the current owners of Rustavi 2, the second, third and fourth applicants and N., K.K. requested that, should the above-mentioned contracts of 26 December 2005 and 17 November 2006 be declared null and void, his misappropriated property – 100% of shares in Rustavi 2 – should be retrieved from their wrongful possession and returned to him. K.K. also requested that the current owners pay him approximately 18,000,000 United States dollars ((USD) – approximately EUR 15,000,000) for loss of income.
In relation to the first applicant, K.K.’s only claim was for him to be acknowledged as the creator of the channel’s logo and the author of three of its entertainment shows – Fort Boyard, Geo-Bar and Last Hero. K.K. also requested damages from the first applicant in the amount of USD 500,000 (approximately EUR 449,000) for the misuse of his intellectual property.
Pending a decision in the examination of the merits of his action, and in order to secure the proper conduct of the civil proceedings, K.K. also made an application for a preliminary injunction to freeze both Rustavi 2’s own assets as well as the individual owners’ shares in the company, so that the four applicants and N. would be prevented from either disposing of the company or making any other decision which could affect the company’s capital or functioning. As a further injunction measure, he also requested, as regards the copyright part of the dispute, that Rustavi 2 be prohibited from using its logo while the case was being examined.
Later the same day, 4 August 2015, K.K. retracted his application for the preliminary injunction in part, in so far as the request for freezing of Rustavi 2’s bank accounts was concerned.
All four applicants, as well as the two other defendants, H. Ltd and N., filed their written comments in reply to K.K.’s action. Amongst many other points, two major arguments raised by all the defendants were that K.K.’s action under Article 85 of the Civil Code had been clearly lodged out of time, contrary to Article 89 of the same Code (see paragraph 187 below). They also complained that the claimant had not submitted sufficient evidence in support of his allegation of having been subjected to undue pressure by high-ranking State officials. They stated that “the mere fact of lodging a criminal complaint with the Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office [was] not sufficient to turn the allegation of coercion into an established fact because the civil courts [were] free to establish their own facts during the examination of a dispute”. The applicants and the other respondents also mentioned that the price stipulated in the share-purchase agreements of 26 December 2005 and 17 November 2006 (see paragraphs 15 and 17 above) had more or less corresponded to what K.K. had himself paid for acquiring the shares in the company in 2004 (see paragraphs 12 and 13 above). The second, third and fourth applicants also claimed that they could not be considered as mala fide owners, as they had never had any direct financial dealings with K.K. in respect of the shares in the company.
In their comments, the applicants furthermore emphasised that Article 54 of the Civil Code was not applicable to the facts of the case, which ought to be examined rather under Article 85-89 of the Code. The relevant excerpt from their comments reads as follows:
“The legal grounds for allowing the claim [according to K.K.] are Article 54 and Article 85 of the Civil Code of Georgia. However according to the practice of the Supreme Court of Georgia, Article 54 of the Civil Code of Georgia cannot serve as the legal grounds for assessment of contracts made under duress. Articles 85-89 of the same Code should rather apply (see the judgment in case no. AS-1404-1622-05, delivered by the Supreme Court on 28 December 2006). However, in any event, it should be noted that the evidence available in the case and the argument presented by the claimant do not constitute sufficient grounds for the claim to be allowed.”
As to the remaining defendant, G.-T. Ltd, this company failed to submit any comments in reply to K.K.’s action.
Given that K.K.’s action of 4 August 2015 included, amongst other things, a copyright claim (see paragraph 78 above), it was assigned to Judge T.U., who was one of the three civil judges specialising in copyright disputes at the Tbilisi City Court.
On 5 August 2015 Judge T.U., who was dealing with K.K.’s application for a preliminary injunction, ruled that both Rustavi 2’s corporate assets and all of the owners’ shares in the company should be frozen while the case was being examined. The company was thus prohibited from interacting with the banking sector for the purposes of taking out loans, and from selling or renting out any of its real and movable property, such as buildings, land, broadcasting equipment, vehicles, and so on. The company was also prohibited from entering into possible mergers and acquisitions or implementing any other changes affecting its corporate structure. With respect to the intellectual-property dispute, the City Court rejected K.K.’s request that the first applicant be prohibited from using the logo of the channel while the case was being examined, as this would hinder the channel’s proper functioning.
However, the company was left free to continue using all of its property unhindered for broadcasting purposes. In addition, the City Court decided not to freeze the bank accounts of the first applicant following the withdrawal of this request by K.K. (see paragraph 80 above) and on the basis that such measures might impede the proper functioning of the first applicant and lead to its bankruptcy.
As regards the owners – the second, third and fourth applicants and N. – Judge T.U. specified that they should be prohibited from entering into any legal relations which could result in either the definitive or provisional disposal of their shares in the company, and that they should abstain from any acts which could have an impact on Rustavi 2’s financial sustainability and normal business activities.
In Judge T.U.’s opinion, the above-mentioned interim measures were necessary to ensure the proper administration of justice in the on-going property row between K.K. and the current owners of the company over Rustavi 2’s shares.
On 18 August 2015 the respondent applicants requested, under Article 26 of the Code of Civil Procedure, that the case be referred from the judge sitting in a single-judge formation to a bench composed of three judges of the Tbilisi City Court.
On the same day they also requested that Judge T.U. recuse himself from the examination of the case altogether because there was a strong belief that the examination of the case had started with “forum shopping” (a process whereby a litigant “shops around” in order to have his or her case heard by a favourable court). The applicants argued that K.K., being aware that Judge T.U. had been the only civil judge specialising in intellectual-property disputes on duty at the Tbilisi City Court on 4 August 2015, had artificially included in his action a clearly unmeritorious copyright claim.
By rulings of 11 and 14 September 2015, Judge T.U. rejected the applicants’ request for referral of the case to a three-judge bench, reasoning that involving three judges in the examination of the case might result in unnecessary delays in the proceedings. As regards the request for recusal, the judge stated that the applicants’ fears were unsubstantiated given that he was not the only judge examining copyright disputes at the Tbilisi City Court. Two other judges at that court possessed similar expertise. Judge T.U. also explained that the examination of the case had been assigned to him in alphabetical order, following the statutory requirement contained in section 5 of the Allocation of Cases to Judges Act of 26 June 1998.
On 29 September 2015 the third and fourth applicants signed a sale contract with a relative of the former Minister of Defence (“the buyer”), giving up their joint 100% of the shares in TV Sakartvelo for USD 400,000 (approximately EUR 358,000). In accordance with the terms of the contract, along with paying the agreed sum for the shares, the buyer undertook to invest USD 6 million (approximately EUR 5.2 million) in Rustavi 2, whose assets had been frozen since 5 August 2015.
A legal representative of the buyer of the shares from the third and fourth applicants requested that the Public Registry effect the formal transfer of the shares in TV Sakartvelo on the same day, 29 September 2015. However, the Registry refused to register the transfer because the power of attorney presented by the representative omitted to specify that he had been authorised to purchase the shares on behalf of the buyer. The Public Registry gave the representative thirty days to solve the shortcomings in the power of attorney.
On the following day, 30 September 2015, at around 2.30 p.m., K.K. lodged an application with the court for another preliminary injunction to freeze the assets of TV Sakartvelo as well. The application was allowed by the judge at 5.39 p.m. on the same day, and at 9.35 p.m. the Public Registry made the necessary records to freeze the second applicant’s assets.
The Director General of Rustavi 2, N.Gv., immediately made a public statement that the second court injunction of 30 September 2015 had made it impossible to enforce the sale contract of 29 September 2015 (see paragraph 92 above) and had thus cut off vital investment for the broadcaster. N.Gv. accused Judge T.U. of having been bribed by former Prime Minister Ivanishvili, and made statements in his address such as “soil will burn under the judge”, “he will never find a safe haven in this country” and, making reference to a Nazi connotation, he called Judge T.U. “a Sonderjudge” (for more epithets used by N.Gv. in relation to Judge T.U., see paragraphs 175 and 176 below).
On 12 October 2015 Rustavi 2 aired a journalistic investigation into a criminal investigation against Judge T.U.’s mother which was allegedly on-going. Journalists from the channel claimed to have discovered that the judge’s mother had injured her son-in-law, the husband of her late daughter, with an axe during a family dispute which had occurred on 7 January 2014. Immediately after the incident, the police had intervened and launched a criminal investigation. The injured person had been taken to hospital for medical assistance, but no charges had been brought against the judge’s mother at that point. According to Rustavi 2’s journalists, it was only on 24 September 2015 that the injured person had suddenly been declared a victim and the judge’s mother had been charged with the criminal offence of intentionally occasioning actual serious bodily harm. Interviewed by Rustavi 2’s journalists, the injured party asserted that, to the best of his knowledge, Judge T.U. had tried to assist his mother by using his authority and connections in the immediate aftermath of the incident of 7 January 2014.
On 13 October 2015 the Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office issued a public statement, categorically distancing itself from the on-going civil proceedings in the Rustavi 2 case and regretting that no information had been requested from it for the purposes of Rustavi 2’s journalistic investigation (see the preceding paragraph). The prosecutorial authority further outlined the reasons for the delay in bringing charges against Judge T.U.’s mother. In particular, the statement explained that the incident had occurred on 7 January 2014, during a family conflict between the woman and her son-in-law, after the former’s daughter (and the latter’s spouse) had died, leaving behind her twelve-year-old child. The investigation had been commenced immediately on the charge of intentional infliction of injury of a less serious nature (Article 118 § 1 of the Criminal Code). As the offence was classified as a less serious one under domestic legislation, and taking into account the age (seventy-five years old) and state of health of the offender as well as the interests of her grand-daughter, the investigative authorities decided, before charging the woman, to allow time for reconciliation with the victim. Such a procedural move was consistent with the well-established practice of the investigative authorities. However, after it had become clear that the parties had failed to reach reconciliation, the Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office proceeded, on 24 September 2015, with bringing charges against Judge T.U.’s mother and granting victim status to her son-in-law. The public statement further clarified that at the material time the investigation had already been concluded and the case was to be transmitted to the Tbilisi City Court for review, which minimised any influence the prosecutor’s office might have on the final outcome.
All the above-mentioned facts, mentioned in the Chief Public Prosecutor’s public statement of 13 October 2015 were confirmed by a copy of the relevant criminal-case-file material subsequently submitted by the Government in the proceedings before the Court (see paragraph 324 below). As was further disclosed by the Government’s submissions, Judge T.U.’s mother was convicted of the offence under Article 118 of the Criminal Code by a judgment of the Tbilisi City Court of 11 December 2017, and, given her age, she was given a suspended prison sentence. The conviction was never appealed against and thus became final.
On 16 October 2015 the Deputy President of Parliament, a member of the ruling GDC coalition, made a public statement about the journalistic investigation aired by Rustavi 2 on 12 October 2015 as well as about the personal affronts proffered by the channel’s Director General against Judge T.U. She called upon Judge T.U. not to withdraw from the case. The Deputy President stated that “judges must resist such types of assault and if they cannot endure this type of attack, [he or she] should not only withdraw from a case, but quit the judiciary altogether”. She added that Rustavi 2 was a politically biased television channel which had nothing in common with free speech.
On 19 October 2015 the applicants requested that Judge T.U. recuse himself from the case. The applicants first reiterated that there existed a fear that the examination of the case had started with “forum shopping” (see paragraphs 90 and 91 above). The applicants then referred to the fact that Judge T.U.’s mother had been accused of a criminal offence. They argued that, from the perspective of an objective observer, it might look suspicious that the criminal investigation had been revived and a charge formally preferred against the woman twenty months after the relevant incident, thus with a significant delay. Those dubious circumstances might lead the public to think that, by renewing the criminal case against the judge’s mother after such an inexplicable delay, a delay which coincided with the commencement of the examination of the Rustavi 2 ownership dispute, the authorities wished to obtain leverage over the judge.
As further grounds for requesting that the judge recuse himself, the applicants referred to a number of public posts that Judge T.U.’s wife had shared on social media (specifically her Facebook account). Notably, on 7 July 2015, that is before the ownership dispute was assigned to the judge for examination, his wife put up a post on Facebook concerning the latest episode of The X Factor, a television music competition franchise that was broadcast on Rustavi 2. Her status contained the following comment:
“Not an X but, excuse me, a Dumb Factor it is. First of all, why to make 13-year-old children sing songs that are absolutely not appropriate for their age, and then why reach a decision so cruelly and nastily, like a real redneck, a pleb, abandoning them without any way out. But then again, this is Georgia, where values that and priorities have been turned upside down, [that they] are being watched over by random and unacceptable members of the jury (it is clear to whom exactly I am referring).” (X  ფაქტორი კი არადა, მომიტევეთ, და შტერ-ფაქტორია, ჯერ რატომ ამღერებ არაასაკობრივ, 13 წლის ბავშვისთვის აბსოლუტურად შეუფერებელ სიმღერას და მერე ასე საზიზღრად და სასტიკად, ყოველგვარი გამოსავლის გარეშე, იღებ გადაწყვეტილებას. ყოვლად არაპროფესიონალურად, ხეპრედ. თუმცა ეს ხომ საქართველოა, სადაც პრიორიტეტები, ღირებულებები აღრეულია და მის სადარაჯოზე გაუგებარი და მიუღებელი ჟიურის წევრები (ნათელია, ვინც მყავს მხედველობაში) დგანან.)
On 13 August 2015, that is to say by the time her husband had already issued the preliminary injunction of 5 August 2015 freezing Rustavi 2’s assets (see paragraph 85 above), his wife, making allegorical references to Data Tutashkhia, a famous Georgian novel, had compared Rustavi 2 to Arkipo Seturi, a villain from that novel. The relevant public Facebook post read as follows:
“‘On the contrary, Asineta, on the contrary’ – this is a well-known phrase of a well-known literary character ... The only thing is that today Rustavi 2 is our [Arkipo] Seturi, the Father-Breadwinner, whilst Asineta appears to be the mindless part of our society.” (‘პირუქუ, ასინეთა, პირუქუ’ - ეს ცნობილი ლიტერატურული გმირის ცნობილი ფრაზაა ... უბრალოდ ახლა სეთური და მამა-მარჩენალი რუსთავი 2-ია, ასინეთა კი ქართული საზოგადოების უმეცარი ნაწილი.)
In another public post published on Facebook on 2 October 2015, Judge T.U.’s wife had shared a video from a satirical Facebook page called “Property-frozen Rustavi 2” (“ყადაღადადებული რუსთავი 2”). That video showed an interview given by the then Director General of Rustavi 2, N.Gv. back in 2007 when he had held the post of Deputy Chief Public Prosecutor. She had made the following comment on the shared video:
“Well, in comparison to the insane face he [N.Gv.] had yesterday, in that public appearance [in 2007] at least he had something of an exquisite villain [about him] ...” (ნუ, გუშინდელ შეურაცხად სახესთან შედარებით, ეს გამოსვლა დახვეწილი არამზადას გამოსვლას მაინც ჰგავს ...).
Judge T.U. examined and dismissed the applicants’ request for him to recuse himself on the same day, 19 October 2015. As regards his wife’s Facebook posts, the judge stated that she was an ordinary individual who was free to have her own opinions on various matters, and that as she herself was not bound by judicial ethics, she had never agreed those publications with him. The judge emphasised that he had not been aware of the existence of those publications and that his wife, unlike himself, could not be considered limited in the right to exercise her freedom of speech. The judge further attached importance to the fact that one of his wife’s Facebook publications only concerned the Director General of the television channel, and not the channel as such. He also underlined that N.Gv. himself, in his various public statements, had never hidden his intention to provoke the examining judge into behaving in an unethical manner by proffering various insults (see paragraph 173 below).
As regards the circumstances surrounding his mother, Judge T.U. firstly stated that, according to the Bangalore Principles of Judicial Conduct, she could not be considered part of his family because she lived separately from him at a different address, and was not economically dependent on him. He further stated that he had always distanced himself from the criminal proceedings against his mother. His personal curiosity in the case had been limited to soliciting information from his mother’s lawyers about the prospects of the case. According to information he had received from the lawyers, he knew that the impugned act had been committed by his mother as a result of justified emotional strain, since the victim – her son-in-law – had verbally harassed her on a regular basis. He also knew that, given the petty nature of the offence in question, the proceedings would probably be concluded with the ordering of victim-offender mediation.
Judge T.U. concluded by saying that, since the Director General of Rustavi 2, N.Gv., had orchestrated the public campaign against him, he, as the examining judge of the complex and sensitive case, had a moral and professional obligation to stay firm, sustain the pressure and prove that he could act with the requisite independence and impartiality. With all this in mind, the judge ruled that the application for him to recuse himself from the case was not justifiable and should be dismissed. The judge’s decision was later upheld by both the appellate and cassation courts (see paragraphs 147 and 173 below).
On 26 October 2015 the applicants lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court, requesting the striking down of the relevant provisions in the Code of Civil Procedure which allowed a court of first instance in civil matters to order the immediate enforcement of a decision even if a further appeal would normally lie against that decision. The complaint was a result of the applicants’ concern that K.K. could demand immediate enforcement of a first-instance court judgment in the event of winning the ownership dispute. On 2 November 2015, accepting the applicants’ constitutional complaint for examination, the Constitutional Court ordered the provisional suspension of the impugned provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Between 19 October and 3 November 2015, with the participation of both sides, Judge T.U. held eight full-day public hearings during which the merits of the case were examined. As confirmed by the transcript of the hearings, the second, third and fourth applicants had the possibility to freely challenge all the evidence adduced by the claimant, including the auditor’s expert opinion assessing the market value of Rustavi 2 (see paragraph 76 above) and Rustavi 2’s balance sheets on which the opinion had been based, and were able to question the auditor in person. On 3 November 2015 the judge delivered a judgment upholding a number of K.K.’s claims.
In his judgment of 3 November 2015 the judge dismissed as unsubstantiated K.K.’s claims regarding his intellectual property in respect of the logo and the three entertainment shows used and broadcast by Rustavi 2. Consequently, the judge also dismissed K.K.’s claim for damages in respect of the alleged breach of copyright (see paragraph 78 above).
However, Judge T.U. allowed K.K.’s claims in relation to H. Ltd, G.-T. Ltd and the current owners of Rustavi 2 – the second, third and fourth applicants and N. – by annulling the share-purchase agreements of 26 December 2005 and 17 November 2006 as null and void ab initio, and reinstating the claimant’s ownership of 100% of the shares in Rustavi 2. In arriving at that conclusion, the judge cited the following. Firstly, he noted that one of the legal grounds for lodging the claim for annulment of the impugned agreements had been Article 85 of the Civil Code on the basis of duress (see paragraphs 75 above). However, the judge observed that the claimant had failed to substantiate duress with sufficient evidence. Thus, although K.K. had lodged the criminal complaints, including that of 1 December 2008, regarding the loss of his business interests as a result of alleged pressure from the then President of Georgia, the mere fact of lodging those complaints, without the investigation having established any concrete facts, such as the actual use of threats or violence against K.K., could not be taken by the civil courts as proof of duress. Judge T.U. thus concluded that the claimant had failed to discharge the burden of proof.
Since the facts as presented by the claimants were not sufficient for the purposes of Article 85 of the Civil Code, Judge T.U. decided to assess the validity of the share-purchase agreements of 26 December 2005 and 17 November 2006 under Article 54 of the Civil Code, the other legal grounds relied on by K.K. in his statement of claim (see paragraph 75 above), by assessing whether or not the contracts could be found to be unenforceable on the grounds of public policy (see paragraph 183 below). In that connection, the judge referred to a State auditor’s expert opinion dated 9 September 2015 which had established that, using an asset-based valuation method (აქტივებზე დაფუძნებული მეთოდი) the value of Rustavi 2 – the company as such together with all its assets and liabilities – in 2005-06 had been approximately GEL 7,322,686 (approximately EUR 2,727,041). However, since the claimant had given up the company under the impugned share-purchase agreements for, overall, as little as GEL 571,400 (approximately EUR 212,766), that significant price difference itself meant that the contracts contradicted sound reason, ethical and equitable principles and public policy considerations. The judge also stated that the available case-file material did not confirm that even the derisory price stipulated in the impugned purchase agreements – GEL 571,400 – had in actual fact been paid to K.K. by G.-T. Ltd and H. Ltd.
The judge attached further significance to the fact that, after having acquired Rustavi 2 shares by virtue of the above-mentioned share-purchase agreements, G.-T. Ltd and H. Ltd had further disposed of those shares in very short periods of time, fourteen days and nine months respectively, at almost the same price for which they had been purchased from K.K. All those circumstances clearly suggested that neither of the two purchasers had ever been genuinely interested in acquiring and running the television company, and moreover that media had never formed part of their ordinary business activities. All in all, and particularly given the manifest difference between the value of the ceded property and the derisory payment received in exchange, the judge concluded that the share-purchase agreements of 26 December 2005 and 17 November 2006 had been illusory, entered into in disregard of various public considerations, and were unenforceable under Article 54 of the Civil Code. That being so, those agreements were also void ab initio, which entailed the extinguishment of all possible legal consequences relating to the conclusion of the defective agreements, pursuant to Article 61 § 1 of the Civil Code (see paragraph 184 below). In the light of the above factual findings, and noting that there were no specific statutory time-limits in relation to claims concerning ab initio void contracts, the judge decided to apply the general statute of limitations of ten years under Article 128 § 3 of the Civil Code.
The judge then continued by noting that it was legitimate for the shares in the company in the current owners’ possession to be retrieved in favour of K.K., given that they could not be considered bona fide purchasers. In that connection, the judge firstly noted that the third applicant, who had always run various businesses with his brother (the fourth applicant), had been the authorised representative of a company which had bought Rustavi 2 from G.-T. Ltd on 1 December 2006, that is to say only fourteen days after G.-T. Ltd had obtained the property from K.K. (see paragraphs 17 and 19 above). In other words, the third and fourth applicants had known about the derisory price for which K.K. had given up the television company, and thus should have realised that they had been acquiring property which had been clearly tainted. In that regard, the judge relied on Article 187 § 2 of the Civil Code, in accordance with which a third-party acquirer of movable property, such as shares in the company, could not be considered a bona fide owner if the property in question had been misappropriated from the original owner. In his reasoning, Judge T.U. also referred to the criminal complaint of 1 December 2008 as well as the follow-up criminal complaints lodged by K.K. with the Chief Public Prosecutors Office in 2008-09, by which the latter had brought the authorities’ attention to the wrongful acts committed against him. The judge considered that the existence of those criminal complaints should have rebutted the presumption of regularity of any subsequent transfers of Rustavi 2 shares in the eyes of the relevant domestic authorities.
In the judge’s view, being a mala fide third-party acquirer was not enough to make the person in question responsible for providing reimbursement in respect of the profit earned by the television channel. Consequently, the judge dismissed K.K.’s claim against the applicants for loss of income as ill-founded.
The parties could have lodged an appeal against the judgment of 3 November 2015 within fourteen days of having received a copy of the reasoning.
On 5 November 2015, following an application by K.K., Judge T.U. ordered another injunction in relation to the dispute. In particular, he appointed temporary managers for Rustavi 2, thus replacing the broadcaster’s Director General, N.Gv., and its chief financial officer.
As one of his justifications for issuing the injunction, the judge stated that, under the then management, the broadcaster was “overly focused” on coverage of the then on-going civil dispute, which could negatively affect the television station’s ordinary programming, resulting in a reduction in viewing figures. The judge also said that, in general, media outlets should provide coverage on all issues “of public interest” and not “concentrate on only one issue”. Judge T.U. further suggested that “it [was] questionable” whether the reporting activities of Rustavi 2, under its then management, had been “fair and objective”. Disregarding the duty to report in an objective manner “posed a danger to the main role and vocation of the media in a democratic society”.
On 13 November 2015 the Constitutional Court, accepting a second constitutional complaint by the applicants for examination, ordered the suspension of the application of the clauses in the Code of Civil Procedure by which Judge T.U had appointed temporary managers for Rustavi 2 on 5 November 2015.
On 27 November 2015 the Tbilisi Court of Appeal quashed Judge T.U.’s injunction decision of 5 November 2015.
In actual fact, the interim injunction of 5 November 2015 had never been implemented in practice for the period until its quashing, as the people formally appointed as temporary managers for Rustavi 2 had never in actual fact started exercising their duties.
On 12 August 2015 all four applicants lodged with the Tbilisi Court of Appeal an interlocutory appeal against the interim injunction of 5 August 2015 which had frozen some of Rustavi 2’s assets (see paragraphs 8588 above).
The applicants mainly argued that Judge T.U., in his injunction order, had not sufficiently explained whether the freezing of the company’s own assets and the owners’ shares in that company had been truly necessary. The judge had not elaborated on why it had not been possible to proceed with an examination of the property dispute on the merits without applying such drastic measures against the television company and its owners. The applicants complained of the disproportionate and sweeping nature of the interim measures applied, measures which had clearly interfered with their property interests. They feared that the actual result of the impugned measures would be the opposite of what the first-instance judge had allegedly pursued. Without being able to manage its various movable and immovable assets freely and fully, the television company could suffer serious financial setbacks, which would have an adverse impact on its ability to perform its media activities with the requisite independence. In that connection, the applicants specified certain particular aspects of doing business in the media sector, such as, for instance, the seasonality of media production, which created the need for maintaining permanent access to the banking sector. Citing the relevant case-law of the Constitutional Court of Georgia and the Strasbourg Court, all four applicants referred to both the company’s various proprietary interests as well as the first applicant’s right to impart information under Article 10 of the Convention.
The applicants’ interlocutory appeal was assigned to a civil chamber of the Tbilisi Court of Appeal, a bench which differed from the one which subsequently examined the merits of the case (see paragraph 134 below). That chamber rejected the appeal in a decision of 20 November 2015, slightly amending the scope of the interim injunction of 5 August 2015.
In its reasoning, the appellate court began by stating that the standard of proof in interlocutory proceedings was always lower than that normally applied by a civil court to the merits of a property dispute. Thus, it was not necessary to address the necessity of the applied interim measures from the standpoint of preponderance of evidence. Rather, in the appellate court’s view, it was sufficient to establish that a prima facie situation existed militating in favour of an interim measure. In that connection, the Court of Appeal referred to the history of numerous transfers of Rustavi 2 shares from one private party to another within very short periods of time (see paragraphs 10-28 above). Given the ease with which the television company had changed hands in the past, there was a prima facie risk that another change in ownership could occur whilst the proceedings on the merits were still ongoing, something which would unduly thwart the execution of a final court decision. It stated that the legitimate aim pursued by the interim injunction of 5 August 2015 had been the need to avoid the creation of any new barriers to the enforcement of a final court decision in the future.
The appellate court then addressed the question of whether all of the interim measures applied by Judge T.U. had been proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued. In that connection, the court stated that, whilst all the other freezing measures seemed reasonable, it could not comprehend the rationale behind restricting the company’s right to rent some of its various movable and immovable assets (see paragraph 85 above). That particular restriction, which did not have any relevance to the legitimate aim pursued, ought therefore to be lifted, and the television company would be allowed to rent a number of its assets for a limited but renewable period of time (thus rental contracts should not exceed three months).
The appellate court also addressed the prohibition on Rustavi 2 entering into any mergers or acquisitions (see paragraph 85 above). In that regard, it explained that the restriction only targeted the company’s external corporate structure. However, the measure should not be understood as preventing the company from implementing any internal organisational change which its director deemed necessary to maintain cost optimisation. The company was thus free to implement any type of internal organisational changes, such as those relating to hierarchy, employment contracts and various administrative procedures.
All in all, whilst upholding the majority of the interim restrictions applied by the injunction of 5 August 2015, the Tbilisi Court of Appeal’s decision of 20 November 2015 slightly amended the previous order by allowing Rustavi 2 to rent out some of its various movable and immovable assets. The appellate decision also confirmed that the company remained free to implement internal organisational changes.
In the operative part of its decision of 20 November 2015, the appellate instance noted that the decision was final and no further appeal lay against it.
On 15 December 2015 K.K. lodged an appeal against the firstinstance court’s judgment of 3 November 2015 in so far as the copyright claim against the first applicant and the claim for loss of income against the second, third and fourth applicants were concerned.
On 15 and 17 December 2015 the second, third and fourth applicants lodged, together with H. Ltd and N., an appeal against the firstinstance court’s judgment of 3 November 2015. Neither the first applicant nor G.-T. Ltd, the two other respondents in the case, exercised their right to lodge an appeal.
Amongst a number of other procedural issues, the appellant applicants, in particular the second, third and fourth applicants (hereinafter “the appellant applicants”), called into question Judge T.U.’s refusal to recuse himself from the case despite the existence of serious circumstances calling into question, at least from an objective standpoint, his independence and impartiality. In support of their grievance about the lack of independence and impartiality, they referred to the relevant domestic case-law and the Court’s case-law. The appellant applicants again referred to the fact that the criminal proceedings against the judge’s mother had suspiciously been renewed at the time of the examination of the case, as well as the fact that the judge’s wife had publicly expressed her utterly negative attitude towards Rustavi 2. They also complained that the preliminary and interim injunctions issued by the first-instance court had been manifestly disproportionate, and had not only affected the company’s purely economic activities, but had also interfered with the channel’s editorial freedom. The appellant applicants also referred to a number of statements made by various high-ranking State officials, including the Deputy President of Parliament (see paragraphs 34, 43, 45 and 99 above), which represented, in their view, an encroachment upon the independence of Judge T.U.
As to the merits of the judgment of 3 November 2015, the appellant applicants mainly focused on calling into question the evidential weight of the State auditor’s expert opinion of 9 September 2015, which had assessed the value of Rustavi 2 shares at the material time (see paragraph 111 above), as well as their inability to add various new documents to the case file. They further contested the application of Article 54 of the Civil Code to the circumstances of the case. The appellant applicants claimed that if the only grounds for annulling the share-purchase agreements had been the alleged discrepancy between the prices determined by those agreements and the actual value of the property in question, then the issue ought to be decided under Article 55 instead. The appellant applicants also complained that Judge T.U.’s reading of Article 187 § 2 of the Civil Code, on which basis he had refused them bona fide owners’ protection, had been inaccurate.
On 16 February 2016 the second applicant lodged a third constitutional complaint (see paragraphs 107 and 118 above) to challenge the constitutionality of Articles 89 and 138 of the Civil Code (see paragraphs 186 and 187 below). In its complaint, it noted that pursuant to “the practice of the domestic courts” Article 138 of the Civil Code paused the running of the limitation period of one year under Article 89, thus giving the interested parties an unjustifiable opportunity to circumvent the statutory time-limit.
The appellant applicants’ appeal was assigned to a civil chamber of the Tbilisi Court of Appeal composed of three judges – Judge N.N., Judge Sh.K., and Judge N.G, and on 31 March 2016 the thus composed appellate bench conducted the first preliminary hearing.
On 27 April 2016 all four applicants applied for one of the appellate judges, Judge N.G., to withdraw from the case for lack of impartiality. In that connection, they relied on two statements made by a non-governmental organisation – the Union of Judges of Georgia, an association of judges which had been founded by, amongst other people, Judge N.G and Judge T.U. – on 31 August and 20 October 2015. In those statements, amongst other things, the association had reproached the Director General of Rustavi 2, N.Gv., for having insulted Judge T.U., and had called upon the public and the media to allow that particular judge and the Georgian judiciary in general to proceed with the examination of the case in a respectful and calm environment (for more details, see paragraphs 179-181 below). The appellant applicants argued that, since the NGO had explicitly expressed support for Judge T.U., Judge N.G., as one of the founders of the NGO, had a clear conflict of interest.
According to articles on its association, the Union of Judges of Georgia was founded in 2013 by eighteen people, which included Judge T.U and Judge N.G. The proclaimed aim of the association’s functioning was “to enhance judicial independence and transparency, improve the process of the administration of justice, empower judges, support and strengthen self-regulation of judges, raise awareness and the legal culture of the society”. According to the information available in the case file, at the time of the examination of the ownership dispute, Judge T.U and Judge N.G. were, together with some fifty other acting judges, members of the association. In general, the Union of Judges of Georgia was known for having been actively involved in public discussion of all legal and other matters that affected the judiciary in Georgia.
The four applicants’ application for Judge N.G.’s recusal was examined and dismissed by the appellate court, with Judge N.G. not sitting on the bench, on the same day, 27 April 2016. The chamber ruled that the circumstances referred to in the application were insufficient for questioning Judge N.G.’s impartiality.
As confirmed by the minutes of the hearing held on 27 April 2016, the counsel for the first applicant acknowledged, during the exchange of oral arguments and in the presence of the legal representatives of the other three applicants, that one of the judges on the appellate bench, Judge Sh.K., was a specialist in criminal law.
During a press conference of 1 June 2016, the Director General of the first applicant publicly declared that the television channel had learnt about the initiation of a set of disciplinary proceedings against Judge N.G. for a breach of judicial ethics. He expressed a fear that the on-going disciplinary proceedings could be used by the authorities as leverage against the judge, thus casting doubt on the latter’s independence and impartiality during the examination of the ownership dispute.
On 7 June 2016 K.K. withdrew his appeal of 15 December 2015 (see paragraph 129 above). Despite that fact, and the consequential result of the first applicant no longer being a co-respondent in the proceedings, the lawyers of Rustavi 2 still continued with raising various procedural requests which were then addressed by the appellate and cassation courts.
On the same day, 7 June 2016, the final hearing was held. As confirmed by the transcript of that hearing, after the parties had finished the exchange of the pleadings, the second to fourth applicants made a formal, written request for the recusal of Judge N.G. referring to the fact that a disciplinary inquiry into a breach of judicial ethics and law had been opened against her. The applicants thus feared that the authorities might use the ongoing disciplinary proceedings as leverage to manipulate Judge N.G. The Tbilisi Court of Appeal left that request without examination, explaining its decision by the fact that the application for recusal had been lodged in breach of the procedural requirements contained in Article 33 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Specifically, the appellate court reproached the applicants for not having explained why they had not made such an application in due time, that is to say right after they had learnt of the relevant facts constitutive of the grounds for their application.
On 9 June 2016 the first and second applicants lodged an application for recusal of Judge Sh.K. Referring to the fact that Judge Sh.K. was a specialist in criminal law, the two applicants claimed that it was suspicious to have a criminal judge hearing a civil case. On the same day, the Tbilisi Court of Appeal, similarly to its previous decision of 7 June 2016, ruled to leave that application without examination for having been made in breach of Article 33 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Overall, eleven full-day public hearings were held before the Tbilisi Court of Appeal, during which the merits of the case were examined. As confirmed by the minutes of the hearings, the second to fourth applicants had uninhibited possibility to challenge all the evidence adduced by the claimant, including the relevant State auditor’s expert opinion. In addition, the three applicants were able to add to the case-file material, with the permission from the appellate court, an alternative expert opinion, issued by private auditors of their choice, assessing Rustavi 2’s value in 2005-06.
On 10 June 2016 the Tbilisi Court of Appeal delivered a decision, dismissing the appellant applicants’ appeal of 17 December 2015 and upholding the first-instance court’s judgment of 3 November 2015 in full. The decision did not list the first applicant, Rustavi 2, as a party to the proceedings in the light of fact that the latter had never lodged an appeal (see paragraph 130 above).
Similarly to the first-instance court, the Tbilisi Court of Appeal examined the ownership dispute under both Article 54 (contravention of legal order and good morals in contractual relations) and Article 85 (use of duress in contractual relations) of the Civil Code (see paragraphs 183 and 186 below). As regards the latter provision, the appellate court considered that the claimant, K.K., had not proved the existence of coercion. However, it upheld the lower court’s findings that the circumstances of the case fell more to be examined under the former provision, Article 54 of the Civil Code.
The appellate court then gave detailed explanations as to why the State auditor’s expert opinion of 9 September 2015 was a decisive piece of evidence, and why the respondents, despite a number of counter-arguments and submissions, had failed to refute that evidence in an effective manner. Applying the standard of proof of the balance of probabilities, the appellate court thus confirmed the existence of a manifest discrepancy between the price determined by the share-purchase agreements of 26 December 2005 and 17 November 2006 and the actual value of Rustavi 2 at the material time. The appellate court further confirmed the appropriateness of Judge T.U.’s decision to apply Article 54 of the Civil Code and the general tenyear statute of limitations (Article 128 § 3 of the Civil Code) to the facts of the case, and agreed that the current owners of Rustavi 2 could not be considered bona fide third-party acquirers.
As regards the complaint against Judge T.U.’s decision of 19 October 2015 not to withdraw from the case (see paragraphs 104 and 131 above), the appellate court’s decision of 10 June 2016 stated that the factual circumstances cited by the applicants in support of their allegations were not sufficient for calling into question the independence and impartiality of the first-instance judge.
On 17 November 2016 all four applicants lodged with the Supreme Court an application under Articles 196 and 199(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure (see paragraph 196 below). The applicants argued that the interim injunction of 5 August 2015 freezing Rustavi 2’s corporate assets and the owners’ shares in the company had been unlawful and disproportionate and should be lifted or replaced with a less stringent interim measure (see paragraphs 85-88 above).
With respect to the alleged unlawfulness, the applicants referred to the fact that K.K. had withdrawn his appeal in respect of his claims against the first applicant on 7 June 2016 (see paragraph 140 above). Consequently, the first-instance court’s judgment of 3 November 2015, whereby K.K.’s claim against Rustavi 2 had been dismissed, had become final on 7 June 2016. However, given that Articles 198 and 199(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure only provided for the possibility to apply or maintain an interim injunction against an actual party to proceedings, the continued application of the freezing order against Rustavi 2 had become unlawful on 7 June 2016.
As to the allegedly disproportionate nature of the freezing order of 5 August 2015, the four applicants argued that the continued application of the interim measure had unduly interfered with the first applicant’s ability to act as a successful and independent media outlet. As a consequence, the owners of the company, including the first, second and third applicants, had sustained pecuniary losses. The freezing order had had a damaging impact on the television company’s financial sustainability, which could lead to its insolvency and the cessation of its broadcasting activities. Should the cassation court decide that it was not possible to lift the interim injunction altogether under Article 199(1) of the CCP, the applicants requested that the part of the injunction forbidding Rustavi 2 to mortgage its real property and to take out loans from the banking sector be replaced with an injunction preventing the company (the first applicant) from paying dividends to its owners, the second, third and fourth applicants.
On 2 March 2017, after delivering a final judgment on the merits of the property dispute (see paragraph 164 below), the Grand Chamber of the Supreme Court issued a separate ruling rejecting the four applicants’ application to lift the preliminary injunction of 5 August 2015. In that ruling, the Grand Chamber briefly stated that, since it had already determined the subject matter of the property dispute over the shares in the company by way of a final judgment, in accordance with Article 199(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure it was no longer appropriate to address the applicants’ application to lift the already extinguished interim measure.
On 12 and 13 July 2016 the three appellant applicants, together with H. Ltd and N., lodged an appeal on points of law against the Tbilisi Court of Appeal’s decision of 10 June 2016. The arguments made in that appeal mainly reiterated those made in the appeal of 17 December 2015. The three applicants also challenged the various procedural decisions made by the appellate court, including those relating to their applications for the judges’ recusal.
On 9 September 2016 a civil-affairs chamber of the Supreme Court declared the three appellant applicants’ appeal on points of law admissible. On 21 November 2016 the chamber referred the case to the Grand Chamber of the Supreme Court for examination.
On 1 August 2016 K.K. submitted his written comments in reply to the appellant applicants’ appeal on points of law.
On 28 November 2016 all four applicants lodged an application for the President of the Supreme Court and another judge of the Supreme Court, Judge M.T., to recuse themselves from sitting as part of the Grand Chamber.
With regard to the President of the Supreme Court, the applicants referred to the fact that she might feel prejudiced against the Director General of Rustavi 2, N.Gv., since it had been he who had brought disciplinary charges against her back in 2006 while he had been a member of the High Council of Justice, and those disciplinary proceedings had resulted in her being dismissed from her judicial post at that time.
As to Judge M.T., all four applicants referred to the fact that, prior to being elected to the Supreme Court, she had worked as the head of the legal department of a bank owned by the former Prime Minister and the informal leader of the GDC ruling party, Mr Ivanishvili (see paragraph 31 above). The applicants also submitted proof that Judge M.T. had donated GEL 34,000 (approximately EUR 10,600) to the GDC between 2012 and 2014, a fact which proved that she had clear political sympathies for the current ruling party. However, given the political sensitivity surrounding the dispute over Rustavi 2, it was inappropriate for a judge with a clear political orientation to sit in the case.
On the same day, 28 November 2016, the second to fourth applicants submitted to the Supreme Court an amicus brief by a domestic legal expert on the points of law involved. The amicus brief dealt with, amongst other issues, the use of duress in contractual relations, within the meaning of Article 85 of the Civil Code. As confirmed by the case-file material, that report, which was not commented on by K.K., was added to the case file and duly taken into consideration by the Supreme Court in its judgment of 2 March 2017. However, the Supreme Court refused to accept certain additional pieces of evidence from the applicants, reiterating that its role under the domestic law was limited to the examination of points of law on the basis of the facts already established of by the lower courts.
According to the official version of events, on 1 December 2016 a nine-member composition of the Grand Chamber was formed and the case file was transferred to the relevant judges. At that time, the parties were not informed of the composition of the bench which had been formed. According to the applicants, however, the composition of the Grand Chamber was formed no earlier than 27 February 2017 (see paragraph 161 below).
On 6 and 17 February 2017 the appellant applicants inquired with the Registry of the Supreme Court about the composition of the Grand Chamber. The Registry of the Supreme Court did not disclose that information at that time.
On 27 February 2017 the Supreme Court officially informed the parties of the composition of the Grand Chamber, specifying that the case would be examined on 2 March 2017. It turned out that both the President of the Supreme Court and Judge M.T., whose recusal had been requested by the appellant applicants (see paragraphs 156 and 157 above), were sitting in the announced composition. The President of the Supreme Court presided over a nine-judge bench of the Grand Chamber.
On 2 March 2017, in addition to its separate ruling concerning all four applicants’ complaint about the interim injunction of 5 August 2015 (see paragraph 151 above), the Grand Chamber of the Supreme Court delivered another ruling addressing a number of procedural applications made by them (see paragraphs 152 and 155 above). The Grand Chamber delivered that ruling prior to its final judgment on the merits of the case (see paragraph 164 below). Amongst other things, the Grand Chamber dismissed the applicants’ application of 28 November 2016 for Judge M.T. and the President of the Supreme Court to recuse themselves. It stated that the grounds referred to by the applicants were insufficient for calling into question the judges’ impartiality and independence under either the subjective or objective tests under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. Specifically, in so far as Judge M.T. was concerned, the Grand Chamber stated that the applicants had failed to explain what the link between the judge’s personal experience and the subject-matter of the ownership dispute had been. As regards the President of the Supreme Court, the Grand Chamber firstly stated that, although N.Gv. had brought disciplinary charges against her back in 2006, this fact was irrelevant because he had not been party to the ownership dispute in question. The Grand Chamber also emphasised that the President of the Supreme Court had not examined the ownership dispute as single-judge but as a member of the collegial body composed of nine judges. The court then stated that the applicants had not presented any proof capable of showing that the President had expressed any negative statements or attitudes in respect of N.Gv. in relation to the events that had occurred more than a decade previously. The Grand Chamber further attached significance to the fact that, although the disciplinary proceedings had resulted in the President’s dismissal from her previous judicial post back in 2006, that disciplinary record had already been irrevocably erased and she had been able to obtain re-election to the highest judicial office in the country. These positive developments in her career further diminished the risk of the President’s feeling personal animosity towards N.Gv. owing to the past and by that time completed and irrelevant dealings.
Dispensing with an oral hearing, the Grand Chamber also delivered a final judgment on the merits of the case on the same day.
By a judgment of 2 March 2017, which was 190 pages long, the Grand Chamber of the Supreme Court, by unanimous decision, quashed the Tbilisi Court of Appeal’s decision of 10 June 2016 and decided the case anew. In its judgment, the first applicant was not listed as a party to the proceedings (see paragraphs 130 and 140 above).
The Grand Chamber reproached the two lower courts for having decided the civil dispute by applying irrelevant provisions from the Civil Code. Notably, it ruled that, given the particular factual circumstances, the dispute should not have been examined with reference to Article 54 of the Civil Code, which the lower courts had referred to, but rather in accordance with Article 85 of the Civil Code. Indeed, the essence of K.K.’s civil claim was proving that he had been coerced into giving up the television channel by signing the share-purchase agreements of 26 December 2005 and 17 November 2006 because of threats from high-ranking State officials, such as the President of Georgia, the Minister of the Interior and the Chief Public Prosecutor. The Supreme Court stated that examining the ownership dispute through the lens of Article 85 of the Civil Code did not involve a need for establishment of any new factual findings. On the contrary, the cassation instance specified, by reference to its previous case-law, that “duress was not a matter of fact but of legal evaluation”, stating that “the lower courts had erred in their legal evaluation of the factual description of duress.”
As to the statute of limitations applicable to claims for the annulment of contracts made under duress under Article 89 of the Civil Code, a statute which set out a period of one year, the Grand Chamber noted that, in accordance with the above-mentioned provision, the relevant period should have started to run from the moment the situation constituting duress had ceased to pertain. In K.K.’s case, since the duress had been the pressure exerted upon him by high-ranking State officials of the former UNM government, such a situation had lasted until the change in the ruling forces brought about by the results of the parliamentary election of October 2012. However, even prior to the change in the ruling forces, a fact which could have triggered the running of a statutory limitation period of one year under Article 89 of the Civil Code, K.K. had already exercised his right to repudiate as void the relevant share-purchase agreements by lodging a criminal complaint on 1 December 2008 regarding the misappropriation of his property by high-ranking State officials.
The Grand Chamber also developed an alternative line of reasoning with regard to the question of whether or not K.K.’s claim was time-barred. It suggested that, under Article 85 of the Civil Code, a claim to annul a contract resulting from coercion could also be lodged within three years under the statute of limitations applicable to civil wrongs under Article 1008 of the Civil Code (see paragraph 191 below).
The Grand Chamber also stated that, under a general provision of the Civil Code governing all types of statutory time-limits, notably Article 138 of the Civil Code, the running of a statutory time-limit could be interrupted by lodging either a court action or any other complaint claiming a pecuniary interest (see paragraph 188 below). That being so, the Grand Chamber concluded that, by lodging the criminal complaint regarding the misappropriation of his property by the State machinery with the prosecuting authority on 1 December 2008, K.K. had done nothing else but voice his claim over Rustavi 2. Consequently, it had been on 1 December 2008 that K.K. had interrupted, under Article 138 of the Civil Code, the running of the statutory time-limit of either one year – specifically applicable under Article 89 of the Civil Code to claims of duress within the meaning of Article 85 – or of three years – normally applicable, under Article 1008 of the Code, to all types of civil wrongs.
The Grand Chamber emphasised that provisions allowing claims for the annulment of contracts as null and void ab initio, of which Article 85 of the Civil Code (concerning contracts resulting from coercion) was an example, should be treated with utmost care. This was because the annulment of such a contract would result in the nullification of all legal consequences associated with the civil contract, which was prejudicial in respect of the principle of legal certainty.
As to the circumstances which proved that pressure had been exerted on K.K. by high-ranking State officials, the Grand Chamber listed the following:
The Grand Chamber then stated that K.K.’s reference to all those facts in his civil action was sufficient for a prima facie assumption that he had been subjected to pressure by the State officials when giving up Rustavi 2 in 2005 and 2006. That being so, the burden of proving that his allegations had been untrue had shifted onto the respondents, who, in their written submissions, had failed to effectively rebut the claimant’s allegations. In that connection, the Grand Chamber emphasised that one of the main respondents, G.-T. Ltd, had waived its right to submit written comments in reply to K.K.’s initial claim, whilst the written submissions of H. Ltd, another main respondent, remained silent on all the abovementioned four factual circumstances referred to by K.K. in support of his claim of duress.
Lastly, espousing the relevant part of the reasoning given by the two lower courts, the Grand Chamber confirmed that none of the current owners, particularly the third and fourth applicants and TV Sakartvelo, which the former owned, could be considered bona fide third-party acquirers and owners of Rustavi 2. By listing the sequence and the circumstances of various financial transactions which had occurred after K.K. had ceded the company to H. Ltd and G.-T. Ltd on 26 December 2005 and 17 November 2006 (see paragraphs 15-19 above), the Grand Chamber found it established that the third and fourth applicants had been aware from the very outset of the unfair and coercive financial obligations imposed upon K.K.
In its judgment of 2 March 2017, the Grand Chamber, amongst other procedural issues, also addressed the applicants’ complaints regarding the involvement of judges allegedly lacking independence and impartiality in the examination of the case, both at first-instance and appellate level. Those procedural complaints were rejected as ill-founded, with the highest cassation court confirming that both the first-instance judge, Judge T.U., and the appellate judge, Judge N.G., had been correct in their decisions not to withdraw from the case. In that connection, the Supreme Court stated that the epithets that the Director General of Rustavi 2 had levelled against the judges of the first and appellate instances, with Judge T.U. being the primary target, had been unacceptable insults that had gone beyond the limits of a permissible criticism. The Supreme Court also referred to the fact that during one of his televised press conferences the Director General, N.Gv., had publicly confirmed that he had intentionally been attacking Judge T.U. in order to provoke the judge and create a precondition for his recusal (a copy of the video recording of N.Gv.’s relevant public statements is also contained in the case file).
The operative part of the Supreme Court’s judgment of 2 March 2017 was issued to the parties on the same day. A copy of that judgment containing full reasons was served on the appellant applicants on 2 April 2017.
According to the video recordings available in the case file, as supplemented by the parties after the communication of the case, in addition to the statements that the Director General of the first applicant made with respect to Judge T.U. after the latter had issued the injunction order of 30 September 2015 (see paragraph 95 above), N.Gv. alleged further affronts against that particular and other judges who had taken part in the examination of the ownership dispute at the domestic level. Thus, between September 2015 and March 2017, during various public interviews broadcast nationwide by Rustavi 2, the latter’s Director General used such terms with respect to Judge T.U. including, amongst others, “illiterate”, “corrupt”, “puppet”, “pseudo-servant of Themis”, “armed with an axe”, “for-hire” and “scoundrel.” Then again, with respect to T.U. and certain other judges who took part in the examination of the case at the appellate and cassation instances, N.Gv. interchangeably used such epithets in respect of them as “slave”, “mob boss”, “executioner”, “criminal”, “ignorant”, “swindler”, “riff-raff”, “bribe taker”, “traitor”, and “shameful”, among others.
On 3 March 2017 Rustavi 2’s Director General addressed the Supreme Court of Georgia with the following statement: “The whole Supreme Court is one big bin that makes legal rubbish not legal decisions.” In the same public statement, N.Gv. also described K.K. as “the slave of Bidzina Ivanishvili” and the “Judas of all time”.
In addition, N.Gv. telephoned and recorded the conversation with the then President of the Tbilisi City Court, M.A., when the applicants’ case was being examined by that court. According to the recordings, which were publicly aired by several television channels in the country, N.Gv., in exchange for alleged financial assets, had requested that M.A. resign in protest and blame his resignation on the Government’s alleged pressure on the judges.
Later, during a public interview recorded on 4 October 2016, N.Gv. acknowledged that he had indeed recorded the aforementioned conversation with the former President of the City Court. The authenticity of the recording was subsequently confirmed by an official forensic examination.
On 31 August and 20 October 2015 the Union of Judges of Georgia, a national association of judges, made two public statements concerning the media frenzy surrounding the examination of the ownership dispute (see paragraph 134 above).
The statement dated 31 August 2015 read, in its relevant parts, as follows:
“... The statement of Rustavi 2’s Director General, broadcast live by the television channel, in which he used such expressions in respect of the examining judge [T.U.] as “Sonder-judge” who participated in an attempt “to overthrow the judiciary”, cannot be left unaddressed. ...
The Union of Judges respects the media’s work and expresses its readiness to keep the public informed and to support freedom of expression. However, it should be added that denigrating and menacing statements of representatives of media outlets, and insults proffered against judges and the judiciary, do not dignify the media environment, and the television channel in particular. Such an attitude gives an impression that a party to the proceedings was intentionally trying to belittle the judge’s dignity in the eyes of the public, to reach the subjectively desired outcome [in the dispute] by pressurising the court. We hope that that intent will not materialise and that the judges will not deviate from the principles of independence, impartiality and equality. ...
Freedom of expression is, without any doubt, the foundation for a democratic society and the representatives of State power must be tolerant of substantiated criticism. However, statements the sole purpose of which is to discredit a particular judge, to convey clear threats and insults, must be condemned. ...”
Most relevant excerpts from the statement dated 20 October 2015 read as follows:
“... For instance, the ... Director General of Rustavi 2 ... referred to a number of circumstances in support of the allegation that the examining judge [T.U.] lacked impartiality. On one occasion, the Director General referred to the judge as ‘a member of the Justice Minister’s team’ and ‘as a Sonder-judge acting under the latter Minister’s command’. On another occasion, the [Director General] accused the judge of corruption, notably of having accepted a bribe in exchange for delivering a biased decision. On yet a third occasion, Rustavi 2 television channel stated that the judge ‘was held in captivity by the prosecution authority’ in relation to the criminal case conducted against the judge’s mother. ...
What purposes do Rustavi 2’s Director Generals’ statements serve? It should be noted that he ... gave himself an answer to this question. He has never denied that all of his statements serve the purposes of artificially creating pre-conditions for requesting the recusal of the examining judge. ...
In the best interests of the judicial branch of power (and not in the interests of the individual judge in question), due consideration should be given to the two following needs:
Failure to respect the two above-mentioned requirements will undermine the right to a fair trial, which includes the right to have a case examined by an impartial tribunal. In such a situation, any type of decision with no matter which outcome delivered by any and every individual judge on the judicial dispute at hand could be perceived by the public as having been the fruit of undue influence on the judiciary.
The association of judges cannot stay dispassionate with respect to the abovementioned fact. This is not a single, isolated fact which would be left to oblivion with the passage of time. This fact could have long-lasting repercussions and be reiterated in the future. We believe that ... the various legal circles in the country should give an assessment of whether the conduct of Rustavi 2 and of its representatives falls within the scope of the freedom of expression ...”
A separate Chapter in the Civil Code, consisting of Articles 50114, was dedicated to issues pertaining to contractual law.
Articles 54 and 55 § 1 of the Civil Code read as follows:
“A contract that contravenes rules and prohibitions determined by law, or the public order and principles of good morals, is void.”
“1. A contract can be declared void if the difference between the assumed undertakings and the compensation proposed in exchange is strikingly disproportionate, and the contract has only been made because one of the parties has abused his or her market power or maliciously exploited the other party’s hardship or naivety.”
Pursuant to Article 61 § 1 of the Civil Code, a void contract was considered null from the moment it was made.
Sub-chapter II of the Code, consisting of Articles 72-89, addressed three particular types of void contracts – contracts made by mistake, fraud and those made under duress. Specific provisions in the sub-chapter further provided for special statutes of limitations in relation to renouncement of each of the three types of void contracts.
As regards a void contract made under duress, Article 85 of the Civil Code defined the concept as follows:
“The use of duress (force or the threat of force) for the purpose of inducing a person to enter into a contract entitles the latter to void the contract.”
However, Article 89 prescribed a specific statute of limitations in respect of exercising the right to void a contract made under duress, within the meaning of Article 85. This provision read as follows:
“Voiding a contract made under duress is possible within one year of the situation constituting duress ceasing to exist.”
A separate Chapter in the Civil Code, consisting of Articles 12146, was dedicated to general principles governing the calculation of various time-limits provided for in the Civil Code. In particular, Articles 128 § 3 and 138 read as follows:
“1. A statutory time-limit shall apply to the right to demand of another person that he or she perform or refrain from performing a certain action. ...
The general statutory time-limit is ten years.”
“The running of a limitation period is interrupted when the entitled person lodges an action with a court or otherwise voices a claim by applying with a request or statement to the competent State agency ...”
Article 187 § 2 of the Civil Code, which formed part of a Chapter dedicated to regulating ownership of movable assets (consisting of Articles 186-97), read as follows:
“2. A third-party acquirer of movable assets cannot be considered an acquirer in good faith if the original owner has lost the assets in question, [if the assets] have been misappropriated, or [if the acquirer has been] otherwise dispossessed against his or her will, or if the third-party acquirer has obtained those assets free of charge. These restrictions cannot apply with regard to money, financial securities and/or assets disposed of through a public auction.”
Another separate Chapter of the Civil Code, consisting of Articles 992-1016, related to civil wrongs. Article 992 defined a tort, as follows:
“A person who causes loss or harm either by unlawful, intentional or negligent conduct must provide compensation in respect of the damage.”
Article 1008 provided for a specific statute of limitations for tort:
“Damages in respect of a civil wrong can be claimed within three years of the injured party becoming aware of the existence of the harm or the identity of the wrongdoer.”
Article 2 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure proclaimed a general legal principle:
“Everyone shall be guaranteed judicial protection of their rights. ...”
Article 33 of the Code of Civil Procedure, which governed the procedure for lodging an application for recusal of a judge, read as follows:
“Applications for recusal of a judge are to be made by parties in writing. Such an application shall specify the grounds for recusal and shall be submitted during the preparation for a preliminary hearing. An application for recusal may be made later only if the grounds for recusal have become known to a person requesting recusal or have arisen after the commencement of the main hearing. In that case, an application for recusal may be lodged before the final exchange of arguments by the parties.”
According to Article 83, only formal parties to civil proceedings – a claimant, a respondent or a third party – could address a court and exercise their procedural rights by lodging applications.
Articles 88-92 of the Code of Civil Procedure regulated how third parties could become involved in civil proceedings. In particular, the provisions differentiated between two sub-categories of third parties: “a third party with an independent claim over the subject matter of a civil dispute” (Article 88), and “a third party without an independent claim over the subject matter of a civil dispute” (Articles 89-91). The legal provisions which referred to the latter sub-category read as follows:
“Any interested person who does not make an independent claim over the subject matter of the civil dispute at stake may apply for leave to intervene in the civil proceedings as a third party on behalf of either the claimant or the respondent if the outcome of these proceedings could affect [his or her] rights and responsibilities in respect of either of the two parties (the claimant or the defendant). After hearing the two parties’ observations on the matter, the court shall decide whether or not the application is to be allowed.”
Articles 191-99(1) formed Chapter XXIII on interim injunctions. The most relevant provisions from that Chapter read as follows:
“1. A claimant may apply to the court for an interim injunction. The application shall indicate the circumstances that could arguably suggest that, in the absence of the requested measure, the enforcement of a final decision in the case at hand, the restoration of the breached right or the retrieval of the claimed interest would become either impossible or highly complicated, or that direct and irreparable damage might be sustained. ... In the consideration of whether or not the requested measure should be granted, the court should be guided by, amongst other considerations, the prospects of the claim. This assessment [of the prospects of the claim] shall, however, be conducted without any prejudice to the final courts’ final decision on the merits of the claim. ...”
“1. The court delivers a ruling applying an interim injunction, which shall comply with the requirements of Article 285 of this Code and specify the exact nature of the measure applied.
The respondent may appeal against the ruling applying an interim measure. ...
The time-limit for appealing the court ruling on an interim measure shall be five days. This time-limit may not be extended and it shall commence once the ruling on provisional measures has been served on the respondent party.”
“1. Following an application by one of the parties to the proceedings, one type of interim injunction may be replaced by another.
The issues of replacement of one type of provisional measures by another may heard at any stage of the proceedings. ...”
“1. The court shall take into consideration an appeal [against the injunction order] in accordance with the procedure prescribed under this Code ...
If the court finds an appeal admissible and substantiated, it shall allow it. Otherwise, the appeal along with the case-file material shall be referred to a higherinstance court. ...
The time-limit for examining an appeal against the injunction order shall be limited to twenty days.
The complaint shall be heard by a higher-instance court according to the procedures provided for in Articles 419 and 420 of this Code.”
“1. The question of exactly what type of interim injunction should be applied in the case will be decided by the court on the basis of an application by the claimant containing reasons.
The following interim injunctions [can be applied in civil proceedings]:
“An interim injunction that has been applied with respect to a civil claim must be lifted by the court if the claim has been rejected, dismissed or left unexamined by the courts, or if the underlying civil proceedings have been discontinued in any other manner. The court’s ruling to lift the interim measure in question may be appealed to a higher court in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law. The interim measure must also be lifted if the parties have reached a friendly settlement, unless the parties themselves have agreed on another course of action.”
Pursuant to Article 393 §§ 1 and 2, only the lawfulness of an appellate judgment could be challenged in an appeal on points of law (cassation claim). The disputed judgment would be found to be unlawful if the appellate court had wrongly applied or interpreted legislative provisions.
Article 396 § 1 (f) required the appellant to mention in his or her appeal on points of law those facts which supported the alleged breaches of procedural law if the appeal on points of law was calling into question not only substantive but also procedural legal provisions.
Articles 399-412 of the Code of Civil Procedure formed part of Chapters XLIX-L that contained rules governing the conduct of the proceedings before the cassation court. The most relevant provisions read as follows:
“1. The cassation court shall review the [disputed] judgment only in so far as it was challenged in the appeal on points of law. The cassation court cannot go beyond the facts referred to under Article 396 § 1 (f) and enquire of its own motion into other procedural breaches.”
“1. The cassation court shall take into account the party’s submissions only in so far as disclosed by the case file or the appellate judgment; only the facts submitted under Article 396 § 1 (f) can be taken into account.
The establishment of the facts [by the appellate court] is binding on the [cassation] court, unless an additional and well-founded cassation argument has been raised.”
“3. In the event the cassation court finds it appropriate..., it can decide the case without an oral hearing. The parties shall be notified of such a decision.”
“The cassation court shall take a [final] decision itself if the circumstances of the case have been established by the appellate court without procedural breaches and there is no need for additional fact finding.”
“1. If it is not possible for the cassation court to decide the case in accordance with Article 411, it shall quash the appellate judgment and remit the case for a fresh examination.
If the cassation court quashes the disputed judgment because of the legal assessment, it shall indicate to the appellate court which circumstances of the case require additional examination, what kind of evidence has to be collected further and what other procedural acts are to be conducted.”
Articles 414-20 formed Chapter LI on interlocutory appeals. The most relevant provisions from that Chapter read as follows:
“1. An interlocutory appeal may be lodged against a court ruling only in situations expressly allowed by this Code.
An interlocutory appeal may be lodged by a party to the proceedings against whom the ruling has been delivered, as well as by a person who is directly concerned by the ruling.”
“An interlocutory appeal shall be lodged with same the court that has delivered the ruling. ...”
“An interlocutory appeal shall be lodged with the competent court within the time-limit of twelve days. This period cannot be extended or restored, and it starts to run from the moment the disputed ruling is served on or pronounced in the presence of the relevant party. ...”
“An interlocutory appeal, together with the case file, shall be sent [by the court that has received it] to a higher-instance court for examination.”
“1. The higher-instance court shall examine and decide on the interlocutory appeal within two months of its receipt. ...
The decision of the higher-instance court on the submitted interlocutory appeal is final and may not be appealed further.”
“An interlocutory appeal shall be examined by the relevant higher-instance court in accordance with the rules that are normally applicable to that instance of jurisdiction.”
Both parties submitted a number of the decisions delivered by the Supreme Court of Georgia as an illustration of how the various provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, notably those governing the interim injunction proceedings, were applied in practice.
Amongst the Supreme Court decisions submitted by the applicants, the summary overview of the most relevant examples is given below.
In its decision of 13 May 2016 concerning a civil case registered under number AS-277-263-2016, the Supreme Court, overturning a decision of a lower court, the Tbilisi Court of Appeal, stated, in paragraphs 12, 14 and 21-28 of its decision, that the right to appeal against an injunction order under Article 194 § 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure was limited not only to the respondent (pursuant to the strict reading of Article 194 § 2) but could also be exercised by an affected person, that is to say someone whose rights and lawful interests were affected by the impugned injunction measure (when Article 194 § 2 was read in conjunction with such general provisions as Articles 2 and 414 § 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure).
In paragraph 32 and the operative part of the same decision, the Supreme Court noted that an appeal lodged by an affected person against the injunction order ought to be examined in accordance with Articles 197(1), 419 and 420 of the Code of Civil Procedure, that is to say in accordance with the rules governing the examination of interlocutory complaints. Thus, such an appeal, lodged by an affected person, had to be examined first by the court which had ordered the injunction (the Tbilisi Court of Appeal), and only then could it be examined by a higher court (the Supreme Court).
In its decision of 6 April 2017 and 6 January 2015 concerning civil cases registered under nos. AS-175-164-2017 and AS-1135-1081-2014, the Supreme Court, upholding decisions of a lower court, the Tbilisi Court of Appeal, confirmed the rule contained in Article 199(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure, in accordance with which once a person had ceased to be the respondent in a civil case (that is to say when a claim directed against that respondent had been dismissed by a final and binding decision), the injunction applied with respect to that person had to be lifted even if the examination of the case continued on the merits with respect to other co-respondents.
The Supreme Court further confirmed the rule contained in Article 199(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure – the non-sustainability of an injunction measure with respect to a person who had ceased to be a respondent – ought to be examined in accordance with Articles 197(1), 419 and 420 of the same Code, that is to say in accordance with the rules governing the examination of interlocutory complaints. Thus, such an appeal, lodged by a claimant against the decision to lift the injunction affecting a former respondent, had to be examined firstly by the court who had authorised the lifting (the Tbilisi Court of Appeal), and only then could it be examined by a higher court (the Supreme Court).
In its decision of 29 December 2016 concerning a civil case registered under number AS-806-773-2016, the Supreme Court, upholding a decision of a lower court, the Tbilisi Court of Appeal, confirmed the rule contained in Article 199(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure, in accordance with which once a person had ceased to be a respondent in the civil case (that is to say when a claim directed against that respondent had been finally and irrevocably dismissed), the injunction applied with respect to that person had to be lifted even if the examination of the case continued on the merits with respect to other co-respondents (paragraph 14 and 15 of the decision).
The Supreme Court further interpreted Article 199(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure by ruling that when a civil court omitted to lift an injunction with respect to a person who had ceased to be a respondent in the case, that person, the former respondent, was entitled to apply for the lifting of the injunction at any later stage. The Supreme Court specified that such a right to request the lifting ex post factum was not subject to any time-limit and could be exercised at any moment. It further stated that any such application for the lifting of the interim measure ex post factum had to be lodged with the court in accordance with Article 197(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure, that is to say in accordance with the rules regulating interlocutory complaints (paragraph 15 in fine of the decision). In particular, the person who had ceased to be a respondent in the civil case had to lodge an interlocutory complaint first with the court that had omitted to lift the injunction measure, the addressed court then ought to take a decision on the lifting application, and only then could that decision be appealed to a higher court under Articles 197(1) § 4, 419 and 420 of the Code. This is exactly how the relevant complaint procedure had occurred in that case, and was approved by the Supreme Court as the appropriate procedural remedy (paragraphs 7-12, 15 in fine, 17-22 and the operative part of the decision of 29 December 2016).
In its decision of 13 November 2012 concerning a civil case registered under number AS-1185-1114-2012, the Supreme Court gave an interpretation of Article 196 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Notably, the court ruled that under the said rule either a claimant or respondent were entitled, as a formal party to the proceedings, to request replacement of an indicated injunction measure with another type of measure. It further specified that the exercise of that rule by a claimant or respondent could not be subject to any time-limit and depended only on a change of circumstances in the case at consideration. It also followed from the decision, notably from its operative part, that applications for the change of one type of injunction measure with another one could be lodged by either a claimant or a respondent in accordance with Articles 197(1), 419 and 420 of the Code of Civil Procedure, that is to say in accordance with the rules governing the examination of interlocutory complaints.
In its decision of 17 November 2008 concerning a civil case registered under number AS-934-1139-08, the Supreme Court, upholding a decision of a lower court, the Tbilisi Court of Appeal, confirmed that, under Article 196 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the respondent, a formal party to the proceedings, was entitled to apply for replacement of the object of the interim injunction from one type of asset with another (that is to say the kind of property affected by the injunction) at any stage of the proceedings. It also was clear from the decision that applications based on Article 196 of the Code of Civil Procedure could be lodged by either a claimant or respondent according to the procedure provided for by Articles 197(1), 419 and 420 of the Code, that is to say in accordance with the rules governing the examination of interlocutory appeals.
In its decision of 2 February 2016 concerning a civil case registered under number AS-1215-1140-2015, the Supreme Court confirmed the rule contained in Article 199(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure, in accordance with which once a person ceased to be a respondent in the civil case (that is to say when a claim directed against that respondent was finally and irrevocably dismissed), the injunction applied with respect to that person must be lifted even if the examination of the case continued on the merits with respect to other co-respondents. As attested by the civil case at hand, that rule was valid in relation to a corporate dispute, that is to say when a former co-respondent, who had successfully obtained the discontinuation of the interim injunction (freezing of its corporate assets) on the basis of Article 199(1), represented a company exclusively owned by a second corespondent with respect to whom the civil proceedings continued (paragraphs 11 and 12 of the decision).
The Supreme Court confirmed that an application for lifting of the interim injunction on the basis of Article 199(1) ought to be lodged with the court in accordance with Article 197(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure, that is to say in accordance with the rules regulating the examination of interlocutory appeals.
In its decisions of 6 March and 17 November 2017 concerning civil cases registered under nos. AS-28-25-2017 and AS-1113-1033-2017 respectively, the Supreme Court confirmed, on the one hand, that the exercise of the right to apply for a change of an interim injunction was attached to a party to the proceedings (claimant, defendant or a third party) and, on the other, that such an application was not subject to any time-limits and could be lodged at any stage of the proceedings. The Supreme Court further confirmed that an application for a change of an interim injunction on the basis of Article 196 ought to be lodged with the competent court in accordance with Article 197(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure, that is to say in accordance with the rules regulating the examination of interlocutory appeals.
Amongst the Supreme Court decisions submitted by the Government, the summary overview of the most relevant examples is given below.
In its decisions of 27 October 2014 and 19 April 2017 concerning civil cases registered under nos. AS-1102-1051-2014 and AS4714392017 respectively, the Supreme Court confirmed that, pursuant to Articles 197(1) and 419 of the Code of Civil Procedure, questions relating to interim injunctions only had to be examined at two levels of jurisdiction, and the decisions of a higher court, resulting from lodging of an interlocutory appeal, were final and binding, and no further appeal could lie against the final, appellate decisions.
In its decision of 18 May 2018 concerning a civil case registered under number 194-194-2018, the Supreme Court noted that the general principle contained in Article 2 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure – the right to judicial protection – could not be fused with the guarantee of applying to a court in breach of the relevant procedural requirements. By its very nature, the exercise of the right of access to a court had to comply with the various procedural rules. The civil procedure conferred not only rights but also various procedural obligations, and these obligations had to be complied with by everyone who wished to address to a court for the protection of his/her/its civil rights (paragraphs 12 and 13 of the decision).
In its decisions of 10 March 2015 and 29 July 2016 concerning the civil cases registered under nos. AS-116-109-2015 and AS6506212016 respectively, the Supreme Court confirmed, on the one hand, that the exercise of the right to apply for a change of the interim injunction was attached to a party to the proceedings (claimant, defendant or a third party) and, on the other, that such an application was not subject to any time-limits and could be lodged at any stage of the proceedings. The Supreme Court further confirmed that an application for a change of an interim injunction on the basis of Article 196 ought to be lodged with the competent court in accordance with Article 197(1) of the same Code, that is to say in accordance with the rules regulating the examination of interlocutory appeals.
In its decision of 30 September 2015 concerning a civil case registered under number AS-661-628-2014, the Supreme Court stated that “indirect evidence of duress can be presented before the court to substantiate the probable cause of the restriction of free will” in contractual relations, within the meaning of Article 85 of the Civil Code.
The Government submitted an illustrative example of the Supreme Court’s practice with respect to the application of Article 138 of the Civil Code (see paragraph 188 above). In particular, they submitted eight decisions delivered by the Supreme Court between 2002 and 2017 (that is to say before and after the final examination of the ownership dispute in the present case), all of which confirmed the principle of interruption of the running of any type of a statutory limitation contained in the Civil Code by bringing either a civil or criminal action.
In particular, in one of the above mentioned-decisions, delivered by the Supreme Court on 15 March 2002 in a civil case registered under no. 3/1186-01, which similarly to the case at hand dealt with the issue of the statute of limitations with respect to a contract made under duress, the Supreme Court ruled that, pursuant to Articles 85 and 89 of the Civil Code, the exercise of the right to void a contract made under duress was possible within a year of when the situation constituting duress had ceased to pertain. At the same time, according to Article 138 of the Civil Code, the running of the period of the statute of limitations should be interrupted if the rightful person brings a civil claim or tries to obtain the satisfaction of the claim by other means, such as by filing a document confirming the existence of the claim with any State agency or with a court, or by obtaining a writ of execution.
The Supreme Court found in the case under its consideration that the running of the limitation period of one year under Article 89 had been interrupted when R.K. (the author of the appeal on points of law in the mentioned case) had applied to a prosecutor’s office with a criminal complaint concerning the duress under which he had entered into a contract.
The Report issued by the Public Defender of Georgia on the situation with respect to human-rights practices in the country in the first half of 2008 confirmed (on page 85) the fact of the lodging by K.K. of a criminal complaint with the Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office on 1 December 2008 in relation to his alleged coercion into cession of Rustavi 2 shares.
An excerpt from the above-mentioned report by the US Department of State concerning the property row over Rustavi 2 read as follows:
“The privately owned national stations Rustavi 2 and Imedi, the country’s two most popular television stations, and the country’s public television station, were all generally considered to have a pro-government editorial policy.
In November 2008 Rustavi-2’s founder and former owner, [E.K.], alleged that authorities seized the television station from him in 2004. In December 2008 the next Rustavi 2 owner, [K.K.], filed a letter of complaint with the Prosecutor’s Office and Parliament alleging he was forced to give up his ownership of the station in 2006 under pressure from government officials. No action was taken on the letter.”
The Bangalore Draft Code of Judicial Conduct 2001 (hereinafter “the Bangalore Principles”) was adopted by the Judicial Group on Strengthening Judicial Integrity, and it was revised at the Round Table Meeting of Chief Justices held in The Hague in November 2002. The relevant principles contained therein read as follows:
“VALUE 1: INDEPENDENCE
Principle: Judicial independence is a pre-requisite to the rule of law and a fundamental guarantee of a fair trial. A judge shall therefore uphold and exemplify judicial independence in both its individual and institutional aspects.
Application:
1 A judge shall exercise the judicial function independently on the basis of the judge’s assessment of the facts and in accordance with a conscientious understanding of the law, free of any extraneous influences, inducements, pressures, threats or interference, direct or indirect, from any quarter or for any reason.
2 A judge shall be independent in relation to society in general and in relation to the particular parties to a dispute which the judge has to adjudicate.
3 A judge shall not only be free from inappropriate connections with, and influence by, the executive and legislative branches of government, but must also appear to a reasonable observer to be free therefrom.
4 In performing judicial duties, a judge shall be independent of judicial colleagues in respect of decisions which the judge is obliged to make independently.
5 A judge shall encourage and uphold safeguards for the discharge of judicial duties in order to maintain and enhance the institutional and operational independence of the judiciary.
6 A judge shall exhibit and promote high standards of judicial conduct in order to reinforce public confidence in the judiciary which is fundamental to the maintenance of judicial independence.
VALUE 2: IMPARTIALITY
Principle: Impartiality is essential to the proper discharge of the judicial office. It applies not only to the decision itself but also to the process by which the decision is made.
Application:
1 A judge shall perform his or her judicial duties without favour, bias or prejudice.
2 A judge shall ensure that his or her conduct, both in and out of court, maintains and enhances the confidence of the public, the legal profession and litigants in the impartiality of the judge and of the judiciary.
3 A judge shall, so far as is reasonable, so conduct himself or herself as to minimise the occasions on which it will be necessary for the judge to be disqualified from hearing or deciding cases.
4 A judge shall not knowingly, while a proceeding is before, or could come before, the judge, make any comment that might reasonably be expected to affect the outcome of such proceeding or impair the manifest fairness of the process. Nor shall the judge make any comment in public or otherwise that might affect the fair trial of any person or issue.
5 A judge shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any proceedings in which the judge is unable to decide the matter impartially or in which it may appear to a reasonable observer that the judge is unable to decide the matter impartially ... [p]rovided that disqualification of a judge shall not be required if no other tribunal can be constituted to deal with the case or, because of urgent circumstances, failure to act could lead to a serious miscarriage of justice. ...
VALUE 4: PROPRIETY
Principle: Propriety, and the appearance of propriety, are essential to the performance of all of the activities of a judge.
Application:
1 A judge shall avoid impropriety and the appearance of impropriety in all of the judge’s activities.
2. As a subject of constant public scrutiny, a judge must accept personal restrictions that might be viewed as burdensome by the ordinary citizen and should do so freely and willingly. In particular, a judge shall conduct himself or herself in a way that is consistent with the dignity of the judicial office. ...
6 A judge, like any other citizen, is entitled to freedom of expression, belief, association and assembly, but in exercising such rights, a judge shall always conduct himself or herself in such a manner as to preserve the dignity of the judicial office and the impartiality and independence of the judiciary. ...
8 A judge shall not allow the judge’s family, social or other relationships improperly to influence the judge’s judicial conduct and judgment as a judge.
9 A judge shall not use or lend the prestige of the judicial office to advance the private interests of the judge, a member of the judge’s family or of anyone else, nor shall a judge convey or permit others to convey the impression that anyone is in a special position improperly to influence the judge in the performance of judicial duties. ...
11 Subject to the proper performance of judicial duties, a judge may: ...
13 A judge may form or join associations of judges or participate in other organisations representing the interests of judges. ...”
In March 2007 the Judicial Group on Strengthening Judicial Integrity adopted the Commentary on the Bangalore Principles. Its relevant parts read as follows:
“65. Outside court too, a judge should avoid deliberate use of words or conduct that could reasonably give rise to a perception of an absence of impartiality. Everything from his or her associations or business interests to remarks which the judge may consider to be ‘harmless banter’ may diminish the judge’s perceived impartiality. All partisan political activity and association should cease upon the assumption of judicial office. Partisan political activity or out of court statements concerning issues of a partisan public controversy by a judge may undermine impartiality. They may lead to public confusion about the nature of the relationship between the judiciary on the one hand and the executive and legislative branches on the other. Partisan actions and statements, by definition, involve a judge in publicly choosing one side of a debate over another. The perception of partiality will be reinforced if, as is almost inevitable, the judge’s activities attract criticism and/or rebuttal. In short, a judge who uses the privileged platform of judicial office to enter the partisan political arena puts at risk public confidence in the impartiality of the judiciary. There are some exceptions. These include comments by a judge on an appropriate occasion defensive of the judicial institution, or explaining particular issues of law or decisions to the community or to a specialized audience, or defence of fundamental human rights and the rule of law. However, even on such occasions, a judge must be careful, as far as possible, to avoid entanglements in current controversies that may reasonably be seen as politically partisan. The judge serves all people, regardless of politics or social viewpoints. That is why the judge must endeavour to maintain the trust and confidence of all people, so far as that is reasonably possible. ...
The potential for conflict of interest arises when the personal interest of the judge (or of those close to him or her) conflicts with the judge’s duty to adjudicate impartially. Judicial impartiality is concerned both with impartiality in fact and impartiality in the perception of a reasonable observer. In judicial matters, the test for conflict of interest must include both actual conflicts between the judge’s self-interest and the duty of impartial adjudication and circumstances in which a reasonable observer would (or might) reasonably apprehend a conflict. For example, although members of a judge’s family have every right to be politically active, the judge should recognize that such activities of close family members may, even if erroneously, sometimes adversely affect the public perception of the judge’s impartiality. ...
A judge should discourage members of the judge’s family from engaging in dealings that would reasonably appear to exploit the judge’s judicial position. This is necessary to avoid creating an appearance of exploitation of office or favouritism and to minimize the potential for disqualification. ...
The generally accepted criterion for disqualification is the reasonable apprehension of bias. Different formulae have been applied to determine whether there is an apprehension of bias or prejudgment. These have ranged from ‘a high probability’ of bias to ‘a real likelihood’, ‘a substantial possibility’, and ‘a reasonable suspicion’ of bias. The apprehension of bias must be a reasonable one, held by reasonable, fair minded and informed persons, applying themselves to the question and obtaining thereon the required information. The test is ‘what would such a person, viewing the matter realistically and practically – and having thought the matter through – conclude. Would such person think that it is more likely than not that the judge, whether consciously or unconsciously, would not decide fairly’? The hypothetical reasonable observer of the judge’s conduct is postulated in order to emphasize that the test is objective, is founded in the need for public confidence in the judiciary, and is not based purely upon the assessment by other judges of the capacity or performance of a colleague. ...
Depending on the circumstances, a reasonable apprehension of bias might be thought to arise (a) if there is personal friendship or animosity between the judge and any member of the public involved in the case; (b) if the judge is closely acquainted with any member of the public involved in the case, particularly if that person’s credibility may be significant in the outcome of the case; (c) if, in a case where the judge has to determine an individual’s credibility, he had rejected that person’s evidence in a previous case in terms so outspoken that they throw doubt on the judge’s ability to approach that person’s evidence with an open mind on a later occasion; (d) if the judge has expressed views, particularly in the course of the hearing, on any question at issue in such strong and unbalanced terms that they cast reasonable doubts on the judge’s ability to try the issue with an objective judicial mind; or (e) if, for any other reason, there might be a real ground for doubting the judge’s ability to ignore extraneous considerations, prejudices and predilections, and the judge’s ability to bring an objective judgment to bear on the issues. Other things being equal, the objection will become progressively weaker with the passage of time between the event which allegedly gives rise to a danger of bias and the case in which the objection is made. ...
The judge’s family, friends, and social, civic and professional colleagues with whom he or she associates regularly, communicates on matters of mutual interest or concern, and shares trust and confidence, are in a position to improperly influence, or to appear to influence, the judge in the performance of his or her judicial functions. They may seek to do so on their own account or as peddlers of influence to litigants and counsel. A judge will need to take special care to ensure that his or her judicial conduct or judgment is not even sub-consciously influenced by these relationships.”
The Office of the Public Defender of Georgia, one of the two thirdparty interveners in the case (see paragraph 5 above), submitted its views on the media environment and challenges in the judicial system in the country. The most relevant excerpts from its written comments read as follows:
“At the outset, the Public Defender asserts that the independent media in Georgia is active and freely express a wide variety of views. However, as noted in the US State Department recent report on the Human Rights Situation in Georgia, the watchdog groups expressed concerns regarding a restrictive environment for media pluralism and alleged political meddling in the media, especially those critical of the government. In particular, concerns persisted concerning government interference with and criticism of alleged pro-opposition bias in some media outlets, in particular in the country’s most widely viewed television station, Rustavi 2. ...
Although the Constitution of Georgia provides for an independent judiciary, there are nevertheless indications of interference with judicial independence and impartiality. ... The Public Defender underlines that fair-trial guarantees include the obligation for courts to give sufficient reasons for their decisions. Nevertheless, the failure to give sufficient reasons for a court decision is again identified as a structural problem in Georgia.”
The second third-party intervener, the Georgian Young Lawyers’ Association (see paragraph 5 above), submitted its views on two legal issues: (i) the interplay between Articles 54, 85 and 89 of the Civil Code of Georgia and (ii) the principles on case allocation in domestic courts.
After having given its own legal analysis of the relevant domestic law and practice, the third-party intervener made the following concluding statements, summarising its findings, with respect to each of the two issues:
“30. Considering the above-mentioned, it should be noted that the existing judicial practice demonstrates that when a contract is invalidated on the basis of Article 85 [of the Civil Code], a one-year repudiation period, as set out in Article 89, must be observed by the claimant. ...
As the above-mentioned reveals, the rules governing the allocation of cases for examination play a vital role in upholding the impartiality and independence of the relevant judges examining the case and the absence of such rules could easily lead to abuse, which may jeopardise the internal independence of the judiciary. ...”