The case originated in an application (no. 10252/10) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Yuriy Borisovich Basok (“the applicant”), on 24 January 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr Anton Leonidovich Burkov, and previously by Mr V. Kapustin, lawyers practising in Yekaterinburg. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 15 May 2017 the Government were given notice of the complaints under Article 5 §§ 1 and 5, Articles 10 and 13 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1969 and lives in Zarechnyy, Sverdlovsk Region.
On 8 January 2009 the applicant was present in Yekaterinburg at the venue of a public protest against an increase in the tax on foreign imported vehicles. According to the applicant, he was acting as a freelance journalist for an Internet news portal. Seeing Mr D. – a senior official of the traffic police in charge of supervising the event – park his vehicle at a pedestrian crossing, the applicant or some other journalists present at the event venue made video recordings and took photographs of the vehicle. The applicant also tried to take a photograph of Mr D.
Allegedly, Mr D., inter alia, shouted obscenities at the applicant, slapped the applicant in the face, tried to grab his neck, and damaged his still camera. According to the applicant, those actions were seen by journalists and other officers. The incident received some media coverage.
On 15 January 2009 a police officer, Shch., submitted a report (рапорт) to his superior, indicating that (i) on 8 January 2009 he had been assigned the task of ensuring public safety during a protest rally; (ii) the applicant had been taking part in that rally and (iii) he was listed in the official database as an “extremist” who took part in protest rallies in Yekaterinburg.
It appears that on 23 January 2009 the applicant lodged an application to bring a private criminal prosecution for battery and insulting behaviour against D., but that application was turned down since at the time a criminal investigation had already been started (see below).
On 27 January 2009 the authorities opened a criminal investigation against D. in respect of the offences of causing wilful damage to property and of abuse of power by a public official (Articles 167 and 286 of the Criminal Code). The applicant was given victim status in the criminal case and also lodged civil claims against D.
As can be understood from the text of the bill of indictment, wishing to put an end to the applicant’s attempts to take photographs and his questioning, D. struck with his left hand the applicant’s still camera; the camera being close to the applicant’s face, D. also touched his face, thereby causing pain to the applicant. D. then grabbed with his two hands the applicant’s clothes and pushed him away slightly (to a distance of some two metres), also inflicting a blow to the applicant’s neck.
The case against D. was submitted for trial before the Verkh-Isetskiy District Court of Yekaterinburg in October 2009. In December 2009 the prosecutor dropped the charges, stating that there was insufficient evidence. On 21 December 2009 the judge validated this decision, referring to Article 246 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, and discontinued the case for lack of corpus delicti. On 3 February 2010 the Sverdlovsk Regional Court upheld the judgment, noting that the dropping of charges in a criminal case inevitably resulted in a judicial decision to discontinue that case.
The applicant again attempted to bring a private prosecution against D. for battery and insulting behaviour (under Articles 116 and 130 of the Criminal Code). On 27 January 2010 a justice of the peace declined to examine the case because D. had already been subject to criminal prosecution in respect of the same accusation (обвинение) relating to the same facts and a decision on it had been delivered on 21 December 2009. On 28 June 2010 the District Court upheld the decision of 27 January 2010. On an unspecified date, the Regional Court dismissed a cassation appeal lodged by the applicant.
The applicant lodged a constitutional complaint challenging Article 246 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. By decision no. 1711-O-O of 16 December 2010 the Constitutional Court of Russia declined to hear that complaint, noting that while a public prosecutor’s decision to drop charges did entail the discontinuation of a criminal case, it did not prevent the person concerned from lodging a separate civil claim later on and from securing the examination of that claim.
The applicant lodged a claim for compensation against the State in respect of pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage caused by an on-duty public official. By a judgment of 13 October 2010 the Verkh-Isetskiy District Court of Yekaterinburg dismissed his claim as unsubstantiated. On 25 January 2011 the Sverdlovsk Regional Court upheld that judgment.
At 11.30 a.m. on 31 January 2009 the applicant and two others were stopped by the police and then taken to a police station while they were apparently on their way to take part in a public event in the form of a meeting (митинг) organised by the local branch of the Communist Party that was scheduled to start at 1 p.m. According to the applicant, it was explained to him that he had been stopped because his appearance matched the description of a suspect in an unspecified robbery.
In the police station the police searched the applicant and seized several leaflets from a batch (entitled “Trust yourself, not the authorities”, “The Government – to be dissolved”, and “A call to the police”) that the applicant had in his bag, as well as an edition of a newspaper, People’s Friend.
The applicant was released two and a half hours later, after the end of the public event. No arrest record or other record was compiled in relation to the above-mentioned robbery or any other offence.
The police submitted the leaflets to the anti-extremism unit of the Department of the Interior. The latter ordered a linguistic expert report, which concluded that the leaflets contained incitements to racial, religious, ethnic and other forms of hatred. The report furthermore concluded that both the leaflet entitled “Trust yourself, not the authorities” and the newspaper contained calls to prepare for “difficult times” and thus fostered a “depressive attitude”, which in turn incited social enmity between different groups of the population. Overall, the material reflected the ideology promoted by the so-called National Bolshevik Party (Националбольшевистская партия), a prohibited organisation.
On 27 February 2009 the authorities declined to initiate criminal proceedings in respect of charges of extremism because the abovementioned material had not been disseminated.
The Kirovskiy district prosecutor’s office instituted court proceedings seeking to have the leaflets declared to constitute extremist material. It appears that at least two court hearings were held in March 2010. The outcome of the case is unclear.
In February 2009 the applicant instituted court proceedings under Chapter 25 of the Code of Civil Procedure, challenging the police officers’ actions in respect of him on 31 January 2009. The applicant argued as follows:
- the real purpose of his being taken to the police station had been to prevent him from taking part in the demonstration and from distributing leaflets; at the police station he had not been interviewed in relation to any robbery, and no related investigative measures had been carried out; instead, he had been “dealt with” by officers of the anti-extremism unit of the Department of the Interior;
-  the police had not compiled a written record in respect of his deprivation of liberty.
The police submitted to the court a list containing descriptions of several dozen alleged robbers.
On 13 July 2009 the Kirovskiy District Court of Yekaterinburg delivered a judgment. Having given a long summary of the anti-extremist legislation and the authorities’ actions in relation to the applicant’s leaflets, the court concluded that the applicant had been subjected to the escort procedure (доставление) under Article 27.2 of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”) and that the use of that procedure had been lawful, since the police had stated that the applicant had matched the description(s) of suspects issued in the course of pending robbery investigation(s). However, the court considered that the failure to compile an escort record had been unlawful. Lastly, the court summarily dismissed the remainder of the claims as unsubstantiated.
The applicant appealed, arguing, inter alia, that he had not been accused or suspected of any administrative offence; thus, it had been unlawful to use the escort procedure under the CAO, since his being taken to the police station could not have and had not pursued the statutory aim of compiling an administrative-offence record. In any event, that finding contradicted the authorities’ explanation regarding his resemblance to the robber in question.
On 20 October 2009 the Sverdlovsk Regional Court upheld the judgment, while noting that the first-instance court’s comment regarding the escort record had been “unnecessary”. The appeal court also stated as follows:
“[The applicant] was escorted by the patrol officers, who noticed agitated behaviour [on the part of the applicant and two others]. Upon seeing the officers they started to hide something and hand things over to each other ... [The applicant’s appearance] resembled a description of a person suspected of stealing mobile telephones ... The patrol officers decided to ascertain whether [the applicant] was implicated in those offences ...”