The case originated in an application (no. 50255/12) against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Hungarian national, Mr Péter Süveges (“the applicant”), on 2 August 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Kádár, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, relying on Article 3 of the Convention that the conditions of his house arrest amounted to inhuman and degrading treatment, under Article 5 §§ 3 and 4 of the Convention, that his detention had been unduly protracted and the proceedings concerning his motions for release were unfair. He also complained that his right to a fair hearing within a reasonable time had not been respected, in breach of Article 6 § 1 since the criminal proceedings against him had lasted an unreasonably long time. Moreover, relying on Article 8, he complained of a restriction on maintaining contact with his family members. Furthermore, relying on Article 9, he submitted that the restriction on his right to manifest his religion while in house arrest had been unjustified.
On 22 October 2014 the complaints concerning Articles 3, 5 §§ 3 and 4, 6 § 1, 8, and 9 were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The applicant was born in 1972 and lives in Budapest. He submits that he is a practicing Catholic. According to the documents in the case-file he is a teacher of religion by profession.
.  On 2 June 2005 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of misuse of explosives.
.  On 11 May 2007 the Central Investigation Prosecutor’s Office indicted the applicant in the Pest County Regional Court on charges of incitement to aggravated murder and unlawful possession of firearms and explosives.
.  The first hearing in the case took place before the Pest County Regional Court on 17 December 2007. Up until 10 March 2009 the trial judge, Ms K.B.H., held 24 hearings.
.  Later, the applicant was charged by the Budapest Chief Prosecutor’s Office with armed robbery. The two sets of criminal proceedings were joined by the Pest County Regional Court on 22 June 2009.
.  The applicant challenged the trial judge for bias, which motion was dismissed. At the applicant’s renewed request, the trial judge recused herself. A new judge, Ms Gy.Sz., was appointed to try the case. She held 11 hearings in the period June to December 2009. This judge eventually declared herself biased; and the case was assigned to yet another judge, Ms A.F., who held 23 hearings between September 2010 and April 2011.
.  Meanwhile, on 25 October 2010 the applicant was indicted by the Komárom-Esztergom Regional Prosecutor’s Office for aggravated murder. The case was joined to the ongoing criminal proceedings on 28 January 2011 by the Pest County Regional Court.
.  On 17 April 2011 applicant challenged Ms A.F. for bias. On 24 June 2011 the Budapest Court of Appeal dismissed this motion. It pointed out that the trial judge had declared herself impartial, along with the four other eligible judges of the Pest County Regional Court. Despite the decision of the Court of Appeal, the trial judge eventually recused herself, since, in her view, the applicant’s letters addressed to the Regional Court had infringed her dignity.
.  Subsequently, in July 2011 the case was assigned to another judge at the Pest County Regional Court, Mr S.P., who did not hold any hearing. On 25 January 2012 he also recused himself following the applicant’s different motions, apparently containing insinuations. The remaining three judges of the Pest County Regional Court declared themselves biased as well. On 31 January 2012 the Budapest Court of Appeal appointed the Budapest High Court to try the case. The trial judge at the High Court held the first hearing on 7 May 2012.
.  On 28 February 2014 the applicant was found guilty and sentenced to life imprisonment with the possibility of parole after 30 years.
On 2 July 2015 the second-instance court quashed this judgment and remitted the case to the first-instance. The case is currently pending there.
In the context of the above proceedings, on 4 June 2005 the Kaposvár District Court remanded the applicant in custody.
His detention was repeatedly prolonged at the statutory intervals until 30 May 2008 when the Budapest Court of Appeal suspended his detention and ordered him to serve a prison sentence which had become enforceable in connection to other criminal proceedings unrelated to the present case.
On 21 May 2010, on the new charges of aggravated murder put forward by the Komárom-Esztergom Regional Prosecutor’s Office, the Tatabánya District Court again remanded the applicant in custody. The decision was upheld on appeal by the Komárom-Esztergom Regional Court on 1 June 2010.
The applicant was actually placed in pre-trial detention again on 2 February 2011, after having served his prison sentence. He submitted that under the law, his detention should have been reviewed within six months, that is, on 2 August 2011 at the latest but that this had not taken place.
On 10 February 2011 the applicant filed an interlocutory application for his immediate release and placement in house arrest with the Pest County Regional Court. The court dismissed the application on the same day. The applicant appealed without success. His further requests for release or, alternatively, a less coercive measure were to no avail.
On 21 November 2011 the Budapest Appellate Public Prosecutor’s Office requested the Budapest Court of Appeal to review the applicant’s pre-trial detention under section 132(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
On 5 December 2011 the detention was extended until the delivery of the first-instance judgment under section 129(1)(b) and (d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (risks of absconding and of reoffending). The Budapest Court of Appeal held that there was a risk that the applicant might abscond given the seriousness of the charges and the gravity of the punishment and reoffend given that he was a multiple recidivist and the number of offences he was charged with.
The Kúria endorsed this decision on 6 January 2012, holding that the impending severe punishment substantiated the risk of absconding, due to which the applicant’s presence at the proceedings could not be ensured in any other way. It also observed that the last offence had been committed by the applicant during his conditional release from his nine-year imprisonment, thus there was a real risk of reoffending. The court dismissed the arguments put forward by the applicant concerning his health status, unspecified, and concluded that his personal conditions did not militate for a less severe measure.
The applicant’s pre-trial detention reached the statutory time-limit of four years on 2 February 2012. On 23 January 2012 the Budapest Surroundings High Court placed the applicant under house arrest with continuous police surveillance, to be carried out in the flat of Ms I.T, an acquaintance of the applicant. The applicant was allowed to leave the flat every second Wednesday of the month, between 8 a.m. and 4 p.m. The court noted that the reasons for the applicant’s detention were still valid, and a less restrictive measure was to be applied only because the statutory fouryear time-limit for pre-trial detention had expired. The court also dismissed the applicant’s request for release on the undertaking not to leave his place of residence. According to the court, the applicant’s argument concerning his mother’s ill health and the modest financial situation of his host could not serve as a ground for the application of a less stringent measure.
On 8 February 2012 the Budapest High Court extended the applicant’s house arrest until the adoption of the first-instance judgment. It noted that the applicant was charged with a crime punishable with 10 to 15 years’, or life, imprisonment which in itself demonstrated the risk of absconding. It also relied on the applicant’s previous criminal conduct and the number of offences the applicant had been charged with to find that there was a risk of reoffending
On 5 March 2012 the Budapest High Court granted the applicant’s request for leave for 21 March 2012 to visit his mother in hospital between 8 a.m. and 12 noon and to undergo dental treatment.
On 8 March 2012 the applicant requested his release from house arrest, pointing out that he had no income on his own and intended to work. He also produced a job offer from a company. His request was dismissed on 14 March 2012 by the Budapest High Court on the ground that no new circumstances existed that would affect the necessity of the house arrest.
On 16 April 2012 the applicant was granted exceptional leave from house arrest for every last Friday of the month between 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. to visit his hospitalised mother. The remainder of the applicant’s request, that is leave from house arrest twice a week, was dismissed.
His further request for extraordinary leave to visit his mother for five hours on 21 June 2012 and to study his case file at the premises of a non-governmental organisation was granted on 18 June 2012.
On 16 July 2012 the applicant was granted leave to visit his father in the town of Pápa on 28 July 2012 between 6 a.m. and 6 p.m.
The applicant’s further request for leave for medical reasons was granted on 18 July 2012. However, the Budapest High Court dismissed his application for leave so as to look after his mother on a daily basis, in particular to assist her with insulin injections. The court reasoned that Ms I.T., the applicant’s acquaintance and a co-defendant in the criminal proceedings, who lived in the flat of the applicant’s mother, could do so in his stead. The court also stated that lengthy daily leave would be incompatible with the house arrest.
The applicant’s further motions for leave to accompany his mother to medical examinations were granted on 20 July and 1 August 2012 for 23 July (between 3 p.m. and 10 p.m.) and 3 and 15 August 2012, respectively.
The applicant lodged further requests for leave in August 2012 to visit his terminally ill father in Pápa twice a month, to take his mother home after her hospitalisation and to make certain arrangements with her bank and her previous workplace, since she was under guardianship proceedings.
By a decision of 14 August 2012 the Budapest High Court granted the applicant leave to visit his father every fourth Saturday between 6 a.m. and 6 p.m., and to accompany his mother coming home from hospital on 22 August between 7 a.m. and 10 a.m. His request to visit his mother’s financial institution and workplace was dismissed, since he had not specified their addresses, whereas under section 138(1) of the Criminal Procedure Code, leave could be granted only for a specific time and destination. As regards the applicant’s more frequent visits to his father, the court noted that regular, long-term leave from the house arrest would jeopardise its purpose of securing the applicant’s presence throughout the proceedings. The applicant appealed, arguing that the time period to assist his mother was too short, that his father’s health was deteriorating fast, requiring more frequent visits, that is, every second week, and that he had already submitted the contact details of his mother’s financial institution and workplace. On 1 October 2013 the Budapest Court of Appeal, acting as a second-instance court, found that the applicant’s appeal concerning the restricted time to assist his mother was well-founded, nonetheless no longer pertinent, because she had already left the hospital. The remainder of the applicant’s appeal was dismissed.
The applicant’s further requests for leave to visit his ill father, lodged on 14 August and 2 September 2012, were not granted. The applicant’s father died on 8 October 2012.
On 10 October 2012 the court granted the applicant leave for the period 15 to 17 October 2012 to make arrangements concerning the funeral of his father.
On 3 December 2012 the Budapest High Court released the applicant from house arrest with an undertaking not to leave his place of residence. The court observed that there were no grounds to believe that the applicant would pervert the course of justice or reoffend. Nonetheless, in its view, he was charged with a serious offence requiring a coercive measure.
On appeal, the Budapest Court of Appeal reversed the first-instance decision and placed the applicant under house arrest on 20 December 2012. It noted that given the seriousness of the offence there existed a danger of his absconding and given his previous multiple convictions, a risk of reoffending.
On 21 December 2012 the Budapest High Court dismissed the applicant’s motion for leave to attend Mass on every Sunday between 7 a.m. and 11 a.m. and his further request for leave on 27 and 28 December 2012 and 2 and 4 January 2013. The court observed that the applicant, being a teacher of religion by profession, was not disproportionately restricted in the exercise of his religious conviction. This decision was upheld on appeal on 24 January 2013, the Court of Appeal holding that the applicant’s religious conviction did not justify the granting of permissions of leave from the house arrest; and that such permissions were normally to reflect an intervening change in the detainee’s personal circumstances. The court noted that such a request could only be granted if it was submitted concerning a specific place and purpose.
Meanwhile, the applicant’s host, Ms I.T. complained on a number of occasions to various authorities that the police officers surveying the applicant interfered with her private life. She also submitted that, as she had indicated from the beginning of the house arrest, she did not have the necessary financial means to accommodate the applicant.
On 7 January 2013 Ms I.T. submitted a motion to the Budapest High Court stating that the applicant was to leave her flat since she could not further provide for him. On the same day, the applicant requested the court to establish the place of his house arrest at a camping site in Nagyteve. He was informed by the court that, according to information received by the relevant authorities, the camping site was not suitable for residence during the winter. Notwithstanding this information, the applicant maintained his request.
A new decision was issued by the investigating judge on 8 January 2013 establishing the place of the applicant’s house arrest at the Nagyteve camping site. On 8 January 2013 the Pápa Police Department issued a report on the applicant’s presence at the camping site, stating that the “weather conditions, the lack of food supply and the poor hygienic conditions” endangered the applicant’s health. On 9 January 2013 the Veszprém County Chief Police Department lodged a request with the Budapest High Court to amend its decision of 8 January 2013 since the camp site was unsuitable for long-term residence.
On 14 January 2013 the applicant sought the termination of his house arrest again. His motion was dismissed on 16 January 2013 by the Budapest High Court, which stated that there was no reason to overturn the decision of 20 December 2012 and that he had been aware of the conditions of the camping site when he had requested to be committed there.
On 18 January 2013 the local general practitioner arranged for the applicant to be admitted to Pápa Hospital. The examinations carried out at the hospital did not result in the finding of any such disease as warranting the applicant’s further treatment, so he was released on the same day and placed in a social care institution in Pápa.
On 21 January 2013 the Budapest High Court amended its decision of 8 January 2013 and ordered the applicant’s house arrest to be carried out in the flat of Ms I.T. again. The applicant’s appeal against this decision was to no avail. In its decision of 26 February 2013 the Budapest Court of Appeal reiterated that the applicant was a multiple reoffender charged with serious crimes, thus the risk of absconding and reoffending existed. The court also noted that had the statutory maximum of detention on remand not expired, the most restrictive measure should have been applied. It further argued that the measure was not disproportionate, since the protraction of the proceedings had been compensated for by the statutory discontinuation of the applicant’s detention on remand. The court also dismissed the applicant’s argument that some co-defendants were released from house arrest.
On 10 July 2013 the Budapest High Court carried out the statutory review of the applicant’s house arrest and, at the same time, decided on the applicant’s request for release. During the court hearing the judge presented to the applicant and the prosecutor a letter allegedly originating from one of the applicant’s previous cellmates. The writer of the letter informed the court that the applicant intended to obstruct the criminal proceedings by physically threatening the investigating judge and subsequently requesting his exclusion for bias, initiating criminal proceedings against the trial judge for judicial errors and absconding and inciting the co-accused to do so. The applicant sought direct access to the document, arguing that without receiving information on the author’s identity he was unable to challenge this latter’s motivation and the credibility of the content of the letter. Relying on the protection of the author’s personal data as provided in section 60(1) of the Criminal Procedure Code, the court dismissed the applicant’s request.
The court upheld the applicant’s house arrest because of the risk of reoffending and absconding as provided in section 129(2)(b) and (d) of the Criminal Procedure Code. In its decision the court relied on the seriousness of the crimes and the gravity of the impending punishment in holding that there was a likelihood that the applicant would abscond. It also held that given the fact that the applicant was a recidivist, there was a risk of reoffending. In its decision the court mentioned the letter as one of the factual elements to consider.
On 22 July 2013 the Budapest High Court authorised the applicant to leave house arrest to undergo physiotherapy every second weekday in the period 22 July to 15 August 2013.
On 8 August 2013 the applicant’s request for leave to take up a job and to look after his ill mother on a daily basis was dismissed by the Budapest High Court, which found that such a daily leave would defeat the purpose of house arrest.
On 12 September 2013 the applicant was appointed as his mother’s guardian.
The applicant stayed in house arrest until 8 November 2013, when he was placed in pre-trial detention in connection with criminal proceedings concerning another offence.
As of 2 July 2015 the applicant has been again in pre-trial detention following the second-instance court’s decision to quash his conviction and remit the case to the first-instance.
“(2)  Pre-trial detention of a defendant may take place in a procedure related to a criminal offence punishable by imprisonment, and only under the following conditions: ...
b)  if, owing to the risk of escaping or absconding, or for other reasons, there is reasonable cause to believe that the presence of the defendant in procedural actions cannot be otherwise ensured,
c)  if there is reasonable cause to believe that if left at liberty, the defendant would frustrate, obstruct or jeopardise the taking of evidence, especially by means of influencing or intimidating witnesses, or by the destruction, falsification or secretion of physical evidence or documents, ...
d)  if there is reasonable cause to believe that if left at liberty, the defendant would accomplish the attempted or planned criminal offence or commit another criminal offence punishable by imprisonment.”
“(2)  Instead of pre-trial detention, the court may impose a home detention, house arrest or restriction order.”
“(1)  Pre-trial detention ordered prior to filing the indictment may continue up to the decision of the court of first instance during the preparations for the trial, but may never be longer than one month. The pre-trial detention may be extended by the investigating judge by three months at the most on each occasion, but the overall period may still not exceed one year after the order of pre-trial detention. Thereafter, pre-trial detention may be extended by the county court acting as a single judge by two months at the most on each occasion, in compliance with the procedural rules pertaining to investigating judges.”
“(1)  The court shall examine the motion to terminate the pre-trial detention in its merit, and deliver a reasoned decision thereon. Repeated motions may be rejected by the court without substantial justification, unless the defendant or the counsel for the defendant invokes new circumstances.”
“(1)  The court, the prosecutor and the investigating authority shall take all necessary steps to reduce the term of the pre-trial detention as much as possible. If the defendant is held in pre-trial detention, an extraordinary procedure shall be conducted.”
“(1)  In the event of a house arrest, the defendant may only leave the dwelling designated by the court and the enclosed area attached to it for the reason, at the time and within the distance specified in the court decision, thus especially, for the purpose of complying with everyday basic necessities or medical treatment.
(2)  The order, period, maintenance and termination of house arrest as a coercive measure shall be governed by the provisions pertaining to the order, extension, maintenance and termination of pre-trial detention.”
“(1)  The investigating judge shall hold a session if the motion pertains to the following subjects:
a)  the [first] ordering of a coercive measure entailing the restriction or deprival of personal freedom ...,
b)  the extension of pre-trial detention or house arrest, if a new circumstance [as opposed to the previous decisions] has been proposed [by the prosecution] to justify the prolongation of the measure ...”
“(3)  At the [court] session, the [prosecution] having submitted the motion [on ordering or prolonging pre-trial detention] shall present the evidence substantiating the motion in writing or orally. Those present shall be granted the opportunity to examine – within the limits set forth in section 186 – the evidence ... If a notified party does not attend the session but submitted observations in writing, this document shall be presented by the investigating judge.
(4)  The investigating judge shall examine whether the statutory requirements related to the motion have been met, whether there are any obstacles to the criminal proceedings and whether the motion is substantiated beyond reasonable doubt. In the cases specified in Sections 210 (1) a) to d) this examination shall also extend to the personal circumstances of the suspect.”
“(1)  Unless provided otherwise in this Act, the investigating judge shall deliver a ruling with the explanation of the reasons within three days following the submission of the motion, in which he consents – either wholly or partially – to the motion or rejects the motion. The explanation shall include the substance of the motion, the brief description and classification of the criminal offence underlying the procedure and state whether the statutory requirements related to the motion exist or are absent. If the investigating judge rejects the motion, the motion may not be repeated on identical grounds.”
“(1)  A decision of the investigating judge may be appealed by all those parties who have been notified thereof. Any appeal against a decision notified by way of oral pronouncement shall be lodged [orally] immediately after the pronouncement. ...
(5)  Regardless of an appeal, the order for a coercive measure entailing the restriction on deprivation of personal freedom may be executed [at once].”
Joint Decree No. 6/2003. (IV. 4.) IM–BM of the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Interior provides as follows:
“(1)  If the court orders the placement of the accused in house arrest, it designates the dwelling and its closed surrounding that is the usual place of residence of the accused as the place of house arrest.
(2)  In case of ordering house arrest, the court informs the accused that he can only leave the dwelling for the purposes, time and destination specified in the court’s decision.”