The case originated in an application (no. 74651/01) against the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by the Association of Citizens “Radko” (“the Association”) and Mr V. Paunkovski (“the second applicant”), the Chairman of the Association, on 30 July 2001.
The applicants, who had been granted legal aid, were represented by Mr Y. Grozev, a lawyer practising in . The Macedonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs R. Lazareska Gerovska.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the dissolution of the Association was in breach of Article 11 of the Convention. The second applicant complained also that such dissolution had violated his rights under Article 10 of the Convention.
On 3 November 2005 the Chamber communicated the case to the respondent Government and put additional questions on 9 July 2007 (Rule 54 § 2 (b)). The parties replied in writing to each other’s observations. In addition, third-party comments were received from the Bulgarian Government, which had exercised its right to intervene (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 (b)). The parties replied to those comments (Rule 44 § 5).
A hearing on admissibility and the merits took place in public in the Human Rights Building, , on 19 June 2008 (Rule 54 § 3).
There appeared before the Court:
The second applicant was also present.
The Court heard addresses by Ms Lazareska Gerovska, Mr Grozev and Ms Atanasova.
By a decision of 8 July 2008, the Court declared the application admissible.
On 20 August 2008 the applicants submitted their just satisfaction requests under Article 41 of the Convention. On 22 September 2008 the respondent Government presented their comments in this regard.
The second applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Ohrid, the .
On 24 May 2000 ten Macedonian nationals, including the second applicant, founded the Association in the city of . On 19 June 2000 the Ohrid Court of First Instance registered the Association in the register of associations of citizens and foundations under the following name: “Association of Citizens Radko-Ohrid”.
Article 3 of the Articles of Association (“the Articles”) defined the Association as an independent, non-political and public organisation, which studies and promotes the Macedonian Liberation Movement (“the Movement”) through commonly accepted democratic principles and standards.
Article 7 defined its objectives and tasks as follows:
Article 8 set out that the Association will attain these objectives and tasks through:
Article 9 provided that every citizen who accepted the Association’s Programme could become a member.
Article 10 § 1 provided:
The Association’s Programme of 24 May 2000 consisted of two paragraphs. It read as follows:
On 27 October 2000 the official launch of the Association took place in a hotel in Skopje, the capital of the . A promotional leaflet by the Association (which accompanied the letters of invitation for the opening ceremony) was published at the beginning of October. It provided information about the Association’s name, objectives and the ways in which these were to be achieved. It read:
After the opening speech by the Chairman of the Association and a solemn performance of the anthem of Todor Alexandrov, three young men threw smoke bombs inside the conference hall, which caused a temporary delay. Some of the participants started to beat and kick the young men. The latter managed to escape, but a retired journalist was injured. According to the daily newspaper “Utrinski vesnik” of 30 October 2000, he sustained a “fracture of his left hand and blood on his face”.
On 7 October 2005 the Skopje Court of First Instance convicted two persons of causing grievous bodily injury and sentenced them to three months’ imprisonment. It found that the perpetrators had pushed the journalist, who had sustained a fracture of the forearm. One of the perpetrators was a member of the Association.
There was a strong media campaign before and after the launch of the Association, condemning its foundation and functioning as contrary to the Macedonian national identity. The Association was described as “fascist” and as rehabilitating “terrorism and fascism, which were the basic characteristics of Hitler’s collaborator Vančo Mihajlov” (excerpts from the newspapers “Utrinski vesnik”, mentioned above, and “Dnevnik” from 24 October 2000).
In or about October 2000 three practising lawyers from Skopje, together with a political party and the Association of War Veterans from the Second World War filed petitions before the Constitutional Court challenging the conformity of the Association’s Articles and Programme with Article 20 of the Constitution. They also challenged the lawfulness of the Ohrid court’s decision to register the Association.
The petitioners, inter alia, stressed that:
The petitioners noted that all the Association’s documents bore the flag of Vančo Mihajlov. They continued:
On 8 November 2000 the  sent the petitions for reply to the second applicant, as Chairman of the Association. The Association contested the petitioners’ arguments as its Articles and Programme did not contain any elements that would incite to national, religious or racial hatred or intolerance or would advocate violent destruction of the constitutional order.
On 17 January 2001 the  declared the petition admissible. The court found, inter alia, that there existed:
It further declared itself incompetent to judge the constitutionality of the registration decision of the Ohrid Court of First Instance, because it was not vested with jurisdiction to decide on such decisions.
On 21 March 2001 the  declared the Association’s Articles and Programme null and void, on the ground that they were directed towards violent destruction of the constitutional order and incitement to national or religious hatred or intolerance.
The  based its decision on the following reasoning:
As regards freedom of association, the  argued as follows:
Applying these criteria to the present case, the  held as follows:
On 10 April 2001 the ’s decision was published in the “Official Gazette of the ” and became final and enforceable.
On 16 January 2002 the Ohrid Court of First Instance ex officio decided to terminate the activities of the Association (се утврдува престанок на работа на Здружението).
On 29 January 2002 the applicants appealed the latter decision. They complained that it had been given on the basis of the ’s decision, which in their view had not been final, but that the ’s holdings on their application should be awaited.
On 11 February 2002 the Bitola Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal as ill-founded. It found that an association of citizens would cease to exist ipso jure when the  had declared its Articles and Programme unconstitutional. As the ’s decision had been published in the Official Gazette and had accordingly entered into force, the Court of Appeal upheld the lower court’s decision.
The Preamble to the Constitution, as valid at the material time, read, inter alia:
“...the historical fact that Macedonia is established as a national state of the Macedonian people, in which full equality as citizens and permanent co-existence with the Macedonian people is provided for Albanians, Turks, Vlachs, Roma and other nationalities living in the Republic of Macedonia...”
Amendment IV of the Constitution of 2001 replacing the Preamble, reads, inter alia, as follows:
“The citizens of the Republic of Macedonia, the Macedonian people, as well as citizens living within its borders who are part of the Albanian people, the Turkish people, the Vlach people, the Serbian people, the Romany people, the Bosniak people and others ...”
The relevant provisions of the Constitution related to freedom of association and the  read as follows:
“Citizens are guaranteed freedom of association to exercise and protect their political, economic, social, cultural and other rights and convictions.
Citizens may freely establish associations of citizens and political parties, join them or resign from them.
The programmes and activities of political parties and other associations of citizens may not be directed at the violent destruction of the constitutional order of the Republic, or at encouragement of or incitement to military aggression or ethnic, racial or religious hatred or intolerance.
Military or paramilitary associations which do not belong to the Armed Forces of the  are prohibited.”
The relevant provisions of the Associations of Citizens and Foundations Act provide: