The case originated in an application (no. 50799/14) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Mr Andrei Prepeliţa (“the applicant”), on 23 June 2014.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Balaban, a lawyer practising in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr O. Rotari.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been subjected to illtreatment by police officers in violation of Article 3 of the Convention.
On 24 January 2018 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1982 and lives in Bălți.
According to the applicant, on 27 October 2012 he was walking on the street when he saw several persons approaching him. He recognised one of them as being a police officer and immediately threw away a packet of marijuana which he had in his pocket. Subsequently, three police officers started punching and kicking him. He fell to the ground from the first blow but was still hit while on the ground. One of the police officers twisted his left arm behind his back, at which point he felt a sharp pain. Another police officer held his right arm and hit him in the region of his ribs. He was later taken to a police station where the ill-treatment allegedly continued. In particular, the applicant submitted that one of the police officers had continued hitting him, without specifying how and where, and forcing him to sign a document in which he admitted to have resisted arrest. He signed the document and was released.
The above account of events was contested by the Government who argued that the applicant had resisted arrest and attempted to run away. The police officers had had to use special fighting techniques in order to curb that resistance. All the injuries sustained by the applicant had been as a result of him resisting arrest and of the police officers’ intervention in order to curb his resistance.
The applicant was released on the same day and went immediately to a hospital where he was diagnosed with multiple scratches and bruises on his forehead and face, bruises on his chest and ribs and a fracture of his left arm.
On the same day, 27 October 2012, the applicant was charged with the offence of resisting on-duty police officers. However, these proceedings were discontinued by the Prosecutor’s Office on 26 January 2013 on the grounds of a lack of resistance to the police by the applicant.
On 29 October 2012 the applicant lodged a complaint against three police officers who had allegedly ill-treated him.
On 30 October and 8 November 2012 two forensic investigations were conducted at the request of the Public Prosecutor who examined the applicant’s complaint. The injuries found on the applicant’s body on 27 October 2012 were confirmed. At the same time, in one of the reports it was stated that the fracture of the applicant’s arm could have happened as a result of a fall and that in ninety percent of cases such a fracture occurs after the person has fallen on his or her hand.
On 9 November 2012 the applicant complained to the Prosecutor’s Office that one of the witnesses to his ill-treatment, I.R., had been approached by one of the police officers who had ill-treated him and asked to make a false declaration to the effect that the applicant had not been beaten up. No action appears to have been taken by the prosecutor as a result.
In the process of the examination of the applicant’s complaint, the prosecutor in charge of the case heard evidence from the applicant, a police officer who had participated in his arrest on 27 October 2012 and who stated that the applicant had not been subjected to any ill-treatment, and witness I.R. who confirmed the account of the events as stated by the applicant.
On 29 November 2012 the Prosecutor’s Office refused to initiate criminal proceedings on the ground that the applicant’s complaint was illfounded. The statements made by I.R. were not taken into consideration because the prosecutor considered them to be unreliable on account of the fact that I.R. had a criminal record.
The applicant contested the above decision before a hierarchically superior prosecutor. He repeated his complaint concerning the pressure exerted on I.R. by the accused police officers and stated that the prosecutor had failed to question another witness, E.G.
On 6 December 2012 the hierarchically superior prosecutor quashed the decision of 29 November 2012 and ordered the initiation of a criminal investigation into the circumstances of the applicant’s alleged ill-treatment.
On 16 May 2013 the prosecutor in charge of the case dismissed the applicant’s complaint. After questioning the accused police officers, the applicant and witness I.R., the prosecutor came to the conclusion that the applicant’s injuries had been the result of him resisting the police officers. The applicant challenged this decision.
On 7 June 2013 a hierarchically superior prosecutor dismissed the applicant’s challenge, finding that the actions of the police officers had been justified by the applicant’s behaviour and that his fracture could have been a consequence of a fall. The applicant challenged this decision before an investigation judge.
On 1 July 2013 an investigation judge from the Bălţi District Court upheld the applicant’s appeal and quashed the prosecutors’ decisions. He found that the prosecutors had preferred the statements of the accused police officers over those of the applicant and witness I.R. without giving any plausible justification for doing so. Moreover, the investigation judge found that the prosecutors had failed to question other witnesses.
During the re-examination of the applicant’s complaint, evidence was heard from a new witness, A.P. He stated that he had seen the applicant being arrested by several police officers. When the applicant had attempted to escape, he had been apprehended by the police officers and immobilised against a concrete fence. He had had scratches on his face from the fence and his arms had been twisted behind his back. He had not been thrown to the ground and had not been hit by the police officers. When asked how the applicant had resisted arrest, A.P. stated that he had pushed the police officers away and had tried to break free from their grip.
Two other witnesses, O.S. and V.D., gave statements similar to that made by A.P. In particular, they stated that the applicant had not been thrown to the ground nor beaten up but had been immobilised with his face against a concrete fence.
The police officers, who had arrested the applicant, stated that the applicant had resisted arrest and that, therefore, they had had to use special fighting techniques in order to curb his resistance.
On 21 August 2013 the prosecutor in charge of the case dismissed the applicant’s complaint of ill-treatment and found that there was no evidence to conclude that the police officers had ill-treated him. In so far as the applicant’s fracture was concerned, the prosecutor stated that it could not have occurred as a result of his arm being twisted behind his back because in ninety percent of cases with such fractures, the fracture came about as the result of a fall.
The applicant challenged the above decision both before a hierarchically superior prosecutor and before an investigation judge, but was unsuccessful. His appeals were dismissed on 5 November and 23 December 2013 respectively.
On 14 January 2014 the Bălţi Prosecutor’s Office initiated a new criminal investigation into the circumstances leading to the applicant’s left arm being broken on 27 October 2012. Since no perpetrator could be identified, the investigation was discontinued on 11 June 2014.
The Police Act of 18 December 1990 states:
Section 14.  Conditions of and limits on the use of force, 
special techniques and firearms
“Police officers have the right to use force, special techniques and firearms in the cases and in the manner provided for in the present law. The use of force, special techniques and firearms shall be preceded by a warning about the intention to use them, and sufficient time shall be allowed for a reaction, except in cases in which a delayed use of force ... may generate a direct threat to the life and health of citizens or police officers or may lead to serious consequences.
...
In any case in which the use of force cannot be avoided, police officers are obliged to do their best in order to cause the least harm possible to the health, ... dignity and property of citizens, as well as to ensure medical assistance is provided to victims.
In case of injury or death caused as a result of use of force ... the police officer concerned shall report it to his or her direct superior, in order that the latter may inform a prosecutor.
An abuse of the power to use force ... shall be punished in accordance with the law.”
Section 15.  The use of physical force
“Police officers are only entitled to use force and special fighting techniques for the purpose of ending criminal activities and for neutralising resistance to legal demands in cases in which non-violent methods are not sufficient to discharge their obligations.”