The case originated in an application (no. 61730/08) against the Republic of Armenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Armenian national, Mr Davit Matevosyan (“the applicant”), on 1 December 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr Shushanyan and Mr Grigoryan, lawyers practising in Yerevan. The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, and subsequently by Mr Y. Kirakosyan, Representative of the Republic of Armenia before the European Court of Human Rights.
On 12 February 2013 notice of the complaints concerning the alleged lack of a fair trial and the applicant’s prosecution and conviction being in breach of his freedom of expression, freedom of assembly and freedom from discrimination was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The applicant was born in 1960 and lives in Yerevan.
On 19 February 2008 a presidential election was held in Armenia. The main contenders were the then Prime Minister, Mr Sargsyan, representing the ruling party, and the main opposition candidate, Mr Ter-Petrosyan. During the election campaign the applicant acted as an authorised election assistant for Mr Ter-Petrosyan and a member of his central election headquarters.
Immediately after the announcement of the preliminary results of the election, Mr Ter-Petrosyan called on his supporters to gather at Freedom Square in central Yerevan in order to protest against the irregularities which had allegedly occurred in the election process, announcing that the election had not been free and fair. From 20 February 2008 onwards, nationwide daily protest rallies were held by Mr Ter-Petrosyan’s supporters, their main meeting place being Freedom Square and the surrounding park. It appears that the rallies at Freedom Square attracted at times tens of thousands of people, while several hundred demonstrators stayed in that area around the clock, having set up a camp. It further appears that the applicant was an active participant in the rallies, regularly attending the on-going demonstrations and sit-ins.
On 1 March 2008, apparently at some point between 6 and 7 a.m., police forces arrived on Freedom Square.
The Government alleged that the purpose of the police operation had been the verification of information obtained by the police a day earlier, according to which the demonstrators possessed arms and ammunition. For that purpose, members of the relevant police force, who were not equipped with any protective gear, had arrived at Freedom Square where hundreds of demonstrators armed with metal rods and wooden clubs had gathered, waiting for them. The demonstrators had attacked the police officers, hitting them and throwing stones, pointed metal objects and Molotov cocktails at them, as a result of which numerous police officers had been injured.
The applicant, who was present at Freedom Square when the police operation was conducted, contested the Government’s allegations and submitted that the assembly had been peaceful and none of the demonstrators had been armed. It was the police who had attacked the peaceful demonstrators, using excessive force, in order to terminate the assembly.
It appears that, as a result of the police operation, all the demonstrators present at Freedom Square, including the applicant, fled from the square.
On the same day a criminal case was instituted in connection with the events at Freedom Square, which was later examined under no. 62202608. The decision stated that Mr Ter-Petrosyan and a number of other opposition leaders and activists had organised and held unlawful demonstrations at Freedom Square and incited disobedience of the orders to end the unauthorised demonstrations, while a number of demonstrators had illegally carried arms and ammunition and committed life and healththreatening assault on the police officers.
According to “the record of the applicant’s bringing-in” drafted by the arresting police officers H.K. and E.K., the applicant was “brought in” to Kanaker-Zeytun Police Station (hereafter “the police station”) from Freedom Square at 8.50 a.m. on 1 March 2008 “on suspicion of having put up resistance to a police officer”.
Police officers H.K. and E.K. each reported to the chief of the police station in writing that the applicant had been “brought in” from Freedom Square for having put up resistance by disobeying their lawful orders, refusing to be taken to the police station, pushing them and trying to flee.
The applicant was questioned as a witness. He stated that he had continuously participated in the demonstrations at Freedom Square. On 1 March 2008, early in the morning, police forces had arrived at the square and started violently dispersing the demonstrators gathered there. He had tried to persuade the police officers not to apply force, but had been attacked with tear gas and batons and had been pushed to the ground. After getting to his feet, he had walked towards Northern Avenue. Two other demonstrators, H.M. and A.O., whom he knew personally, had walked along with him. As they reached the intersection of Northern Avenue and Abovyan Street, police officers had approached them, taken them by the arms and ordered to follow them to a nearby location. They had then been handcuffed and taken by car to the police station.
According to the materials of the case, besides the applicant several other opposition supporters were taken that morning from Freedom Square to the police station, including H.M. and A.O.
On 2 March 2008 the investigator drew up a record of the applicant’s arrest, indicating that the applicant was suspected of having committed offences under Articles 225.1 § 2 (inciting disobedience to an order to terminate an unlawful assembly) and 316 § 2 (life or health-threatening assault on a public official) of the Criminal Code (CC).
Police officers H.K. and E.K. were questioned and stated that they had participated in the police operation at Freedom Square in the early morning of 1 March 2008. The demonstrators had gathered there, when ordered to terminate the assembly, had put up resistance, assaulted the police officers and fled. Police officer H.K. submitted that, having been given the task of pursuing and finding those persons, he had stopped one man, who was walking with a few others, for an identity check at the intersection of Northern Avenue and Abovyan Street. The man had been calm at first but, after he had asked him to follow him to a police station in order to check whether he had been involved in the unlawful events at Freedom Square, the man had pushed him and tried to flee. At that moment police officer E.K. had approached, whom the man had pushed as well, but then the man had surrendered to the officers and had been taken to the police station where he had been identified as the applicant. Police officer H.K. added that the two persons walking with the applicant had been taken away by other police officers before he had stopped the applicant. Police officer E.K. made similar submissions.
On 4 March 2008 the applicant was formally charged under Articles 225.1 § 2 and 316 § 2 of the CC within the scope of criminal case no. 62202608. The decision stated that the applicant, having participated from 20 February in the unlawful assembly organised by Mr Ter-Petrosyan and his co-thinkers, incited to disobey the orders to end the assembly, accompanied with public insults addressed at public officials. Thereafter, on 1 March 2008 at around 6 a.m., when the police officers demanded the participants in the demonstration at Freedom Square to allow them to verify the veracity of the information that they possessed arms and ammunition, and once again warned them to end the unlawful event, the applicant and other demonstrators, disobeying the police officers’ lawful orders, committed life- and health-threatening assault on them, causing injuries of various nature and degree.
The applicant was questioned and denied having incited disobedience or inflicted any violence on the police officers.
On the same date the applicant was remanded in custody.
On 27 March 2008 the investigator dropped the charges under Articles 225.1 § 2 and 316 § 2 of the CC for lack of evidence, but brought a new charge against the applicant under Article 316 § 1 of the CC (non-life or health-threatening assault on a public official) in respect of the same facts as in the initial charge.
On the same day the applicant was questioned. He once again denied having done anything illegal at Freedom Square but stated that, when he had been approached in the street later by the two police officers, he had been agitated because of the effect of the tear gas and had behaved in a way which was later assessed as unlawful. He stated that he admitted his guilt for having assaulted the two police officers in a non-life and healththreatening way.
On 3 April 2008 the bill of indictment was approved under Article 316 § 1 of the CC and the applicant’s case was referred to a court.
On 28 April 2008 the applicant’s trial commenced in the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan. During the trial the applicant retracted the admission of guilt he had made during the investigation and pleaded not guilty, stating that he had not assaulted the two police officers who, he alleged, had made false statements. Police officers H.K. and E.K. were questioned as witnesses before the District Court and maintained their statements against the applicant. According to the applicant, he had been unable to question properly the police officers in court as the trial judge disallowed some of the questions, namely those related to the lawfulness of the police actions at Freedom Square in the morning of 1 March 2008, as not related to the circumstances of the case under examination.
The applicant also requested the District Court to call H.M. and A.O. as witnesses, stating that they had been with him at the time of the alleged incident. They had witnessed that he had not assaulted the two police officers and could therefore provide exculpatory evidence. In support of this request, the applicant submitted written statements by H.M. and A.O. in which they corroborated his account of events. The District Court adjourned the examination of the applicant’s request until the other evidence in the case file had been examined.
On 15 May 2008 the applicant repeated his request to call H.M. and A.O. as witnesses. He argued that the case against him, based solely on the statements of police officers H.K. and E.K., was trumped up and he was basically prosecuted for having exercised his freedom of expression.
On 2 June 2008 the District Court examined and dismissed the applicant’s request, holding that it was unnecessary to call H.M. and A.O. on the ground that there was sufficient evidence in the case file.
On 16 June 2008 the District Court found the applicant guilty under Article 316 § 1 of the CC, sentencing him to three years’ imprisonment. In doing so, the District Court found it to be established:
“[The applicant], having participated on a daily basis in mass public events, marches, around-the-clock demonstrations and sit-ins held continuously from 20 February 2008 in violation of the procedure prescribed by law and disrupting the capital’s life, traffic, normal functioning of public institutions and peace and calm of the population, on 1 March 2008 at around 7 a.m., when the police officers demanded the demonstrators gathered at Freedom Square to give them a possibility to verify the veracity of the information that the demonstrators possessed arms and ammunition and once again warned them to end the unlawful event, disobeying the lawful orders of [police officers H.K. and E.K.], assaulted them in a non-life or health-threatening way by pushing and pulling them...”
In reaching these findings, the District Court relied on the statements of police officers H.K. and E.K.
On 3 July 2008 the applicant lodged an appeal arguing, inter alia, that the trial court, by dismissing his request to call as witnesses H.M. and A.O. and relying solely on witness statements of police officers H.K. and E.K., had violated his right to a fair trial as protected by Article 6 of the Convention. Besides, his prosecution and conviction had also been in violation of Articles 10, 11 and 14 of the Convention.
During the examination of his appeal by the Criminal Court of Appeal, the applicant lodged a request similar to the one lodged before the trial court seeking to call H.M. and A.O. as witnesses.
On 24 September 2008 the Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld his conviction. As regards the applicant’s request to call witnesses, the Court of Appeal dismissed it, finding that the applicant’s submissions were insufficient to conclude that the District Court’s dismissal of that request had been unfounded. The Court of Appeal further held that, as could be seen from the materials of the case, before police officers H.K. and E.K. had approached the applicant, both H.M. and A.O. had already been taken from the scene by other police officers and had therefore not witnessed the incident involving the applicant.
On 17 December 2008 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law, raising similar arguments.
On 22 January 2009 the Court of Cassation declared the applicant’s appeal on points of law inadmissible for lack of merit.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law and practice, as well as of the relevant international materials, see Mushegh Saghatelyan v. Armenia (no. 23086/08, §§ 91-134, 20 September 2018).