The case originated in an application (no. 32407/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Austrian national, Mr Karl Friedrich Donner (“the applicant”), on 7 September 2004.
The applicant was first represented by Mr Zwerger and subsequently by Mr Kreibich, both lawyers practising in . The Austrian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr F. Trauttmansdorff, Head of the International Law Department at the Federal Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
On 10 January 2006 the Court decided to communicate the complaints concerning the length of the proceedings and the lack of remedies in that respect to the Government. Applying Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time.
The applicant was born in 1955 and lives in .
In the autumn of 1989 the Salzburg Tax Office (Finanzamt) started investigations into a large-scale fraud relating to the “WEB/IMMAG” group.
On 20 December 1989, the applicant, member of the board of directors and managerial director of one of the concerned companies, wrote a letter to the Salzburg Tax Office and requested that his income tax declaration for the year 1987 be corrected in that the losses declared therein be cancelled.
Thereupon, the Salzburg Tax Office, on 27 December 1989, informed the applicant that he was suspected of tax evasion and invited him to submit his comments in writing. On 23 January 1990 it further informed the applicant that his letter of 20 December 1989 was considered as “self-accusation” (Selbstanzeige). On 16 February 1990 the applicant transferred the amount of 1,973.07 euros (EUR) for evaded taxes to the Tax Office.
In the following years the Tax Office conducted extensive inspections into the WEB/IMMAG group together with the Tax Office for the Investigations of Large Enterprises in the course of which investigation reports were published and administrative criminal fiscal proceedings were instituted against a multitude of persons.
On 19 August 1993 the Salzburg Tax Office heard the applicant. Subsequently, it submitted criminal information against the applicant to the Public Prosecutor's Office (Staatsanwaltschaft) concerning suspicions of tax evasion. The Public Prosecutor's Office received this information on 15 March 1994, together with criminal information against four other suspects related to the WEB/IMMAG group.
Subsequently, on 4 May 1994 the investigating judge at the  (Landesgericht) instituted criminal investigations (Voruntersuchungen) against the applicant and other accused. It further included these proceedings into already pending proceedings against other accused. This decision was confirmed by the Chamber (Ratskammer) of the  on 1 February 1995.
Having received supplementary criminal information from the Tax Office, the investigating judge, in April 1995, summoned the applicant and the other accused to six hearings scheduled in May and June 1995 respectively. The applicant's request that the criminal investigations be stayed was dismissed. On 30 April 1996 the investigating judge forwarded the file to the Public Prosecutor's Office.
On 13 January 1998 the Salzburg Public Prosecutor's Office preferred a bill of indictment against the applicant and three co-accused. It charged the applicant with evasion of income tax and participation in evasion of taxes of the WEB/IMMAG group in 1987 and 1988. Proceedings against other accused were separated from those of the applicant's. The applicant's appeals against these decisions remained unsuccessful.
On 16 May, 4 July, 22 August and 3 October 2000 the  examined the case. At the end of 2000 the presiding judge of the chamber dealing with the applicant's case retired and a new presiding judge was appointed in July 2001.
Having held further hearings on 18 and 19 February 2002, the  convicted the applicant pursuant to section 33 of the Code of Tax Offences (Finanzstrafgesetz) of income tax evasion in the amount of 1,973.07 EUR and partly attempted evasion of other taxes in the total amount of 1,074,891.60 EUR. It sentenced him to a fine of 300,000 EUR of which the payment of 200,000 EUR was suspended with a probation period. When fixing the sentence the court took into account the applicant's good conduct until the offences and since then, that the applicant had paid the evaded taxes, the fact that the offences had partly only been attempted and the length of the proceedings. The court noted that these circumstances as well as the scale of the unlawfulness of the offences justified that the sentence amounted only to one sixth of the maximum penalty (Höchststrafe). The court finally noted that the length of the proceedings and the other mitigating circumstances justified the suspension of part of the sentence.
During the trial the applicant requested to hear N.G. as a witness due to the fact that, when assessing the losses relevant for his and others' income taxes, he had only followed a system which N.G. had developed and instructed him to use. The court rejected the request and noted inter alia that even assuming this to be correct, there was no reason why the applicant should not bear responsibility. Referring to the fact that the applicant had completed university studies it did not accept the applicant's arguments as to his limited knowledge in this matter.
On 8 May 2002 the written version of the judgment was served on the applicant's counsel. The applicant thereupon, on 5 June 2002, filed a plea of nullity (Nichtigkeitsbeschwerde) with the Supreme Court (Oberster Gerichtshof). On 16 September 2003 the Public Prosecutor's Office submitted its observations. The applicant filed further comments on 9 October 2003.
On 12 February 2004 the Supreme Court rejected the applicant's plea of nullity and transmitted the applicant's appeal to the Linz Court of Appeal. It confirmed inter alia the 's refusal to hear N.G. Having regard to all other evidence against the applicant obtained during the trial including his own statements, and the fact that N.G. had denied any concrete knowledge about the case at issue when heard as a suspect in his own criminal proceedings before absconding to Germany, it found that the applicant had not given any convincing reason why hearing N.G. again was relevant. This judgment was served on the applicant's counsel on 10 March 2004.
On 19 August 2004 the Linz Court of Appeal rejected the applicant's appeal.
Section 91 of the Courts Act (Gerichtsorganisationsgesetz), which has been in force since 1 January 1990, provides as follows.
(1)  If a court is dilatory in taking any procedural step, such as announcing or holding a hearing, obtaining an expert's report, or preparing a decision, any party may submit a request to this court for the superior court to impose an appropriate time-limit for the taking of the particular procedural step; unless sub-section (2) of this section applies, the court is required to submit the request to the superior court, together with its comments, forthwith.
(2)  If the court takes all the procedural steps specified in the request within four weeks after receipt, and so informs the party concerned, the request is deemed withdrawn unless the party declares within two weeks after service of the notification that it wishes to maintain its request.
(3)  The request referred to in sub-section (1) shall be determined with special expedition by a chamber of the superior court consisting of three professional judges, one of whom shall preside; if the court has not been dilatory, the request shall be dismissed. This decision is not subject to appeal.
Section 37 of the Public Prosecutor's Act (Staatsanwaltschafts-gesetz) reads as follows:
“(1)  Complaints against a public prosecutor challenging the performance of his duties, may be filed with any superior authority. Unless the complaint is filed with the authority directly superior to the public prosecutor, it shall, as a rule, be transmitted to that authority together with an order to submit a report, if necessary, for the purpose of taking further action.
(2)  The public prosecutor concerned shall be informed of all complaints that are not manifestly unfounded and he shall be ordered to remedy the complaint within a certain period and to report thereon or to disclose any existing obstacles thereto.”