The case originated in an application (no. 71409/10) against the Kingdom of Belgium lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Belgian national, Mr Philippe Beuze (“the applicant”), on 25 November 2010.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms D. Paci, a lawyer practising in Brussels. The Belgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms I. Niedlispacher, of the Federal Justice Department.
Relying on Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (c) of the Convention, the applicant alleged, first, that he had been deprived of his right of access to a lawyer while in police custody, without being given sufficient information about his right to remain silent and his right not to be compelled to incriminate himself, and secondly, that he had not been assisted by a lawyer during the subsequent police interviews, examinations by an investigating judge and other investigative acts in the course of the judicial investigation.
The application was allocated to the Second Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). On 25 August 2014 a Chamber of that Section gave notice of the above-mentioned complaints to the Government. The remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3. On 13 June 2017 the Chamber, composed of the following judges: Işıl Karakaş, Nebojša Vučinić, Paul Lemmens, Valeriu Griţco, Jon Fridrik Kjølbro, Stéphanie Mourou-Vikström and Georges Ravarani, Judges, and also of Hasan Bakırcı, Deputy Section Registrar, relinquished jurisdiction in favour of the Grand Chamber, neither of the parties having objected to relinquishment (Article 30 of the Convention and Rule 72).
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined according to the provisions of Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24.
The applicant and the Government each filed further written observations on the merits of the case. The parties replied at the hearing to each other’s observations (Rule 44 § 5). In addition, third-party comments were received from Fair Trials International, which had been given leave by the President to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3).
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 20 December 2017.
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Ms Paci and Ms Niedlispacher and their replies to questions from judges.
The applicant was born in 1974. He is currently serving a life sentence in Marche-en-Famenne prison (Belgium).
The applicant was arrested on 17 December 2007 by the French gendarmerie in a village situated in the French département of Nord and taken into police custody under a European arrest warrant issued against him on 14 November 2007 by an investigating judge of the Charleroi (Belgium) Court of First Instance, on the basis of a request of 6 November 2007 from the Crown Prosecutor attached to that court.
The warrant stated that the applicant was wanted for the premeditated murder of his former girlfriend, M.B., committed on 5 November 2007. The warrant stated that a witness who was a neighbour of M.B. had formally identified the applicant. It also referred to a risk of reoffending in view of his history of violence.
The interview record drawn up by the French gendarmes at the time of the applicant’s arrest on 17 December 2007 indicated that he had waived his right under Article 63-4 of the French Code of Criminal Procedure to consult with a lawyer of his choosing or, failing that, officially assigned counsel.
In a judgment of 21 December 2007, the Investigation Division of the Court of Appeal of Douai (France), after acknowledging that the applicant had not renounced his entitlement to the rule of speciality, ordered his surrender to the Belgian judicial authorities for the execution of the abovementioned arrest warrant. The applicant was assisted before the Investigation Division by a lawyer, Ms A., of the Douai Bar.
Having been surrendered to the Belgian authorities at 10.40 a.m. on 31 December 2007, the applicant was interviewed by the criminal investigation police from 11.50 a.m. to 3.55 p.m.
As shown by the police interview record, in accordance with Article 47bis of the Code of Criminal Procedure (code d’instruction criminelle) (see paragraphs 62-65 below), the applicant was notified that he was entitled to request the verbatim transcription of all the questions put to him and his answers, to request any investigative act or the conducting of any interview, and that his statements could be used in evidence.
During that first interview, the applicant explained that he had met M.B. in early 2007 through C.L., his then girlfriend. He admitted that he had been present on 5 November 2007 at the scene of the crime but denied having committed the murder. He claimed that the victim, M.B., had been struck with a hammer by her thirteen-year-old son. He explained that he had intervened and grabbed the hammer from the child, but the latter had continued to hit his mother. The applicant stated that he had left with an axe – which the police had later found near the scene – because he was afraid of being accused on account of his criminal record. He explained that he had fled the scene and had been hiding in his car when the emergency services arrived. He stated that he was unaware that the victim was dead.
During the interview the applicant was also questioned about a statement made to the police by M.B. on 25 October 2007 according to which the applicant had tried to kill her by running her over. The applicant explained that he had accidentally skidded while driving his car and had probably hit M.B., but denied that his intention had been to kill her as she had alleged.
The investigators informed the applicant that they had intercepted a number of text messages that had been sent to relatives of M.B., following her death, from a mobile phone belonging to him. Those messages included one offering condolences for the death of M.B. The applicant denied having sent them himself.
The applicant’s detailed statements were taken down by the police in an eight-page record. The record indicated at the very end that following the interview the applicant had read over his statements and had not wished to correct them or add to them.
All subsequent records of his statements contained the same indications and were signed by the applicant. Except for the first police interview record, of which a copy was given to him after his examination by the investigating judge later that day, the applicant received his copies immediately after being questioned.
Following his interview by the criminal investigation police, the applicant was examined by the investigating judge at the Charleroi Court of First Instance at 4.45 p.m. that day. He confirmed his statements to the investigating judge.
On being asked by the investigating judge at the beginning of the examination whether he had chosen a lawyer, the applicant answered in the negative. At the end of the interview record it was stated:
“I (the investigating judge) have notified him that I have informed the deputy to the Chair of the Bar Council, given that, at the current stage of the proceedings, he has not appointed counsel.”
Following the investigating judge’s examination, which finished at 5.42 p.m., the judge observed that a psychiatrist needed to be called immediately. He formally charged the applicant with the premeditated murder of M.B. An arrest warrant was issued to the applicant on the same day and he was remanded in custody.
It is not in dispute that the applicant was not allowed to communicate with a lawyer between the time of his surrender to the Belgian authorities and the end of his period in police custody on 31 December 2007. He was only allowed to consult with a lawyer, in accordance with the applicable law, once the decision had been taken by the investigating judge to remand him in custody (see paragraphs 21 above and 55-56 below). Moreover, even though he was subsequently assisted by a lawyer during the judicial pre-trial investigation, that lawyer did not attend the police interviews, examinations by the investigating judge or other investigative acts which took place throughout that phase of the proceedings (see paragraph 59 below).
On 11 January 2008 the applicant was again interviewed by the criminal investigation police. He confirmed his previous statements about M.B.’s death and provided further particulars about what had happened. The applicant stated that he had indeed seen a person passing by in the street who had witnessed the blows inflicted by the victim’s son, and that this witness had been accompanied by a woman, and he admitted to having threatened the witness with a fake gun that had subsequently been found in his car after his arrest. When the officers pointed out the inconsistencies in his account, the applicant acknowledged that he had been carrying a real gun at the time but continued to deny that he was the murderer.
There is no indication in the interview record of 11 January 2008, or elsewhere in the file, that the applicant had actually been assigned a lawyer following the notification to the Bar on 31 December 2007, or that he had been in contact with a lawyer prior to that interview.
In parallel to the investigation into the murder of M.B., the applicant was interviewed by the police on four occasions between 6 and 7 March 2008 for “criminal association” in respect of car thefts.
When examined again by the investigating judge on 17 March 2008, the judge asked the applicant if he had chosen a lawyer. He replied in the affirmative and mentioned that he had been in contact with a lawyer at the Brussels Bar. The applicant was informed that the psychiatric assessment had been received and that it had identified an antisocial personality disorder. When questioned about the facts related to M.B.’s murder, the applicant confessed to having stolen a document from the case file, although the authorities had been unaware of this. Subsequently, having repeated that the perpetrator of M.B.’s murder was her son, the applicant changed his account of the events. He mentioned the presence of C.L. at the scene of the crime at the time when M.B. was attacked. He explained that he had witnessed an argument between the two women and that he had had to wrest a hammer from C.L.’s hands.
On 25 March 2008 the criminal investigation police interviewed the applicant for the purposes of a morality and personality assessment. A second police interview was held on the same day concerning bodily harm inflicted on C.L. on 17 September 2007. The applicant acknowledged that he had invited C.L., then pregnant, to get into his car. He stated that he had punched C.L. in the face to “protect” her from a possible encounter with M.B. that had been planned with the aim of stealing the latter’s mobile phone and bank card. He explained that M.B., with the help of an accomplice, had then pushed C.L. into the canal.
A neuropsychological assessment of the applicant was carried out on 28 April 2008 and sent to the investigating judge. The expert psychologist concluded that the applicant had limited verbal skills but that his reasoning was not abnormal. The expert also highlighted his significant lack of empathy and sociability.
On 6 June 2008 a reconstruction of the events of 5 November 2007 was held at the scene of the crime. The two eyewitnesses took part in the reconstruction (see paragraphs 10 and 24 above). The applicant’s lawyer was absent, as the law did not provide for the attendance of a lawyer at any investigative act (see paragraph 59 below). In the context of the reconstruction, the applicant mentioned when interviewed that another person, A.N., had also been at the scene on the day in question. He changed his version of events again and stated that he had falsely accused the victim’s son. He claimed that the fatal blows had in fact been struck by C.L. and that he had fired a gun to intimidate C.L.
During the interview conducted on the same day by the criminal investigation police, the applicant challenged the account given by the two eyewitnesses at the reconstruction and confirmed his new version of the facts. There is no evidence in the file that the applicant sought to communicate with his lawyer before or after the reconstruction or the interview of the same day.
An arrest warrant was issued on 8 August 2008 extending the investigating judge’s remit, on the basis of the submissions of the Crown Prosecutor dated 23 May 2008 and 7 July 2008, to three additional offences: the attempted murder of M.B. on 25 October 2007, and two offences committed on 17 September 2007 against C.L., namely robbery with violence or threats, and fraud.
The applicant was examined on that subject by the investigating judge on 18 August 2008. The information provided for by Article 47bis of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 65 below) was repeated to him; he was also notified of his right to refuse the extension of the charges and to consult with his lawyer on this matter beforehand. The record of the examination shows that he agreed to the extension, thereby renouncing his entitlement to the speciality rule that had been granted by the French authorities (see paragraph 12 above). He also expressed his wish that his lawyer should confirm his position.
On 5 December 2008 the applicant was heard by the Crown Prosecutor as to whether he agreed to the extension of the charges. He replied that he wished to consult with his lawyer on this matter.
Acknowledging that the applicant had not ultimately given his consent, in a judgment of 13 January 2009 the Investigation Division of the Douai Court of Appeal agreed to extend his surrender for the purposes of a criminal prosecution to the three above-mentioned additional charges.
At the close of the judicial investigation stage, the applicant was committed to stand trial before the Assize Court of Hainaut Province by a judgment of 31 August 2009 of the Indictment Division (chambre des mises en accusation) of the Mons Court of Appeal. The Indictment Division found that there were serious indications of the applicant’s guilt in the light, principally, of the witness statements, the investigators’ findings, the real evidence gathered and the forensic medical and psychiatric assessments.
At the start of the trial in the Assize Court, on 1 February 2010, the applicant, assisted by his Belgian counsel, filed a submission in which he requested that the records of the interviews conducted without legal assistance and the ensuing acts should be annulled and that the prosecution case should be declared inadmissible. He argued that his lack of access to a lawyer while in police custody, on 31 December 2007, and during the subsequent interviews and examinations had entailed a breach of an essential formal requirement directly affecting his defence rights and thus irretrievably vitiating the arrest warrant. The applicant complained that the absence of a lawyer had necessarily caused him damage.
Referring to the Court’s case-law and in particular the judgments in Salduz v. Turkey ([GC], no. 36391/02, ECHR 2008) and Dayanan v. Turkey (no. 7377/03, 13 October 2009), the applicant submitted that it laid down an absolute principle not allowing for any case-specific assessment, given that the restriction arising from Belgian law was one of a general and mandatory nature, and that Belgian law did not meet the requirements of the Convention in such matters.
The Assize Court, in an interlocutory judgment of the same day, dismissed the applicant’s plea to dismiss the prosecution case. It began by pointing out that the Court’s case-law did not guarantee, in an absolute manner, the presence of a lawyer at all stages of the criminal proceedings from the first interview onwards and that the Court had emphasised the need to take account of the proceedings as a whole when assessing whether the right to a fair trial had been upheld. It explained that, in principle, defence rights would be irretrievably affected only where incriminating statements were made. The Assize Court further found that courts had no power to substitute their own solutions for those of the legislature in order to make good the shortcomings complained of by the applicant.
As to the consequences of the Court’s case-law for the proceedings in the present case, the Assize Court took the view that, in respect of the French part of the proceedings, the applicant had initially waived his right to legal assistance. Later, before the Investigation Division of the Douai Court of Appeal he had been assisted by a lawyer. The Assize Court dismissed his allegation of pressure by the French gendarmes on the grounds that in one of his interviews (namely in the context of the reconstruction of 6 June 2008 referred to in paragraph 30 above) the applicant had given a different explanation as to why he had falsely accused the victim’s son, allegedly under duress, at the time of his arrest.
As to the Belgian part of the proceedings, the Assize Court found that the applicant had not incriminated himself in respect of the charges, had not claimed that he had been put under any pressure by the investigators, had not been interviewed in a state of particular vulnerability, had expressed himself freely on the facts and had not in any way been compelled to incriminate himself, even being able to exercise his right to remain silent. The applicant had been able to confer with his lawyer after each police interview and examination by the investigating judge to discuss his defence and had been afforded every opportunity to consult with his lawyer throughout the investigation stage. He had also been able, for the two years of his pre-trial detention, to prepare his defence with his lawyer every time he had appeared before the pre-trial courts (juridictions d’instruction), but he had failed, on those occasions, to mention the omission of which he later complained in the Assize Court.
Furthermore, the Assize Court noted that the applicant had been committed to stand trial before it in the light of indications of guilt which stemmed primarily from material other than his own statements (see paragraph 36 above) and that he had availed himself of the right to request the performance of additional investigative acts. After pointing out that the jury’s inner conviction was formed during the oral proceedings before it, the Assize Court concluded that the applicant’s defence rights had been observed and that there was no reason to declare the interview/examination records or prosecution invalid. It therefore declared the prosecution case admissible and ordered that the proceedings be continued.
The bill of indictment drawn up by the Principal Crown Prosecutor on 23 November 2009 was read out at the hearing in the Assize Court. Containing twenty-one pages, it set out the facts and how they had occurred, the investigative acts and their results, and the forensic medical assessments, together with the applicant’s background and family life. The indictment referred to the particulars that had been acknowledged by the applicant (his presence at the scene of M.B.’s murder, the threatening of a witness and the fact that he had been alone with C.L. and had struck her). It also reproduced the various versions of the events that he had given during his police interviews and examinations by the investigating judge, explaining that those accounts were inconsistent with the investigators’ factual findings and were contradicted by the various witness statements.
At the close of the trial, on 9 February 2010, the jury found the applicant guilty, principally of the premeditated murder of M.B. on 5 November 2007 and of the attempted premeditated murder of C.L. on 17 September 2007.
The jury’s reasons were set out in the Assize Court’s “reasoning judgment” (arrêt de motivation) of the same day. The relevant parts read as follows:
“... the main reasons for the decision given by the jury are as follows:
– The first and second questions [concerning the murder of M.B. on 5 November 2007]
The jury considered decisive the consistent and mutually corroborative testimony of the youngsters who had seen only the defendant and the victim at the scene of the crime, without any other person being present, the threats previously made by the defendant against his victim and the various steps taken by Philippe Beuze (in particular the fact of hiding the axe in a bush) in preparation for the crime.
– The third and fourth questions [concerning the attempted murder of M.B. on 25 October 2007]
[Finding of not guilty]
– The fifth and sixth questions [concerning the attempted murder of C.L. on 17 September 2007]
The jury found that the following evidence proved both the actual occurrence of the acts and the homicidal intention which had driven the defendant:
– the defendant had deliberately arranged to be alone with a pregnant woman, whom he knew was thus placed in a weakened position;
– he violently struck C.L., as shown by the medical findings, and left her for dead;
– he then fled the scene without calling for help, even though he had the means to do so;
– he subsequently sent text messages clearly showing his intention to kill C.L.
The jury also took the view that the acts committed by the defendant before going off towards the canal at the end of a long walk (simulation of a flat tyre, deliberate car crash, etc.) all constituted evidence of premeditation.”
In a sentencing judgment dated 10 February 2010, the Assize Court sentenced the applicant to life imprisonment.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law against the Assize Court judgments of 1, 9 and 10 February 2010. Alleging a violation of Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (c) of the Convention, as interpreted in the Court’s case-law, he relied on the right to be assisted by a lawyer and submitted that the presence of a lawyer during questioning was mandatory under the Convention.
In a judgment of 26 May 2010 the Court of Cassation dismissed that ground of appeal as follows:
“3.  Sections 1, 2, 16(2) and (4), and 20(1) of the Law of 20 July 1990 on pretrial detention do not provide for the presence of a lawyer to assist the person in police custody during the twenty-four hour period laid down by Article 12, paragraph 3, of the Constitution.
The secrecy imposed by Article 28quinquies, § 1, first paragraph, and Article 57 § 1, first paragraph, of the Code of Criminal Procedure precludes, as a rule, the lawyer’s attendance at acts performed during the preliminary investigation by the public prosecutor and the judicial pre-trial investigation.
These provisions cannot be said in themselves to violate the right to a fair trial. There are two reasons for this. First, the impugned restriction must be assessed in relation to the full set of legal safeguards made available to the defendant with a view to ensuring the effective protection of his defence rights from the time the prosecution is brought. Secondly, the appellant’s interpretation of Article 6 of the Convention must be examined with reference to the constitutional principle of the legality of criminal proceedings.
In the light of the following elements, there can be no automatic finding that it is irretrievably impossible for a person questioned by the police and the investigating judge without a lawyer to have a fair trial: the formal requirements laid down for the questioning of a suspect in Article 47bis of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the brevity of the police custody period, the immediate issuance to the person charged (upon notification of the arrest warrant) of all the documents referred to in sections 16(7) and 18(2) of the Law of 20 July 1990, the right of the person charged to communicate immediately with his lawyer in accordance with section 20(1) and (5) of that Law, access to the file as governed by section 21(3) of the Law, the lawyer’s presence at the recapitulatory examination provided for in section 22(1), (2) and (3), and the rights set forth, in particular, in Articles 61ter, 61quater, 61quinquies, 136 and 235bis of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
As a rule, Article 12, paragraph 2, of the Constitution does not allow the court to amend the formalities of criminal proceedings as laid down by the law of a democratic State. The only exception is where a domestic rule, if declared incompatible, may be set aside without distortion by the court of the legal framework of which it is part.
On account of its lack of precision, the weight that the appellant attaches to a fair trial cannot trump the above-mentioned principle of legality, whereby the investigation, prosecution and trial can only proceed in accordance with pre-existing and accessible statutes. The submission does not determine the extent to which the court should set aside the domestic statute in order to render the trial fair for the purposes of Article 6 of the Convention according to its proposed evolutive interpretation.
Therefore, neither the appellant nor the case-law on which he relies indicate clearly whether the trial would have been fair on the sole condition that the lawyer had been present during the police custody period or whether it would have been necessary to extend that assistance to all investigative acts.
The right to a fair trial also implies that none of the parties should be placed in a more favourable or less advantageous situation than that of another party. It cannot therefore be regarded as established that the proceedings submitted to the court’s review would have been fairer, within the meaning of the appellant’s submission, simply if a lawyer had been present at all his interviews, without an equivalent advantage being secured to the other parties.
The submission that the alleged right of the accused is absolute in nature must accordingly be rejected, and it is necessary to consider in concrete terms whether, in the light of the proceedings taken as a whole, the matter complained of by the appellant may have vitiated those proceedings.
This does not appear to have been the case. As can be seen from the following findings of the judgment appealed against [of 1 February 2010]:
(i)  the appellant made no self-incriminating statements while in police custody;
(ii)  prior to his first interview by the French gendarmerie, he expressly waived the legal assistance to which he was entitled under Article 63-4 of the French Code of Criminal Procedure;
(iii)  the appellant was assisted by a lawyer from the time of his appearance before the Investigation Division of the Douai Court of Appeal and for the two years of his pre-trial detention;
(iv)  the appellant was at no point compelled to incriminate himself, and at all times expressed himself freely.
The Assize Court therefore acted within the law in refusing to declare the prosecution case inadmissible.”
At the relevant time, the lawyer’s role upon the arrest of a suspect and during the judicial pre-trial investigation stage, together with the safeguards surrounding police interviews, examinations by an investigating judge and other investigative acts, were regulated as follows.
Article 12, paragraph 3, of the Constitution provided that no one could be deprived of liberty for more than twenty-four hours from the time of arrest without review by a judge. That period has recently been extended to forty-eight hours by an amendment to Article 12 on 24 October 2017.
An individual in respect of whom there are serious suspicions creating a presumption that he has committed an offence may be deprived of his liberty and remanded in pre-trial detention (détention préventive), which is governed by the Law of 20 July 1990 on pre-trial detention.
Upon arrest, a record must be drawn up mentioning the time and circumstances of the arrest, the decision and measures taken by the Crown Prosecutor, the manner of their notification, and the precise time at which the person is notified of the decision to arrest (sections 1 and 2 of the Law on pre-trial detention).
During the above-mentioned twenty-four-hour period, at the time, the person concerned would usually undergo a police interview and an initial examination by the investigating judge, after which an arrest warrant could be issued. The provision requiring the investigating judge to conduct this initial examination was section 16(2) of the Law on pre-trial detention, which read as follows prior to its amendment by the “Salduz Act” (see paragraphs 72-77 below):
“(2)  Unless the person charged is a fugitive or is evading arrest, the investigating judge shall, before issuing an arrest warrant, question that person about the facts forming the basis for the charges and potentially justifying an arrest warrant, and hear his or her observations. Failure to question the person charged shall entail his or her release.
The investigating judge shall also notify the person charged about the possibility that an arrest warrant might be issued for his or her detention and hear his or her observations on that matter. Failure to satisfy these conditions shall entail the person’s release.
...”
It was inferred from the silence of those provisions of the Law on pre-trial detention, and from the secrecy of the preliminary police investigation and judicial pre-trial investigation (under Article 28quinquies, § 1, first paragraph, of the Code of Criminal Procedure) that the arrested person could not be accompanied by a lawyer during the twenty-four-hour period in question. Nor was the arrested person entitled to consult with a lawyer, the right to communicate freely with a lawyer only being granted at the end of the first appearance before the investigating judge, which had to take place within a twenty-four-hour period (see paragraph 55 below).
Section 20 of the Law on pre-trial detention, on which the right to consult and communicate freely with a lawyer was based, was worded as follows, in its relevant part, prior to its amendment by the “Salduz Act”:
“(1)  Immediately after the first interview [sic], the person charged may communicate freely with his or her lawyer.
...
(5)  The investigating judge’s decision to restrict visits, correspondence and telephone calls shall not alter the rights of the person charged as regards the possibilities of consulting with his or her lawyer.
...”
That provision, appearing in Chapter III of the Law on arrest warrants issued by the investigating judge, referred not to the first police interview but to the first examination by the investigating judge.
During that first appearance, the investigating judge was required to notify the person charged that he had the right to choose a lawyer. If the person did not choose a lawyer, the investigating judge would inform the Chair of the Bar Council or his deputy (section 16(4) of the Law on pretrial detention).
Free communication consisted mainly in the possibility for the lawyer to visit his client in prison, to read the investigation file made available to the accused and to counsel for a period of two days prior to any hearings (section 21(3) of the Law on pre-trial detention) and to assist the client on a monthly basis before the chambre du conseil of the Court of First Instance in order to discuss any serous indications of guilt and/or the need to maintain the detention measure (section 22, fourth paragraph, of the Law). No later than five days after the notification of the arrest warrant and every month thereafter, or in the case of serious charges every three months (section 22, first and second paragraphs, of the Law), the competent chambre du conseil had to rule on the need to extend the detention. During that hearing the person charged was assisted by his lawyer and was entitled to ask the investigating judge for additional acts to be performed (Article 61quinquies, § 1, of the Code of Criminal Procedure).
The right to communicate with the lawyer did not mean that the latter could attend any subsequent police interviews or examinations by an investigating judge or any other investigative acts during the judicial investigation stage such as reconstructions or confrontations. The Court of Cassation took the view that the secrecy imposed by Article 28quinquies § 1, first paragraph, and Article 57 § 1, first paragraph, of the Code of Criminal Procedure precluded, as a rule, the presence of the lawyer at any acts of the preliminary police investigation or judicial pretrial investigation (see, among other authorities, Court of Cassation, 26 May 2010, in the applicant’s case – paragraph 48 above).
The main exception was the possibility for the lawyer to attend the recapitulatory examination by the investigating judge, as provided for in section 22, second paragraph, of the Law on pre-trial detention, which read as follows before being amended by the “Salduz Act”:
“At the request of the person charged or his counsel, the investigating judge shall summon the person charged ten days prior to each appearance before the chambre du conseil, or the Indictment Division ruling in cases remitted to it in accordance with section 31(4), for a recapitulatory examination; the clerk shall immediately notify the summons, in writing or by fax, to the lawyer of the person charged and to the Crown Prosecutor, both of whom may attend the said examination.”
Section 16(7) of the Law on pre-trial detention, prior to its amendment by the “Salduz Act”, provided that the record of the first examination by the investigating judge of the person charged, together with the records of all police interviews with the person charged between the time he was deprived of liberty and his first appearance before the investigating judge, had to mention the time at which the interview started and finished, together with the time of the beginning and end of any interruptions. On the notification of the arrest warrant, a copy of the statement to the investigating judge and copies of other documents listed in section 16(7) (cited above) were to be given to the person charged in accordance with section 18(2) of the Law.
Article 47bis of the Code of Criminal Procedure further laid down certain rules to be complied with by the police or prosecutor for the organisation of any interviews during the preliminary investigation phase and for the drafting of the interview records. Under Article 70bis of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the same rules applied to questioning at the pre-trial investigation stage, in particular the examinations by the investigating judge.
Prior to its amendment by the “Salduz Act”, Article 47bis of the Code of Criminal Procedure read as follows:
“For the purposes of interviews conducted with any persons questioned in any capacity whatsoever, the following minimum rules shall be complied with:
At the beginning of any interview, the person interviewed shall be informed:
(a)  that he or she may request that all questions put and answers given be recorded verbatim;
(b)  that he or she may request any investigative act or interview;
(c)  that his or her statements may be given in evidence at trial.
...”
The express notification to the person interviewed that his or her statements might be given in evidence at trial was regarded as indirectly enshrining the right to remain silent in Belgian legislation. Such right was not provided for expressly in Belgian law at the relevant time, even though it was one of the defence rights and, according to the Court of Cassation, was part of the general principles of law (Court of Cassation, 13 May 1986, Pasicrisie, 1986-I, no. 558).
Article 47bis of the Code of Criminal Procedure also provided that at the end of the interview, the person interviewed had to be able to read over the statement, unless he or she asked for it to be read out. He or she then had to be asked if the statement should be corrected or complemented. The person interviewed was free to sign the statement or to refuse to do so. He or she could also ask to write it out himself or herself and to request that it be attached to the interview record.
Following the Salduz judgment, the Court of Cassation was, on a number of occasions, called upon to examine – in cases concerning both pre-trial detention and the merits of a criminal prosecution – legal argument based on an alleged violation of Article 6 §§ 1 or 3 (c) of the Convention on the ground that the suspect had not had legal assistance during his or her time in police custody or when questioned by the police or investigating judge.
The Court of Cassation took the view that, although Belgian law did not provide for the presence of a lawyer alongside a suspect from the time of his deprivation of liberty, that did not automatically give rise to a violation of the right to a fair trial. In the court’s view, that restriction had to be assessed in the light of the proceedings as a whole and of the statutory safeguards generally afforded to the accused in order to ensure respect for his or her defence rights from the time of the decision to prosecute. In that connection the court referred in particular to the following safeguards provided for under Belgian law:
(a)  the formalities imposed for the interview of the suspect under Article 47bis of the Code of Criminal Procedure;
(b)  the brevity of the police custody period under the Constitution (Article 12 § 3);
(c)  the immediate remittance to the person charged, upon notification of the arrest warrant, of his interview records;
(d)  the right of the person charged to communicate immediately with his lawyer after his first examination by the investigating judge;
(e)  access to the file prior to appearance before the pre-trial court;
(f)  the lawyer’s presence at the recapitulatory examination.
The Court of Cassation would then verify in concreto if the suspect had made self-incriminating statements without legal assistance during the first police interviews and examinations by the investigating judge, and if so whether those statements had been used by the trial court to find the defendant guilty, and more generally, whether the initial absence of legal assistance had adversely affected the fairness of the trial in the light of the proceedings as a whole.
In a judgment of 5 May 2010 the Court of Cassation thus saw fit, on the first appeal it had received against such a conviction, to examine “whether the interviews [with the accused], without a lawyer being present, conducted by the federal criminal investigation police ... and by the investigating judge ... [had] had any impact on the conduct of the trial” (Court of Cassation 5 May 2010 P.10.0257.F; see also Court of Cassation, 26 May 2010 (in the applicant’s case, see paragraph 48 above), and Court of Cassation, 22 June 2010, P.10.0872.N).
In a judgment of 15 December 2010 (P.10.0914.F), the Court of Cassation quashed for the first time, on account of a violation of Article 6 of the Convention, a trial court decision relying on self-incriminating statements given to the police by a suspect in police custody without any possibility of legal assistance. In response to the appellant’s ground of appeal criticising the judgment for basing his conviction in particular on the statements he had made to the investigators and to the investigating judge in the interviews conducted during the twenty-four-hour period after being taken into custody, the Court of Cassation found, in particular, as follows:
“The right to a fair trial, as enshrined in Article 6 § 1 of the Convention ..., implies that the person arrested or held at the disposal of the courts should have the effective assistance of a lawyer during the police interview which takes place within twentyfour hours after he or she is taken into custody, unless it is shown, in the light of the particular circumstances of the case, that there are compelling reasons to restrict such right.
In so far as it allows such access to a lawyer only after the first examination by the investigating judge, section 20(1) of the Law of 20 July 1990 on pre-trial detention must be regarded as incompatible with Article 6 of the Convention.
The fairness of a criminal trial should be assessed in the light of the proceedings as a whole, by ascertaining whether the defence rights have been observed, examining whether the person charged has had the possibility of challenging the authenticity of the evidence and of opposing its use, verifying whether the circumstances in which evidence for the prosecution has been obtained cast doubt on its credibility or accuracy, and assessing the influence of any unlawfully obtained evidence on the outcome of the criminal proceedings.
The evidence in the file shows that the appellant challenged, before the trial court, the charges of rape and indecent assault laid against him and of which the first respondent claimed to have been the victim at a time when, as a minor, he could not legally have consented to the sexual acts thus characterised.
In support of their conviction as to the appellant’s guilt, the judges of the Court of Appeal noted that, until his release by the investigating judge, the suspect had gradually confessed to the acts described by the complainant before calling everything into question and seeking his acquittal in the trial court.
To explain this change of position, the judgment took the view ... that the appellant had probably not perceived the significance in criminal law of the acts that he had admitted committing, being unaware that oral penetration was also characterised as rape.
Therefore in giving the statement in question, during police custody and without legal assistance, the suspect had incriminated himself because he did not have the legal knowledge which would have enabled him to put his words into a different perspective.
The appellant’s confession and the reason for its withdrawal justify, according to the judgment, the fact of not giving credence to his claims that the accusations against him were mere fiction.
Self-incriminating statements given to the police within twenty-four hours of being taken into custody by a suspect who, in the absence of a lawyer, may not, according to the Court of Appeal, have understood the legal consequences of his words, were thus taken into consideration by that court in finding the criminal complaint credible and accordingly in concluding that the prosecution case was made out.
Being based on that reasoning, the decision breaches Article 6 of the Convention.”
Lastly, it is noteworthy that in a judgment of 31 October 2017 (P.17.0255.N), the Court of Cassation took the view that in order to gauge the impact of the lawyer’s absence from interviews during the judicial pretrial investigation (interviews which had been conducted in 2010, and thus after the Salduz judgment, but before the 2011 “Salduz Act”), the trial court had to take account of a non-exhaustive list of factors enumerated by the Court as set out in Ibrahim and Others v. the United Kingdom ([GC], nos. 50541/08 and 3 others, § 274, 13 September 2016).
The reform of the domestic law began with the enactment of the Law of 13 August 2011 (known as the “Salduz Act”), which entered into force on 1 January 2012, amending the Code of Criminal Procedure and the Law of 20 July 1990 on pre-trial detention. The relevant provisions were again amended by the Law of 21 November 2016 on certain rights of persons during questioning (known as the “Salduz bis Act”), which entered into force on 27 November 2016. This new Law transposes into domestic law the provisions of Directive 2013/48/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on the right of access to a lawyer in criminal proceedings and in European arrest warrant proceedings, and on the right to have a third party informed upon deprivation of liberty and to communicate with third persons and with consular authorities while deprived of liberty (OJ 2013, L 294, p. 1 – see paragraph 82 below).
Under Article 47bis § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, as replaced by the “Salduz Act”, any person interviewed as a suspect, provided that the potential charges concern an offence that could justify an arrest warrant, is entitled to a confidential consultation with a lawyer prior to the first interview. The “Salduz bis Act” has added the possibility for the suspect to be assisted by a lawyer while being interviewed.
Article 47bis § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, as replaced by the “Salduz Act”, also provides that before being interviewed, a suspect must be informed that his statements may be used in evidence and that he cannot be compelled to incriminate himself. The “Salduz bis Act” has added that the suspect may choose, after giving his identity, to make a statement, to answer the questions put to him, or to remain silent.
For persons in custody, section 2bis of the Law on pre-trial detention, as inserted by the “Salduz Act”, provides that the police or judicial authorities must enable the arrested person to exercise his or her right to prior consultation with a lawyer of his or her choosing, or a duty lawyer assigned by the Bar.
Under that same section, persons in custody are also entitled to legal assistance when questioned by the police or a judge during the twenty-four hour period following their arrest.
The lawyer’s role during an interview consists in ensuring that his client’s rights are upheld. The “Salduz bis Act” has extended that role in particular to enable intervention by the lawyer for the purpose of requesting investigative acts or clarifications, in addition to making observations.
In Belgium, Article 442bis of the Code of Criminal Procedure enables convicted persons to apply to the Court of Cassation for the reopening of proceedings following a judgment of the Court finding a violation of the Convention. The provision reads as follows:
“If a final judgment of the European Court of Human Rights has found that there has been a breach of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms or the Protocols thereto ..., an application may be made for the reopening – in respect of criminal matters alone – of the proceedings that resulted in the applicant’s conviction in the case before the European Court of Human Rights or in the conviction of another person for the same offence on the basis of the same evidence.”
On 22 May 2012 the European Union adopted Directive 2012/13/EU of the Parliament and the Council on the right to information in criminal proceedings (OJ L 142, p. 1). As can be seen from Recitals 14 and 18 of this Directive, it is founded upon the rights laid down in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (“the Charter”), and in particular Articles 6, 47 and 48 thereof, building upon Articles 5 and 6 of the Convention as interpreted by the Court. In addition, the Directive explicitly establishes the right to information about procedural rights, as “inferred from the case-law” of the Court (Recital 18).
Article 1 of Directive 2012/13/EU clarifies that the right to information has two aspects: information on procedural rights and information on the accusation. Pursuant to Article 2 § 1, the Directive applies from the time persons are made aware by the competent authorities of a member State that they are suspected or accused of having committed a criminal offence. Such persons must be provided promptly with information concerning at least the five procedural rights listed in Article 3 § 1 of the Directive, namely: the right of access to a lawyer; the right to free legal advice; the right to be informed of the accusation; the right to interpretation and translation; and the right to remain silent. Article 8 § 2 provides that suspects must have the right under national law to challenge any failure to provide the requisite information. The Directive, of which the relevant provisions have not yet given rise to interpretation by the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU), does not address how evidence obtained before the suspect has been informed of his or her procedural rights should be treated in any subsequent criminal proceedings.
Directive 2012/13, which had to be transposed by 2 June 2014, applies to all EU Member States except Denmark.
Directive 2013/48/EU (cited above) lays down minimum rules concerning the right of access to a lawyer in criminal proceedings and in proceedings for the execution of a European arrest warrant. In doing so, it promotes the application of the Charter, in particular Articles 4, 6, 7, 47 and 48 thereof, building upon Articles 3, 5, 6 and 8 of the Convention, as interpreted by this Court (Recital 12). In its Preamble the Directive explains, by reference to case-law of the Court, that where a person other than a suspect or accused person, such as a witness, becomes a suspect or accused person, that person should be protected against self-incrimination and has the right to remain silent. In such cases, questioning by law enforcement bodies should be suspended immediately and may only be continued if the person concerned has been made aware that he or she is a suspect or accused person and is able to fully exercise the rights provided for in the Directive (Recital 21). In addition, the member States should ensure that suspects or accused persons have the right for their lawyer to be present and participate effectively when they are questioned by the police or by another law enforcement or judicial authority, including during court hearings (Recital 25).
Article 2 § 1 of the Directive provides that the rights in the Directive apply to:
“suspects or accused persons ... from the time when they are made aware by the competent authorities ..., by official notification or otherwise, that they are suspected or accused of having committed a criminal offence, and irrespective of whether they are deprived of liberty.”
Article 3 of Directive 2013/48/EU, entitled “The right of access to a lawyer in criminal proceedings”, reads as follows:
“1.  Member States shall ensure that suspects and accused persons have the right of access to a lawyer in such time and in such a manner so as to allow the persons concerned to exercise their rights of defence practically and effectively.
Suspects or accused persons shall have access to a lawyer without undue delay. In any event, suspects or accused persons shall have access to a lawyer from whichever of the following points in time is the earliest:
(a)  before they are questioned by the police or by another law enforcement or judicial authority;
(b)  upon the carrying out by investigating or other competent authorities of an investigative or other evidence-gathering act in accordance with point (c) of paragraph 3;
(c)  without undue delay after deprivation of liberty;
(d)  where they have been summoned to appear before a court having jurisdiction in criminal matters, in due time before they appear before that court.
The right of access to a lawyer shall entail the following:
(a)  Member States shall ensure that suspects or accused persons have the right to meet in private and communicate with the lawyer representing them, including prior to questioning by the police or by another law enforcement or judicial authority;
(b)  Member States shall ensure that suspects or accused persons have the right for their lawyer to be present and participate effectively when questioned. Such participation shall be in accordance with procedures under national law, provided that such procedures do not prejudice the effective exercise and essence of the right concerned. Where a lawyer participates during questioning, the fact that such participation has taken place shall be noted using the recording procedure in accordance with the law of the Member State concerned;
(c)  Member States shall ensure that suspects or accused persons shall have, as a minimum, the right for their lawyer to attend the following investigative or evidencegathering acts where those acts are provided for under national law and if the suspect or accused person is required or permitted to attend the act concerned:
(i)  identity parades;
(ii)  confrontations;
(iii)  reconstructions of the scene of a crime.
Member States shall endeavour to make general information available to facilitate the obtaining of a lawyer by suspects or accused persons.
Notwithstanding provisions of national law concerning the mandatory presence of a lawyer, Member States shall make the necessary arrangements to ensure that suspects or accused persons who are deprived of liberty are in a position to exercise effectively their right of access to a lawyer, unless they have waived that right in accordance with Article 9.
...
In exceptional circumstances and only at the pre-trial stage, Member States may temporarily derogate from the application of the rights provided for in paragraph 3 to the extent justified in the light of the particular circumstances of the case, on the basis of one of the following compelling reasons:
(a)  where there is an urgent need to avert serious adverse consequences for the life, liberty or physical integrity of a person;
(b)  where immediate action by the investigating authorities is imperative to prevent substantial jeopardy to criminal proceedings.”
Article 12 § 2 addresses the question of remedies and provides that, without prejudice to national rules and systems on the admissibility of evidence, member States must ensure that, in criminal proceedings, in the assessment of statements made by suspects or accused persons or of evidence obtained in breach of their right to a lawyer or in cases where a derogation to this right was authorised in accordance with Article 3 § 6 (cited above), the rights of the defence and the fairness of the criminal proceedings are respected.
Directive 2013/48/EU, which had to be transposed by 27 November 2016, applies to all EU member States except for the United Kingdom, Ireland and Denmark.
Article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights of 1966 (“the Covenant”) guarantees the right to a fair trial. Article 14 § 3 (d) provides in particular that everyone charged with a criminal offence has the right, in full equality, to be tried in his presence, and to defend himself in person or through legal assistance of his own choosing; to be informed, if he does not have legal assistance, of this right; and to have legal assistance assigned to him, in any case where the interests of justice so require, and without payment by him in any such case if he does not have sufficient means to pay for it.
In a number of cases the Human Rights Committee has found a violation of Article 14 § 3 (d) of the Covenant on account of a failure to provide sufficient information to an accused about the right to legal assistance (see, for example, Saidova v. Tajikistan, 2004, 964/2001, and Khoroshenko v. Russian Federation, 2011, 1304/2004).
The Court would further refer to the other international and comparative law material presented in Ibrahim and Others (cited above, §§ 218-33).
“The history of liberty has largely been the history of observance of procedural safeguards.”
Felix Frankfurter
“Form is the twin sister of liberty and the enemy of the arbitrary”
Rudolf von Ihering
We have voted with our colleagues in finding a violation of Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (c) of the Convention in this case. However, while we agree with this outcome, we respectfully disagree with an essential part of the reasoning of the judgment, namely the part setting out the guiding principles for situations concerning general and mandatory statutory restrictions on the right of access to a lawyer during pre-trial proceedings. It is our opinion that the rationale of the present case makes a significant departure from the case-law of the Court on this subject and stems ultimately from a misinterpretation of that case-law. It contradicts, in particular, the principles established in Salduz v. Turkey and subsequent relevant cases. The decision that has been reached in the present case diminishes the significance of the minimum rights or guarantees contained in paragraph 3 of Article 6 of the Convention, regardless of whether they are understood as independent rights or merely as facets of the right to a fair trial or to due process.
In our opinion, reliance on the Ibrahim and Others judgment as a guiding principle in the present case is misplaced for three principal reasons. First, Beuze, which is a Salduz type of case, and Ibrahim and Others are two very different cases. While in Salduz the applicant’s complaints concerned statutory restrictions on the right of access to a lawyer, of a general and mandatory nature, in Ibrahim and Others the restriction was provided for in law, but it was neither general nor mandatory. The Grand Chamber acknowledges this (see paragraph 116 of the judgment), yet it has decided to view such fundamentally different situations through the same lens without ever analysing these differences in any depth. We believe that these two situations, when it comes to guaranteeing minimum rights to the assistance of a lawyer during pre-trial proceedings, deserve to be treated differently and were treated differently before the present judgment.
Second, we respectfully disagree that the Salduz judgment set out two stages of the analysis in a way that would always make it necessary to examine the overall fairness of the proceedings (see paragraph 139 of the judgment). On the contrary, we believe that the Salduz judgment went in a different direction and that it actually found the trial as a whole to be unfair, automatically, when certain conditions were met. Furthermore, we do not regard the Ibrahim and Others case as simply clarifying the Salduz principles and thus superseding them. In our view these two cases complement each other, as will be explained below.
Third, unlike our colleagues, we do not see in the post-Salduz jurisprudence related to Salduz type situations any support for the majority interpretation of the Salduz case (see paragraph 140 of the judgment). In our opinion, neither in post-Salduz Turkish cases, nor in post-Salduz cases against other countries, has the Court conducted an examination of overall fairness in Salduz type situations. As we will demonstrate, the Court has not done so even in the two cases cited in paragraph 140 of the judgment as examples for the overall fairness examination in Salduz type situations. In fact, the scope of protection of the right to pre-trial legal assistance established in the Salduz case was not only confirmed in the post-Salduz jurisprudence, it was significantly broadened.
In our view, and we would so argue, upholding the so-called “Salduz doctrine” is important in order to preserve the integrity of the judicial process and thus the values of civilised societies founded upon the rule of law.
The central issue in the Salduz case (cited above) concerned the admission in evidence against the applicant of a confession he had made during a police interrogation at a time when he was denied access to a lawyer on the basis of a general and mandatory statutory restriction on the right to legal assistance during police custody. The Chamber took a traditional approach to this case, assessed the overall fairness of the proceedings and on the basis of such assessment found no violation. The Grand Chamber, unlike the Chamber, after establishing that no justification had been given by the Turkish Government for denying the applicant access to a lawyer, other than the fact that this was provided for on a systematic basis by the relevant legal provisions, concluded that “[a]s such, this already [fell] short of the requirements of Article 6 ...” (ibid., § 56 in fine). In short, it seems that the Grand Chamber decided unanimously to depart from the traditional holistic approach and opted for a finding of an automatic violation.
However, the Grand Chamber’s Salduz judgment did not stop there, but indeed continued to examine the substance of the case. For our colleagues in the present case, the mere fact that the analysis was continued meant that the Salduz case established a two-stage test (first looking at whether or not there were compelling reasons and second examining the overall fairness of the proceedings) which was supposed to apply equally to cases concerning statutory restrictions of a general and mandatory nature as to those concerning restrictions stemming from case-specific decisions by the competent authorities (see paragraph 139 of the judgment). In our view this is an overly simplistic interpretation, at odds not only with the spirit of the Salduz case but with the very language used in that case. After all, why would the Court in Salduz have made an effort to draw a distinction between the different situations identified above, only to conclude that they had to be treated equally?
Our colleagues actually fail to acknowledge that the additional analyses were conducted purely in the form of further observations (“The Court further observes ...”, ibid., § 57). Thus, on the one hand, these additional analyses could be understood as stemming from excessive caution, ex abundanti cautela, as Judge Serghides explained in great detail in his partly dissenting opinion attached to the Simeonovi judgment. On the other hand, these additional analyses could be seen as necessary to verify that the applicant himself was undoubtedly affected by such restriction. It seems that the Court used the opportunity to confirm the principle that in the context in which a lack of compelling reasons coincides with a general and mandatory statutory restriction on the right of access to a lawyer, the mere fact that the applicant’s statement given to the police without a lawyer was subsequently used for his conviction is in itself sufficient proof that the applicant was undoubtedly affected by such restriction. The Court emphasised that in such a situation the overall fairness review would be futile because “[n]either the assistance provided subsequently by a lawyer nor the adversarial nature of the ensuing proceedings could cure the defects which had occurred during police custody” (Salduz, cited above, § 58). In short, the Court introduced a presumption that the proceedings as a whole must be considered unfair whenever incriminating statements made by the accused in a Salduz type situation are used for a conviction. The Court simply considered the first questioning of a suspect by the police as a crucial moment of great importance for the criminal proceedings as a whole – a moment which deserved special treatment.
In such a situation, denial of access to a lawyer cannot be seen as a harmless error, regardless of any other possible procedural safeguards that might be available. In this way, the Court also took care to make it clear that finding an automatic violation in such circumstances should not be mistaken for an abstract review of domestic law.
The principles established in Salduz concerning statutory restrictions on the right of access to a lawyer of a general and mandatory nature, where restrictions were either applied across the board or were limited to certain offences, were rather faithfully followed and even further developed in subsequent cases of the same type. In most of these cases, the majority against Turkey but some against other States such as Monaco, Luxembourg, Malta, Belgium and France, the Court has not analysed the overall fairness of the proceedings, but has found an automatic violation on the basis of a systematic statutory restriction (see Dayanan, cited above, § 33,; Boz v. Turkey, no. 2039/04, § 35, 9 February 2010; Yeşilkaya, cited above, § 31,; Stojković v. France and Belgium, no. 25303/08, §§ 51-57, 27 October 2011; Navone and Others v. Monaco, nos. 62880/11, 62892/11 and 62899/11, §§ 80-85, 24 October 2013; and Borg v. Malta, no. 37537/13, §§ 59-63, 12 January 2016).
Moreover, as it clearly transpires from the above list, the Salduz principles have been followed in respect of different jurisdictions and not only Turkey as is suggested in the present judgment (see paragraph 140). We find this suggestion not only unfounded but detrimental, because it might be concluded that the Court has acted in a biased manner towards one country, in this case Turkey, which of course is not true, because indeed the very same principle, as demonstrated above, has been applied in cases against other countries which had imposed, in their laws, systematic restrictions on the right of access to a lawyer during pre-trial proceedings.
Furthermore, it is asserted in the present judgment (ibid.) that in most of the relevant cases the Court has opted for a less absolute approach and has conducted an examination of overall fairness. To substantiate this argument, the Grand Chamber refers to “other authorities”, but cites only two cases, Ҫarkҫı v. Turkey (no. 2) (no. 28451/08, §§ 43-45, 14 October 2014), and A.T. v. Luxembourg (cited above). However, in the first case, the applicant complained not only that he had not been provided with legal assistance at the early stages, but also that unlawfully obtained evidence (a statement not bearing his signature and allegedly drafted while he was unconscious) had been used against him. The Court thus found it necessary to address both issues because of the precision and seriousness of each complaint, and not because it felt that it had to perform an overall fairness assessment to establish a violation deriving from the systematic statutory restriction on access to a lawyer. The Court also reiterated that in these circumstances “neither the assistance provided subsequently by lawyers nor the adversarial nature of the ensuing proceedings could remedy the defects which had occurred earlier” (Ҫarkҫı, cited above, § 45; see also Salduz, cited above, § 58).
In A.T. v Luxembourg (cited above) the parties disagreed as to which legislation was applicable to the applicant’s questioning by the police. It was the Government’s submission that the applicant could have benefited from legal assistance but that he had waived this right. The Court did not agree with this statement. It found in particular that, as regards the police interview, the statutory provisions then in force implicitly excluded the assistance of a lawyer for persons arrested under a European arrest warrant issued by Luxembourg. Since the domestic court had not remedied the consequences of that lack of assistance, by excluding from its reasoning the statements taken during the interview, the Court found on this point that there had been a violation of Article 6. The Court, in short, in a Salduz type situation, relied on the presumption introduced in the Salduz case. Since incriminating statements were not excluded from the file, the Court considered the proceedings as a whole automatically unfair.
As regards the applicant’s first appearance before the investigating judge, the Court held that the possibility for the applicant to consult his lawyer before that hearing had to be guaranteed unequivocally by the legislation. In so far as A.T. had not been able to converse with his lawyer before the hearing in question, the Court thus found a violation of Article 6. In none of these two situations did the Court perform an overall fairness review.
As shown above, there had been no significant divergence among post-Salduz cases. Contrary to what is asserted by the Grand Chamber, none of the above cases involved an overall fairness assessment under Article 6.
We respectfully disagree that a two-step approach to violations of procedural rights of the defence during pre-trial proceedings (which consists of, first, assessing whether compelling reasons exist, and, second, examining the overall fairness of the proceedings) applied, prior to the judgment in the present case, equally to the legal context in which there had been a general and mandatory statutory restriction on the right of access to a lawyer and one in which there had been none (see paragraph 139 of the judgment). As we have explained above, the Salduz judgment considered Article 6 § 3 (c) of the Convention to have been violated, without any need for a subsequent overall fairness analysis, in a situation where the lack of compelling reasons coincided with a general and mandatory statutory restriction of the right of access to a lawyer. In Ibrahim and Others, the Grand Chamber did not expressly address the question whether the two-stage approach was valid in the presence of a systematic, i.e., general and mandatory, statutory restriction. The Grand Chamber, in that case, simply did not have that situation before it. There the Court dealt with a situation of delayed access to a lawyer affecting individuals suspected of terrorism in a “ticking-bomb” situation, where the exceptional deferral of access was precisely circumscribed by counter-terrorism legislation. Accordingly, cases concerning statutory restrictions of a general and mandatory nature remained covered by the Salduz judgment, even subsequent to Ibrahim and Others.
However, the above view does not apply to another part of the Salduz judgment, that in which the Court confirmed the position taken in Murray and subsequent case-law to the effect that even when there are compelling reasons for restricting access to a lawyer during police custody it is necessary to examine the overall fairness of the proceedings (Salduz, cited above, § 55). The Court took that position because even a justified restriction is capable of depriving the accused of a fair hearing (ibid., § 52). Here the Salduz judgment confirmed the need for a second stage of analysis consisting in an overall fairness review, but it did so only in relation to cases in which compelling reasons had been identified, and with an important caveat that the rights of the defence would in principle be irretrievably prejudiced when incriminating statements made during police interrogation without access to a lawyer were used for a conviction (ibid., § 55). This part of the Salduz judgment was further clarified and consolidated in Ibrahim and Others by providing a definition of “compelling reasons” and by defining criteria according to which the overall fairness review should be carried out.
Finally, the Salduz judgment did not opine about the situations in which the right of access to a lawyer would be denied to a suspect or an accused during police custody without compelling reasons and in contravention of a law which provides for such a right. That the methodology developed in Salduz does not apply in such situations was already established in post-Salduz Turkish cases which dealt with a denial of access to a lawyer imposed by the competent Turkish authorities, without compelling reasons, after Turkey had changed the contested law and had removed the general and mandatory statutory restriction on access. In those cases, the Court took the position that the traditional overall fairness review should be performed. Later on, in Ibrahim and Others (cited above), the approach to such cases was further clarified and it was emphasised that in exercising an overall fairness review in such cases the Court must apply very strict scrutiny and that the onus was on the Government to convincingly demonstrate why, exceptionally and in the specific circumstances of the case, the overall fairness of the criminal proceedings had not been irretrievably prejudiced (ibid., § 265). In this way, Ibrahim in fact developed this particular standard further in the direction of greater protection for the rights of the accused when compared to the pre-Salduz case-law.
We agree with our colleagues that the Salduz case could be seen as introducing two parameters (justification – whether or not there are compelling reasons or not, and the legal context – whether or not there is a general and mandatory statutory restriction of access to a lawyer) to distinguish between four different sets of circumstances (categories of situations, almost “ideal types”) in which an applicant could be deprived of legal assistance during pre-trial proceedings (see Salduz, cited above, §§ 55 and 56, see also paragraph 139 of the present judgment). We also agree that the analysis in the Salduz and Ibrahim and Others cases could, to a certain degree, be seen as developed along these lines. However, we strongly disagree that the two-step approach set out in Ibrahim is mere clarification and further linear development of the two-step approach that we find in the Salduz case, as is claimed (see paragraphs 139, 141 and 152 of the present judgment). While this could be said of the test related to situations in which there are compelling reasons for restricting the right of access to a lawyer (see paragraph 16 above) this cannot be said of the tests related to situations in which there are no compelling reasons for such restriction. There Salduz and Ibrahim developed two different tests, each addressing a different legal context. The Salduz test (introducing a presumption that Article 6 is violated if a self-incriminatory statement given to the police by the accused without the assistance of a lawyer is used for conviction) addresses the situation in which there is a general and mandatory statutory restriction of the right of access to a lawyer (see paragraphs 8 and 15 above), while the Ibrahim test (requiring an overall fairness assessment with very strict scrutiny) addresses the situation in which there is no such general and mandatory statutory restriction (see paragraph 17 above). Thus, the Salduz and Ibrahim cases should be seen as partly overlapping and partly complementing each other. They overlap in situations in which there are compelling reasons for denying the assistance of a lawyer, both going in the direction of applying the overall fairness test. They complement each other in situations in which there are no compelling reasons, such that the Salduz “presumption test leading to an automatic violation” covers situations where there is a general and mandatory statutory restriction of the right of access to a lawyer, and the Ibrahim “strict scrutiny overall fairness test” covers situations where there is no such restriction.
We regret that the present judgment departs from the standards of a fair trial as determined in Salduz and Ibrahim and Others, taken together, under the guise of interpreting them. As we have demonstrated above, the application of the Ibrahim test, related to situations when there are no compelling reasons, could not be stretched to cover the Salduz type of cases without overruling not only Dayanan (cited above) and other judgments against Turkey (as claimed in the present judgment, see paragraph 144), but also overruling Salduz itself and all the cases that have applied the Salduz test. The judgment in the present case actually distorts and changes the Salduz principle and devalues the right that the Court established previously.
Moreover, the present judgment also weakens, if not overrules, the jurisprudence in which the Court has laid down several other conditions which the domestic authorities must respect in restricting the Article 6 safeguards, including the right of access to a lawyer: first, that no restriction should be such as to destroy or extinguish the very essence of the relevant Article 6 right; second, that the restrictions may in general be imposed if they pursue a legitimate aim; third, that the restriction should be reasonably proportionate to the aim sought to be achieved. That is to say, in the present case, the Grand Chamber took the position that the right to a fair trial may be preserved even in a situation in which a lack of compelling reasons for restricting the right of access to a lawyer (i.e. even when there is no legitimate aim) coincides with the general and mandatory statutory restriction or complete denial of the right of access to a lawyer (i.e. even when the very essence of that right is extinguished) and even when this is done during the crucial stage of criminal proceedings (such as the first interrogation by the police) and even if the statement given to the police under these conditions is used for the applicant’s conviction (apparently in complete disregard of proportionality). According to our colleagues (see paragraph 144 of the judgment) all these could, in the concrete case, be counter-balanced by some other procedural safeguards and the fairness of the trial as a whole could still be preserved in the case at hand (see a contrario, Salduz, cited above, § 58).
Apparently, such a sacrosanct understanding of the overall fairness assessment (see paragraph 147 of the judgment) is consistent with the role of the Court, which is not to adjudicate in the abstract or to harmonise the various legal systems (ibid., § 148). In our opinion, it is simply wrong to assume that finding a violation of Article 6 on the basis of any assessment other than the overall fairness assessment is equal to an abstract review of the law (see paragraph 8 above). It is also wrong, in our view, to suggest that the States would not be forced to harmonise their legal systems only if the Court performs an overall fairness assessment. It is also false to treat the automaticity found in Salduz as laying down a binding rule of uniform application. Salduz established a right to custodial legal assistance as an implied right under the Convention, leaving States free to find their own ways of implementing that right. It is a fact that the member States are constantly adjusting their systems to the ECHR standards, but in doing so they are free to choose the best means, as long as the system chosen does not contravene the principles set forth in the Convention. As the Court explained in the case of Al-Khawaja and Tahery, there should be no conceptual disagreement in observing “substantial differences in legal systems and procedures” but the same ECHR standards.
In sum, we believe that it is vital to make a distinction between the systematic defects and the particular defects which are found in individual cases as a result of targeted and context-specific restrictions (e.g. in terrorism cases) or as a result of mistakes and shortcomings in individual cases. It is not correct for the Court to consider the overall fairness of an individual applicant’s case when a systematic ban exists, affecting every other individual in the applicant’s position and in the absence of any assessment by the relevant national authorities.
The formulation of the exception is extremely clear: any derogation must be justified by compelling reasons pertaining to an urgent need to avert danger for the life or physical integrity of one or more people. In addition, any derogation must comply with the principle of proportionality, which implies that the competent authority must always choose the alternative that least restricts the right of access to a lawyer and must limit the duration of the restriction as much as possible. In accordance with the Court’s case-law, no derogation may be based exclusively on the type or seriousness of the offence and any decision to derogate requires a casebycase assessment by the competent authority. Finally, derogations may only be authorised by a reasoned decision of a judicial authority.
The Court must apply a strict approach to a blanket prohibition on the right to legal assistance; otherwise we will end up in conflict with the overall direction of both the case-law of the Court and EU law.
The Salduz judgment led to a revolution for fair-trial rights, stating firmly that any restriction on the right of access to a lawyer must be exceptional and capable of justification: “Article 6 § 1 requires that, as a rule, access to a lawyer should be provided as from the first interrogation of a suspect by the police” and that, as further clarified in Ibrahim and Others, “restrictions on access to legal advice are permitted only in exceptional circumstances, must be of a temporary nature and must be based on an individual assessment of the particular circumstances of the case”. The Beuze judgment in this respect represents a regrettable counter-revolution: it has overruled the “as a rule” requirement – already repeated in more than one hundred judgments widely known as the “Salduz jurisprudence” – and has dramatically relativised it to the detriment of procedural safeguards.
What is more, the present judgment will also disgruntle the member States which have thus far made amendments to their domestic law and practice in order to better follow the earlier decision of the Court. The Salduz judgment has also triggered and to a large extent inspired a series of measures at the EU level, with its Stockholm Roadmap for strengthening procedural rights of suspects and accused persons in criminal proceedings, including Directive 2013/48/EU on the right of access to a lawyer in criminal proceedings and in European arrest warrant proceedings. The intention behind that Directive was to ensure stronger protection of procedural rights of suspects and accused in criminal proceedings. Its goal was to strengthen the Salduz principles by clarifying them to ensure their practical effectiveness, thereby applying not a restrictive but an expansionist interpretation of the Court’s case-law.
It is also worth mentioning that one of those States which has enacted new legislation in response to the Salduz case is Belgium. Today, some nine years later, the Grand Chamber is explaining to Belgium that they are free to weaken the protections they established as a reaction to the Court’s previous ruling; Belgium and other member States were apparently too hasty in complying with Salduz.
It is most worrying that this disappointing radical shift is happening in the sphere of procedural rights – the heart of the rule of law principle. As we know from Plutarch, a garden that is often replanted will not bear fruit.