The case originated in an application (no. 41788/11) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Mr Raimundas Šimkus (“the applicant”), on 7 June 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Venckus, a lawyer practising in Kaunas. The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Bubnytė.
The applicant alleged that he had been tried in criminal proceedings for the same offence for which he had been given an administrative penalty, contrary to the ne bis in idem principle enshrined in Article 4 § 1 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention.
On 25 April 2016 the complaint concerning Article 4 § 1 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1975 and lives in Tauragė.
On 23 July 2006 officers of the State Border Guard Service were patrolling the border between Lithuania and Russia in the Jurbarkas Region, by the river Nemunas. At around 2 a.m. the officers noticed several cars approaching the river and heard the sound of a boat in the water. The officers approached one of the cars and found cartons of cigarettes inside, which they suspected had been smuggled from Russia. The three individuals who had been in the car, K.B., E.L. and M.G., were arrested. During the arrests K.B. received a gunshot wound and the officers took him to a hospital in Jurbarkas (hereinafter “the hospital”).
At around 3.30 a.m. E.L.’s mobile telephone began to ring and a border officer answered it. The caller stated that he would “find and shoot” the officer who had injured K.B. A subsequent forensic examination identified the caller’s voice as probably (tikėtinai) that of the applicant.
At around 4 a.m. the applicant arrived at the hospital and approached the border officers guarding K.B. The applicant used various swearwords towards the officers, demanded that they release K.B. and said that he would beat them up or kill them. It appears that no physical altercation occurred between the applicant and the officers and that the applicant subsequently left the hospital.
On the same day the State Border Guard Service opened a pre-trial investigation against the applicant and several other individuals. The applicant was suspected, among other things, of threatening to murder or seriously injure law enforcement officers and obstructing and verbally abusing them in the exercise of their official duties, under Articles 145 § 1 and 231 § 2 of the Criminal Code (see paragraphs 21-22 below).
On 5 December 2006 the Jurbarkas district prosecutor (hereinafter “the prosecutor”) discontinued the pre-trial investigation against the applicant for lack of evidence. As to the words and statements used by the applicant in his interaction with the border officers (see paragraphs 7 and 8 above), the prosecutor noted that the applicant could have committed the administrative offence of minor hooliganism under Article 174 of the Code of Administrative Offences (see paragraph 26 below). The prosecutor’s decision was forwarded to the State Border Guard Service, instructing them to decide whether administrative proceedings against the applicant should be instituted. However, three days later a senior prosecutor annulled that decision and reopened the pre-trial investigation.
On an unspecified date administrative proceedings were instituted against the applicant; the information available to the Court does not indicate which authority was in charge of them. On 18 December 2006 the Jurbarkas District Court held that the applicant had committed the administrative offence of minor hooliganism when he had used swearwords in the presence of border officers in the hospital (see paragraph 8 above). He was given a warning. The decision was not appealed against and became final after the expiry of the ten-day time-limit for appeal.
On 6 August 2008 the prosecutor charged the applicant with threatening to murder or seriously injure law enforcement officers, and insulting them in the exercise of their official duties, under Articles 145 § 1 and 290 of the Criminal Code (see paragraphs 21 and 24 below). The indictment alleged that the applicant had committed the offences in the hospital on 23 July 2006 (see paragraph 8 above). The case was transferred to the Jurbarkas District Court for examination on the merits but in June 2009, at the prosecutor’s request, the case was returned for additional investigation.
On 23 October 2009 the prosecutor discontinued the pre-trial investigation, stating that the applicant’s actions had not amounted to the criminal offence of threatening to murder or seriously injure the officers because there had not been any objective circumstances indicating that he could have carried out those threats. The prosecutor also held that the applicant could not be prosecuted for insulting the officers because he had already been given an administrative penalty for the same conduct (see paragraph 11 above) – continuing the criminal proceedings against him would be in breach of the ne bis in idem principle.
On 11 June 2010 the Prosecutor General’s Office annulled the prosecutor’s decision and reopened the investigation, noting that the administrative penalty given to the applicant “did not automatically preclude” the criminal proceedings against him.
The applicant appealed against that decision to a senior prosecutor at the Prosecutor General’s Office but on 30 June 2010 his appeal was dismissed. The senior prosecutor held that, in line with the case-law of the domestic courts, an administrative penalty did not preclude the institution of subsequent criminal proceedings concerning the same conduct; however, in order to comply with the ne bis in idem principle, if a person was found guilty in the criminal proceedings, the previous administrative penalty had to be annulled or, if that was impossible, it had to be taken into account during sentencing. Accordingly, the prosecutor considered that the administrative penalty given to the applicant did not preclude the continuation of the criminal proceedings against him.
On 2 November 2010 the Jurbarkas District Court upheld the applicant’s appeal and overruled the prosecutor’s decision of 30 June 2010. It held that criminal proceedings against the applicant could be continued only after the administrative penalty had been annulled, but since that had not been done, any further proceedings concerning the same conduct would be in breach of the ne bis in idem principle. However, on 8 December 2010 the Kaunas Regional Court quashed the lower court’s decision, reiterating the reasoning of the prosecutor’s decision of 30 June 2010 (see paragraph 15 above). That decision was not subject to any further appeal.
In June 2011 the case was transferred to the Jurbarkas District Court for examination on the merits. The amended indictment alleged that the applicant had committed the offences set out in Articles 145 § 1 and 290 of the Criminal Code because of the words and statements which he had used when speaking to the border officers on the telephone (see paragraph 7 above) and in the hospital on 23 July 2006 (see paragraph 8 above).
On 6 September 2011 the Jurbarkas District Court terminated the criminal proceedings against the applicant as time-barred. That decision was not appealed against and became final.
Article 31 of the Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania reads:
“...
Punishment may be imposed or applied only on the grounds established by law.
No one may be punished for the same crime a second time.
...”
Article 2 § 6 of the Criminal Code reads:
“No one shall be punished for the same crime twice.”
At the material time, Article 145 § 1 read:
“1. Anyone who threatens to kill [or seriously injure] a person, if there are sufficient grounds to believe that such a threat can be carried out, shall be punished by community service, a fine, restriction of liberty, detention or imprisonment of up to two years.”
At the material time, Article 231 read:
“1. Anyone who in any way obstructs a judge, prosecutor, pre-trial investigation officer, lawyer or official of the International Criminal Court in the exercise of their duties relating to an investigation or examination of a criminal, civil or administrative case, or obstructs a bailiff in the enforcement of a court judgment, shall be punished by community service, a fine, restriction of liberty or imprisonment of up to two years.
Anyone who commits the acts set out in paragraph 1 ... by using violence or any other type of coercion shall be punished by a fine, detention or imprisonment of up to four years.”
At the material time, Article 284 read:
“1. Anyone who in a public place by defiant conduct, threats, taunts or acts of vandalism shows disrespect to others or the environment and disturbs public order and peace shall be punished by community service, a fine, restriction of liberty, detention or imprisonment of up to two years.
Anyone who in a public place disturbs public order and peace by using offensive language or by indecent conduct shall be considered to have committed a minor criminal offence and shall be punished by community service, a fine, restriction of liberty or detention.”
At the material time, Article 290 read:
“Anyone who insults a civil servant or person performing a public function in the exercise of their duties shall be punished by a fine, detention or imprisonment of up to two years.”
At the material time, the relevant part of Article 9 read:
“...
Administrative liability for the offences set out in this Code shall arise where such offences do not invoke criminal liability in accordance with laws in force.”
At the material time, Article 174 read:
“Minor hooliganism, [that is to say] profane words or gestures in public places, insulting harassment of others or other similar conduct which breaches public order and peace, shall be punished by a fine of between 100 and 300 Lithuanian litai or up to thirty days’ administrative detention.”
At the material time, Article 21 listed the penalties which could be imposed when a person committed an administrative offence, a warning being the mildest available penalty. Article 30(1) provided that a penalty milder than that set out in the relevant Article of the Code could be imposed where there were mitigating circumstances or it was reasonable and fair to do so.
In a ruling of 10 November 2005 the Constitutional Court held:
“...
Paragraph 5 of Article 31 of the Constitution sets out the principle of ne bis in idem. This constitutional principle means a prohibition on [being punished] twice for a single deed that is contrary to the law – that is to say, for the same criminal offence, as well as for the same violation of a law which is not a criminal offence ...
The above-mentioned constitutional principle does not mean that different kinds of liability may not be applied to a person in respect of a violation of the law ... In itself, the constitutional principle of ne bis in idem does not remove the possibility of applying more than one sanction of the same kind (that is to say, defined by the norms of the same branch of law) to a person for the same violation – such as the main and additional punishment, or the main and additional administrative penalty.
The constitutional principle of ne bis in idem also means, inter alia, that if a person who has committed a deed which is contrary to the law has been held administratively but not criminally liable – that is to say, he or she has incurred a sanction (a penalty not for a crime but for an administrative violation of the law) – then he or she cannot be held criminally liable for that deed.
It should also be mentioned that the constitutional principle of ne bis in idem may not be construed to mean that it does not allow a person to be prosecuted and punished for a violation of the law in respect of which the prosecution of that person was started but terminated on grounds which, under the procedure established by law, were later recognised as without foundation and/or unlawful and the person was not held liable – no sanction (imposed punishment or penalty) was applied to him or her.
In itself, the exemption of a person from one kind of liability on the grounds and [under the] procedure established by law cannot be an obstacle to ... him or her [being subject to] liability of another kind on the grounds and under the procedure established by law.
...”
In a ruling of 12 June 2012 in criminal case no. 2K-335/2012 the Supreme Court, relying on its previous case-law (ruling of 13 November 2007 in criminal case no. 2K-686/2007 and ruling of 4 March 2008 in criminal case no. 2K-102/2008), held:
“The court rejects [the argument] that after convicting [the accused] ... the previous administrative penalties would be annulled and thus the principle of ne bis in idem would not be breached. Such legitimisation of the criminal proceedings would only be possible if the administrative penalty had been ordered due to an error or if [at the time of ordering the penalty] not all the circumstances relevant to the classification of the activity had been identified ... In the present case, the penalty for an administrative offence was given in accordance with the law and thus cannot be considered an error caused by the ignorance of relevant circumstances.”