The case originated in an application (no. 35207/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Mr Vitalie Ostrovar (“the applicant”), on 28 October 2003.
The applicant complained, in particular, about his conditions of detention, about the breach of his right to correspondence with his mother and to have contacts with his wife and daughter and about not having an effective remedy in respect of the violations of his rights guaranteed by Article 3 and Article 8 of the Convention.
The application was allocated to the Fourth Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court).
On 1 November 2004 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). This case was assigned to the newly composed Fourth Section (Rule 52 § 1).
By a decision of 22 March 2005, the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1), the Chamber having decided, after consulting the parties, that no hearing on the merits was required (Rule 59 § 3 in fine).
Background
The applicant's conditions of detention in the Remand Centre No. 3 of the Ministry of Justice
(a)  The applicant's submissions
Alleged interference with the applicant's correspondence
(a)  The applicant's submissions
Alleged denial to the applicant of contact with his wife and daughter
(a)  The applicant's submissions
(b)  The Government's submissions on the facts
The relevant parts of the CPT's report concerning the visit to  between 11 and 21 October 1998 read as follows:
“77.  Prisoners were accommodated primarily in five buildings. Buildings I, II and VII for the most part accommodated remand prisoners. Male juveniles were held in a section of building III, the basement of which was reserved for prisoners in transit. Women had a separate detention area, situated in Building V. Sentenced prisoners were scattered among the various buildings, except for the buildings housing the detachment of convicted prisoners employed as workers, situated in Building VIII. It should also be noted that all prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment were accommodated in the basement of Building II.
...
In contrast, in all the other detention areas, living conditions of the vast majority of the prison population left a considerable amount to be desired. In most of the cells, the living space per prisoner was well below the minimum standard set and the cramming in of persons had reached an intolerable level. For example, in Buildings I and II, up to 16 people were accommodated in cells of 24 m², 24 people had to share a cell of 32 m², and 29 people were packed into a cell of 52 m². In the juveniles' section in Building III, 12 young people were placed in a cell of 21 m² and 16 in a cell of 23 m². In addition, the delegation observed that cells of 8 m² to 9 m² accommodated up to four people.
Furthermore, in these cells access to natural light was very limited, artificial lighting was mediocre, and the air polluted and rank. For prisoners still under investigation (i.e. over 700 prisoners), the situation was even worse, their cells being virtually totally without access to natural light because of the thick external metal blinds covering the windows. By force of circumstances, the equipment was reduced to the bare minimum, comprising metal or bunk beds which were extremely rudimentary and in a poor state, and a table and one or two benches. Furthermore, in many cells, there were not enough beds and prisoners had to share them or sleep in turns. In addition, the bedding was in a bad condition; the very small stocks of mattresses, blankets and sheets was not enough and many prisoners without family or resources had to sleep just on the bed frame.
The cells had a sanitary annex, a real source of infection. Above the Asian toilet was a tap which served both as a flush and as a source of water which prisoners could use to freshen up or wash. Moreover, this area was only partially partitioned by a small low wall less than one metre high, which meant that it was not possible to preserve one's privacy.
The state of repair and cleanliness in the cell blocks, overall, was also of considerable concern. In addition, many of the cells were infested with cockroaches and other vermin and some prisoners also complained that there were rodents.
To sum up, the living and hygiene conditions for the vast majority of the prison population were execrable and, more particularly, constituted a serious health risk.
The three transit cells in use at the time of the visit in Building III deserve particular mention. The situation in terms of living space in the cells was without a doubt the worst seen. Up to 18 prisoners were crammed into cells of 18 m². Half of the surface was taken up by a two level wooden platform (without mattress and blankets) completely blocking the window. In addition, the artificial lighting was mediocre and the atmosphere there was suffocating. As the remaining surface of the cell was filled up with the detainees' belongings and an Asian toilet, the detainees had no other choice but to pile onto the two levels of the platform. A number of detainees had been accommodated in these intolerable conditions for three to four months.
As regards washing facilities for prisoners, they had weekly access to the showers. However, the number of showers was notoriously inadequate for the male population (23 showers for approximately 1400 detainees, and moreover, its functioning was unreliable). In addition, prisoners who were not in a position to receive the basic washing necessities from their families were totally left without because of the lack of soap and towels in the prison.
The material conditions described above were further aggravated by another major inconvenience. Prisoners had to put up with very loud and repetitive music which was ongoing throughout the day and broadcast by loud speakers in the yard from 6 o'clock in the morning to 10 o'clock at night. The reason given for this measure was to ensure that the various categories of prisoners had no contact with each other. Many prisoners complained about this situation and the delegation was able to see for itself how obtrusive it was. For example, in many of the cells it was virtually impossible to hold a conversation.
...
The health care staff in prison No. 3 comprised nine full-time doctors, assisted by seven assistants, 11 nurses and a psychologist. The nine doctors were as follows: one doctor in charge of the prison medical service, two general practitioners, two pneumologists, a psychiatrist, a dermatologist, a radiologist and a dentist. In addition to providing a consultation facility, the medical staff was responsible for an infirmary with a capacity of 70 beds, although in reality, this area accommodated 200 patients, primarily patients suffering from tuberculosis.
The medical team could at a pinch be considered sufficient. However, such is not the case for the team of assistants and nurses.”
The relevant parts of the CPT's report concerning the visit to  between 10 and 22 June 2001 read as follows:
“69.  The visited penitentiary establishments were severely affected by the country's economic situation. The budget ceiling for spending on the prison service under the 2001 Finance Act had been set at 48.7 million Lei (approximately 4.2 million Euros) or 38,9% of the resources needed per year. As a result, prisons suffered from severe shortages from every standpoint. For example, the daily budget for feeding a prisoner was 2.16 Lei, just 38.8% of the current statutory norm. Prisons also suffered form cuts in electricity, water and heating, not to mention the unavailability of medicines necessary for treating prisoners.
In their letter of 5 November 2001, the Moldovan authorities refer to the efforts made at the beginning of 2001 by the Department of Prison Administration to obtain humanitarian aid from international organizations and individuals, in order to resolve the most urgent problems of the prison system (2.3 million Lei have been obtained in this way).
The CPT recognizes the laudable efforts made by the Moldovan prison administration and these deserve to be supported. Nevertheless, the Committee has already recalled on several occasions that there are certain basic necessities of life that must, in all circumstances, including in a serious economic situation, be assured by the state in respect of persons for which it is responsible. Nothing can ever exempt the state from this responsibility.
As a consequence, the CPT calls upon the Moldovan authorities, at the highest political level, to take without delay the necessary measures in order that all prisons in Moldova may adequately assure the basic necessities of life for all detainees.
...
The description of Prison No. 3 in Chişinău in paragraph 77 of the report on the 1998 visit is still valid. As previously indicated, this establishment suffered from severe overcrowding: 1,892 prisoners (mainly remand prisoners), including 127 women and 122 juveniles, for 1,480 places.
For example, the follow-up visit to Prison No. 3 in Chişinău revealed positive changes which the CPT welcomes. It particularly approves of the removal of the heavy blinds covering the windows of cells looking onto the interior of the establishment. It is also planned to replace the blinds on the windows looking onto the street with an alternative arrangement that will let in sufficient natural light.
...
...Major repairs had also been made to the heating with, in particular, the installation of a new boiler, while the prison's central showers had been completely renovated (three shower rooms were operational and a fourth was being repaired) with the help of former prisoners and prisoners' families. This made it possible for male prisoners to take a shower, with hot water, every ten days. In certain buildings, moreover, repair work on the electrical system and painting of the corridors had been completed. A few cells were currently undergoing refurbishment.
That said, the appalling living conditions and state of hygiene in buildings I, II and III, including the transit cells, described in paragraphs 80 and 81 of the previous report, had not changed (except as far as access to natural light is concerned). Indeed, the acute overcrowding in these buildings exacerbated matters still further. In the few cells viewed that were properly equipped and fitted out, this was due to the prisoners themselves, who had been able to procure what was needed from their families.
...
The absence of organised activity programmes was a common feature of the establishments visited. This was undoubtedly a consequence of the economic situation and overcrowding, but also of the restrictive legislation governing the categories of prisoners accommodated there. Only a minute fraction of the prison population had work: some sixty in Bender and Chişinău and twenty-seven in Cahul. The majority of these prisoners formed part of the workforce allocated to the various prison duties. Other forms of activity were almost non-existent. It should be noted, however, that some efforts had been made in Prison No. 3, following the CPT's recommendations. For example, the outdoor exercise areas had been equipped with modest sports facilities. In this context, management plans to fit out two sports halls as soon as possible deserve particular support. Improvements had also been made to the juvenile detention regime: a television room had been provided and a few activities organised, such as music, singing and group discussions/debates. However, these early attempts to meet the needs of young persons remain an isolated example. In the other establishments, they were left entirely to their own devices.
...
The follow-up visit to Prison No. 3 showed that compared with 1998 (see paragraph 98 of the report) the situation regarding health staffing levels had deteriorated. In particular, the number of nurses had fallen (from eleven to eight) added to which, two of these posts were vacant. The number of doctors and medical assistants remained the same, 9.5 and 7 respectively, but the post of head doctor was vacant. Such a team is not sufficient to meet the needs of almost 2,000 prisoners, a significant number of which were in the prison hospital (149), particularly as far as the care staff is concerned (medical assistants and nurses). The number of complaints received concerning access to medical staff and medical care is therefore hardly surprising.
...
As indicated in the preliminary remarks, the supply with necessary medication was problematic in the visited establishments. The detainees mostly depended on their families or on non-governmental organisations in order to obtain the necessary medication (for example, Pharmaciens sans Frontières at Prison No. 3)...
From the standpoint of medical confidentiality, medical examinations and consultations did not take place in appropriate conditions in any of the establishments. As a rule, everything took place in the custody areas at cell doors (through the hatch), in the presence of guards. If prisoners had to be treated in a consultation room, guards were also in attendance. The situation in Prison No. 3, in the so-called "procedure" room in the infirmary, was particularly undignified. Treatment was administered through a closed door with bars, with an opening measuring 37 cm². The patients concerned then had to present the relevant part of the body, be it forearm or buttocks, in full view of other prisoners and staff.
There also needs to be a review of access to a doctor and a medical assistant. The delegation observed that when they were doing their daily rounds, the medical assistants only had minimal contact with prisoners, and always in the presence of guards. As a result, it proved very difficult to request consultations, which had to be done through guards. Many complaints were received about the considerable delays in gaining access to care staff and the barriers erected by guards. The CPT recommends that this situation be remedied.
There are several indicators to suggest that the situation regarding tuberculosis, already a matter of concern in 1998, is deteriorating. For example, in Prison No. 3, there has been a constant increase in the number of recorded active cases, from 54 in January 2000 to 121 in June 2001. Moreover, according to statistics supplied, tuberculosis accounts for 42% of the deaths in prison.
The CPT notes the improvements made in Prison No. 3 to the conditions in which visits take place, with the refurbishment of the booths used for short visits and rooms fitted out for convicted prisoners' long visits. Nevertheless, the visiting areas remain insufficient, given the capacity of the establishment. ... The CPT invites the Moldovan authorities to develop the facilities for visits in the establishments visited at the earliest possible opportunity.”
In paragraph 87 of its report concerning the visit to  between 24 November and 4 December 2002, the CPT recommended that prison authorities should offer a minimum of 4 m² per prisoner.
The relevant provision of the Constitution of the  reads as follows:
Article 30
“(1)  The State shall ensure the privacy of letters, telegrams and other postal dispatches, of telephone conversations and of the use of other legal means of communication”.
This principle is restricted in relation to detainees. Specific provisions relating to the privacy of prisoners' correspondence were set out in the Code for the Execution of Criminal Sentences.
The relevant provisions of the Code for the Execution of Criminal Sentences read as follows:
Article 14
“(1)  A convicted prisoner shall enjoy rights established in the legislation on the execution of criminal sanctions in accordance with the nature of the sanction and the restrictions of any of his rights imposed upon him by the sentencing court.
(2)  A convicted prisoner shall be entitled:
(c)  to receive and send mail, and to submit explanations, proposals and complaints in his language, and, if necessary, to use the services of an interpreter.”
Article 73
“(1)  A convicted prisoner shall be entitled to receive and send an unlimited number of letters and telegrams.
(2)  A convicted prisoner's outgoing and incoming correspondence ... shall be subject to censorship. A petition addressed to an ombudsman by a detained person shall not be verified by the prison administration and shall be transmitted to the addressee within twenty-four hours (as amended by Law no. 18-XIV of 14 May 1998).
(4)  A convicted prisoner's proposals, requests and complaints addressed to an hierarchically higher legal authority shall be dispatched to such authority within three days.”
The relevant provisions of the Law on Pre-Trial Detention No. 1226-XIII read as follows:
Article 16. The rights of remanded prisoners
“1.  Remanded prisoners have the right to:
d)  to be visited by their lawyer, relatives and other persons;
f)  to correspond with their relatives and with other persons, to send complaints, requests and letters to public authorities and to public servants in accordance with the provisions of Article 18;”
Article 18. Correspondence, complaints and requests
“(1)  Remanded prisoners can correspond with their relatives and with other persons on the basis of a written authorisation by the person or the authority in charge with their case. Letters written or received by the remanded persons are sent to the addressees or handed by the prison authority to the remanded persons within three days.”
“who can limit the correspondence in the interest of the criminal investigation or in the interest of justice, as well as in the interest of security and order in the detention facility.”
Article 19
“(1)  The administration of the remand centre allows the remanded person to have contact with his or her relatives or other persons, if the contact is authorised by the investigating body charged with the remanded person's case. As a rule, the remanded person has this right once a month. The length of a meeting shall be from one to two hours.”