The case originated in an application (no. 61198/08) against the French Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a French national, Mr Maurice Agnelet (“the applicant”), on 11 December 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr F. Saint-Pierre, a lawyer practising in Lyons. The French Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms E. Belliard, Director of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention on account of the lack of reasoning in a judgment of the Assize Court of Appeal.
On 27 September 2011 the application was declared partly inadmissible, with the exception of the complaint concerning the lack of reasoning in the Assize Court of Appeal’s judgment; notice of that complaint was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1938 and is currently in prison.
In late October 1977 Agnès Le Roux (“A.R.”), a twenty-nine-year-old woman, went missing in unexplained circumstances and for unknown reasons; she has never been seen again. A.R. was a director and partner, together with others including her mother, R.R., in the company that ran the Palais de la Méditerranée, a casino in Nice.
On 13 February 1978 R.R. lodged a criminal complaint alleging false imprisonment. On 1 March 1978 a judicial investigation was opened in respect of that allegation. From 4 February 1980 this became a murder investigation and R.R. lodged a further criminal complaint.
On 13 August 1983 the applicant, who was A.R.’s lawyer and also her lover, was charged with her murder by the investigating judge at the Nice tribunal de grande instance. He was remanded in custody, before being released on 7 October 1983.
On 29 September 1985 the public prosecutor filed submissions recommending that the charges be dropped.
On 30 September 1985 the investigating judge made an order finding that there was no case to answer.
On 23 April 1986 the Indictment Division of the Aix-en-Provence Court of Appeal upheld the order.
In a judgment of 1 February 1988 the Court of Cassation dismissed an appeal on points of law by R.R.
On 24 October 1994 and 4 November 1997 R.R. lodged criminal complaints against the applicant and his estranged wife F.L. respectively, accusing the former of concealment of a body and the latter of aiding and abetting concealment of a body; in both cases she applied to join the proceedings as a civil party.
On 11 June 1999 F.L. admitted that she had given false evidence at the applicant’s instigation in her statement to the police in 1979, having stated that she had gone to Switzerland with the applicant on 27 and 28 October 1977.
In a judgment of 7 December 2000 the Investigation Division of the Aix-en-Provence Court of Appeal ordered the reopening of the investigation into A.R.’s disappearance and murder. It held that the declaration by F.L. constituted fresh incriminating evidence within the meaning of the Code of Criminal Procedure, strengthening the existing evidence which had previously been judged insufficient.
On 20 December 2000 the investigating judge placed the applicant under formal investigation for murder and made a court supervision order.
On 14 June 2001 the investigating judge arranged a confrontation between F.L. and the applicant.
On 21 February 2002, 25 June 2003 and 18 March 2004 the Investigation Division of the Aix-en-Provence Court of Appeal dismissed applications by the applicant for the charges to be dropped.
In a judgment of 26 October 2005 the Investigation Division of the Aix-en-Provence Court of Appeal committed the applicant for trial in the Alpes-Maritimes Assize Court. In its judgment, which ran to ninety-three pages, it dismissed an objection that the investigations into the alleged offence of concealment of a body had been unlawful as they had resulted from an abuse of process by the civil party in the form of a spurious accusation. It further held that the fact that the victim’s body had never been discovered did not prove that no crime had been committed; on the contrary, the disappearance of the body might have been an aspect of the crime designed to thwart any useful inquiries. Furthermore, after noting that the applicant was the only person charged with murder in the case, it observed that it would be appropriate to examine his attitude towards the missing person’s family and the proceedings. The Investigation Division found that the applicant had indulged in a series of lies, omissions and changes of story that could not be explained by his anxiety at being held in police custody or the fear of making statements that could jeopardise his career as a lawyer. It concluded that sufficient evidence had been gathered in the proceedings to suggest that the applicant had intentionally killed A.R. in order to appropriate the sum of three million French francs.
The applicant appealed on points of law against that judgment. He argued, in particular, that the judgment had not specified the factual circumstances in which the alleged offence had been committed, thus making it impossible for him to mount an effective defence.
On 15 February 2006 the Court of Cassation dismissed the applicant’s appeal, pointing out that the judicial investigating bodies had the ultimate authority to assess whether the acts of which a person under investigation was accused amounted to a criminal offence.
In a judgment of 20 December 2006 the Alpes-Maritimes Assize Court acquitted the applicant. The public prosecutor appealed.
A second trial was held in the Bouches-du-Rhône Assize Court from 17 September to 11 October 2007.
The following questions were put to the court and the jury:
Principal questions:
“1 – Is the accused Maurice Agnelet guilty of having deliberately killed [A.R.] in Nice (département of Alpes-Maritimes) between 26 October and 2 November 1977, or in any event within national territory and outside the period to which the time-limit for prosecution applies?
2 – Prior to committing the murder referred to above, had the accused Maurice Agnelet formed the intention to commit that offence?”
Subsidiary questions:
“3 – Is it established that [A.R.] was deliberately killed in Nice (département of Alpes-Maritimes) between 26 October and 2 November 1977, or in any event within national territory and outside the period to which the time-limit for prosecution applies?
4 – Was the murder referred to in question no. 3 premeditated?
5 – Is the accused Maurice Agnelet guilty of having given instructions for the commission of the murder referred to in question no. 3 and further defined in question no. 4 in Nice (département of Alpes-Maritimes) between 26 October and 2 November 2007 [sic], or in any event within national territory and outside the period to which the time-limit for prosecution applies?
– Is the accused Maurice Agnelet guilty of having knowingly facilitated, through aid or assistance, the preparation or commission of the murder referred to in question no. 3 and further defined in question no. 4 in Nice (département of Alpes-Maritimes) between 26 October and 2 November 2007 [sic], or in any event within national territory and outside the period to which the time-limit for prosecution applies?”
The answer given to the two principal questions was “yes, by a majority of at least ten”, and the subsidiary questions were found to be “devoid of purpose”.
In a judgment of 11 October 2007 the Assize Court found the applicant guilty of murdering A.R. and sentenced him to twenty years’ imprisonment. The judges of the court ordered the applicant’s immediate detention and, in a separate judgment on the civil claim, ordered him to pay damages to the civil parties.
The applicant appealed on points of law. He submitted several grounds of appeal, including a complaint that no reasons had been given for the Assize Court’s verdict.
In a judgment of 15 October 2008 the Court of Cassation dismissed the appeal. Addressing the argument that the Assize Court’s judgment had not contained reasons, it held that the requirements of Article 6 of the Convention had been satisfied, concluding that “all the replies, as set out both in the first-instance Assize Court’s judgment acquitting [the applicant] and in the Assize Court of Appeal’s judgment convicting him, which the judges and jury at both levels of jurisdiction gave on the basis of their personal conviction to the questions put to them in accordance with the order committing him for trial, serve as reasons for the Assize Court’s judgments on the criminal charges”.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, as applicable at the material time, read as follows:
Article 231
“The assize court has full jurisdiction to try at first instance or on appeal those persons committed for trial before it as a result of the indictment.
It may not hear any other charge.”
Article 240
“The assize court comprises the court proper and the jury.”
Article 243
“The court proper comprises the presiding judge and the other judges.”
Article 254
“The jury is made up of citizens appointed in accordance with the provisions of the following Articles.”
Article 317
“The defendant must be represented by counsel at the trial.
If the lawyer chosen or appointed in accordance with Article 274 does not appear in court, the president shall officially assign one.”
Article 327
“The president shall ask the defendant and the jury to listen attentively to the committal order and, where the assize court is sitting as a court of appeal, the questions put to the assize court that heard the case at first instance, the answers to the questions, the decision and the sentence imposed.
He shall ask the clerk to read out the appropriate information.”
Article 347
“The president shall declare the oral proceedings closed.
He may not sum up the arguments submitted by the prosecution and the defence.
He shall give directions for the case file to be handed over to the clerk of the assize court; however, with a view to the deliberations provided for in Articles 355 et seq., he shall retain a copy of the Investigation Division’s judgment.
If during the deliberations the assize court considers it necessary to examine one or more documents in the case file, the president shall direct that the file be brought to the deliberation room, where it shall be opened for that purpose in the presence of the public prosecutor and counsel for the defendant and for the civil party.”
Article 348
“The president shall read out the questions which the court and jury must answer. The questions do not need to be read out if they are set out in the indictment or if the defendant or his counsel waives this right.”
Article 350
“If it emerges at the hearing that there were one or more aggravating circumstances which were not mentioned in the committal order, the president shall ask one or more special questions.”
Article 351
“If it emerges at the hearing that the alleged offence warrants a different legal classification from that set out in the indictment, the president shall ask one or more subsidiary questions.”
Article 353
“Before the assize court withdraws to deliberate, the president shall read out the following instruction, which shall also be displayed in large type in the most visible place in the deliberation room:
‘The law does not ask jurors to account for how they reached their personal conviction; it does not lay down rules on which they are to place particular reliance as to the completeness and sufficiency of evidence; it requires them to ask themselves questions, in silence and contemplation, and to discern, in the sincerity of their conscience, what impression has been made on their rational faculties by the evidence against the defendant and the submissions of the defence. The law simply asks them this one question, which encompasses the full scope of their duties: ‘Are you inwardly convinced?’’”
Article 356
“The court and the jury shall deliberate, and shall then vote, in writing and by separate and successive ballots, first on the principal offence and, where appropriate, on grounds for exemption from criminal responsibility, on each of the aggravating circumstances, on the subsidiary questions and on each of the aspects constituting a legal cause for exemption from or reduction of the penalty.”
Article 357
“Each of the judges and members of the jury shall receive for this purpose an open ballot paper bearing the stamp of the assize court and the following words: ‘Upon my honour and my conscience, my finding is ...’.
He shall then write or cause to be written in secret the word ‘yes’ or ‘no’ on a table placed in such a way that no one can see the vote written on the ballot paper. After filling in and closing the ballot paper, he shall hand it to the president, who shall deposit it in a box designed for this purpose.”
Article 370
“Where appropriate, after delivering the judgment the president shall, where applicable, inform the defendant of his right to lodge an ordinary appeal or an appeal on points of law as the case may be, and shall inform him of the time-limit for such an appeal.”
The Court of Cassation has held that “it is a fundamental principle that the assize court must try the charge resulting from the oral proceedings and not the one previously established in the written proceedings” (Court of Cassation, Criminal Division, 12 May 1970, Bull. crim. no. 158).
With regard to reasoning, it has inferred from Articles 353 and 357 of the Code of Criminal Procedure that judgments by assize courts involving a conviction cannot contain any statements as to guilt other than those resulting from the set of answers, serving as reasons, which the judges and jury gave to the questions put to them in accordance with the committal order; a judgment containing any other information, for example clarifying the factual circumstances and aspects of the defendant’s personality, is liable to be quashed (Court of Cassation, Criminal Division, 15 December 1999, Bull. crim. no. 308).
Provided that information has been given in advance as to the charges forming the basis of the indictment, the rights of the defence have been freely exercised and the proceedings have been public and adversarial, the Assize Court’s judgment satisfies the requirements of a fair trial (Court of Cassation, Criminal Division, 14 October 2009, Bull. crim. no. 170).
Following a request for a preliminary ruling on constitutionality, the Constitutional Council ruled that the lack of reasoning in judgments of assize courts did not infringe the right to a fair and just criminal process. In its view, the requirement to give reasons in criminal cases amounted to a legal guarantee of the constitutional requirement for legislation to prevent any arbitrary decisions by the courts in accordance with the principle that only the law can define a crime and prescribe a penalty. Not including reasons could be justified on condition that appropriate safeguards were provided by law to preclude any arbitrariness. The Constitutional Council considered that such safeguards were afforded in proceedings before the assize courts, for the following reasons: the principle that proceedings were conducted orally (only evidence adduced orally and examined by the parties in the defendant’s presence was taken into account in the deliberations) and were uninterrupted (the judges and jury deliberated immediately after the oral proceedings ended); the requirement for the assize court to determine the case on the basis of a reasoned judicial decision, namely the order by the investigating judge or the judgment of the Investigation Division committing the accused for trial; the detailed arrangements concerning deliberations within the assize court; the requirement for the assize court and its president to ensure that the questions put to the court were clear, precise and geared to the circumstances of each individual; and the principle that the verdict was the direct expression of the personal conviction of the members of the jury, seeing that all decisions that were unfavourable to the defendant had to be adopted by at least an absolute majority of the jury.
This law amended Article 327 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and also introduced a new Article 365-1:
Article 327
“The president of the assize court shall give a concise summary of the acts of which the defendant is accused, as resulting from the committal order.
He shall set out the evidence for and against the defendant as referred to, in accordance with Article 184, in the committal order.
Where the assize court hears an appeal, the president shall also indicate the general decision reached at first instance, the reasons behind it and, where applicable, the sentence imposed.
In his summary, the president must not manifest his own opinion as to the defendant’s guilt.
At the end of his summary, the president shall read out the legal classification of the acts forming the subject of the indictment.”
Article 365-1
“The president or one of the other judges designated by him shall draw up the reasons for the judgment.
In the event of a conviction, the reasoning shall consist of a statement of the main items of evidence against the defendant which persuaded the assize court in respect of each of the charges against him. This relates to the evidence examined during the deliberations conducted by the court and the jury in accordance with Article 356, prior to the voting on the questions.
The reasons shall be set out in a document appended to the question sheet known as the ‘statement of reasons form’, which shall be signed in accordance with Article 364.
Where the particular complexity of the case, on account of the number of defendants or the offences with which they are charged, makes it impossible to draw up the statement of reasons form immediately, it shall be drafted, added to the case file and filed with the registry of the assize court no later than three days after the judgment is delivered.”