The case originated in an application (no. 44473/06) against the Republic of Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Hungarian national, Ms Marianne Hábenczius (“the applicant”), on 18 October 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Róth, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice.
The applicant alleged that the criminal proceedings conducted against her had been unfair and excessive in length. She further complained that the seizure of her laptop had been unjustified and protracted, eventually resulting in the loss of its value.
On 5 February 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1969 and lives in Budapest.
At the material time, the applicant lived in the United States. On 14 January 2001 she arrived in Hungary on a visit. She had a laptop with her which she had bought on 9 January 2001 in the United States for 1,624 US dollars (approximately 1,500 euros (EUR) at that time). She did not declare it to the airport customs authority, since in her opinion it constituted a ‘travel item’, exempted from customs duty, within the meaning of section 110 of Act no. C of 1995 and section 185(3) of the implementing Decree of the Act.
Although she specified to the authorities that she was living abroad and had no intention of importing the laptop into Hungary but intended to take it back to the United States on departure, the customs authority nevertheless seized the laptop and filed a criminal report, charging the applicant with smuggling.
A bill of indictment was preferred by the Budapest X/XVII District Public Prosecutor’s Office on 28 April 2001. In the bill of indictment, the prosecutor proposed that the seizure of the laptop be discontinued according to section 102(1) of Act no. I of 1973 on the Code of Criminal Procedure and that the applicant be ordered to pay the value of the item instead of its confiscation.
On 9 May 2001 the Pest Central District Court, without holding a hearing, found the applicant guilty as charged, imposed a fine of 23,000 Hungarian forints (HUF; approximately EUR 90) and ordered the release of the laptop on the payment of another HUF 100,000 (approximately EUR 390) as ‘value equivalent to confiscation’ (elkobzás alá eső érték).
On 23 June 2001 the applicant requested a hearing, seeking her acquittal.
No hearing took place subsequently, and the laptop remained under seizure.
On 24 April 2006 the District Court found that the case was statute-barred and discontinued the proceedings. It ordered the release of the laptop. This decision became final on 2 June 2006.
On 28 June 2006 the customs authority invited the applicant to recover the laptop.
The applicant submitted that during these proceedings she had moved back to Hungary. On her repatriation, she could have imported her belongings, including the laptop, free of customs. However, its release was in these circumstances nevertheless subject to the payment of customs duty. Since the laptop had meanwhile become technically outdated and thus worthless, she decided to have it returned to the United States rather than recover it.
Act no. IV of 1978 on the Criminal Code provided as follows:
“(1) Anyone who
a) withholds dutiable goods from customs inspection or makes an untrue declaration to the authorities in respect of circumstances relevant for the establishment or collection of the customs duty or the customs bond (smuggling),
...
commits an offence and shall be punishable with imprisonment of up to one year, labour in the public interest, or a fine.”
“(1) Any object ...
d) for which the criminal act was committed ...
shall be confiscated.
...
(2) Where confiscation would place an unfair burden on the perpetrator disproportionate to the gravity of the offence, in lieu of confiscation the perpetrator shall be obliged to pay an amount of money corresponding to the value of the object, the advantage, or the material means, unless the non-application of confiscation is excluded under an international obligation.”
Act no. I of 1973 on the Code of Criminal Procedure, as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
“(1) The authority will seize an item which ...
b) is subject to confiscation ...
(2) The authority shall place the seized item in deposit. Where the item is not suitable for being deposited or for any other important reason arrangements shall be made for the preservation of the item in another manner. ...”
“(1) Seizure shall be discontinued as soon as it is no longer needed in the interests of the proceedings. ...”
“(1) The ruling delivered in trial based on documents [tárgyalás mellőzésével hozott végzés] shall not be subject to an appeal; the prosecutor, the accused, the defence counsel, the private party and the other interested party may request, within eight days of the service, that a hearing be held. Upon such a motion, the court shall hold a hearing.
...
(3) Depending on the result of the hearing, the court shall either uphold the ruling delivered in trial based on documents or annul it while adopting a new decision. In the absence of a motion to the detriment of the accused, the court may only impose a harsher punishment if new evidence arises at the hearing and thereby the court establishes a new fact necessitating a more severe classification or the imposition of a significantly harsher punishment. The appeal against the ruling adopted as a result of the hearing shall suspend its execution.”