The case concerns the finding of the applicants’ liability in defamation after one of them published a report on corruption in the Moscow mayor’s office.
The first applicant, a joint-stock company incorporated under Russian law, is the publisher of the Kommersant newspaper. The second applicant, Ms Tirmaste, was born in 1978 and lives in Moscow. She was a journalist writing for the Kommersant newspaper. The third applicant, Mr Nemtsov, was born in 1959. He had been the governor of a Russian region and a Government minister before becoming an opposition politician. The applicants were represented by Mr D. Zharkov, Mr V. Prokhorov and Ms O. Mikhaylova, lawyers practising in Moscow and the Moscow Region.
The Government were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In 2009, in time for the election to the Moscow City Council, Mr Nemtsov released a research report “Luzhkov: Results” which took stock of the seventeen-year-long rule of the Moscow mayor Mr Luzhkov. The forty-page dossier detailed widespread corruption in Moscow, drawing on sociological data, publications in the Russian and foreign media, expert opinions and other sources, all of which were listed in the annex to the report. It concluded:
“Corruption in Moscow is not just problematic, it is systemic. It is an open secret for many Muscovites that corruption has permeated all levels of officialdom in Moscow. It is obvious to us that Luzhkov and his wife have set a harmful example. In the past ten years alone, Luzhkov has signed dozens of orders authorising his wife to start construction work on more than 1,300 ha of land in Moscow. In addition, the Moscow Government approved the privatisation of ... the largest manufacturer of prefabricated houses in Moscow. The privatisation resulted in [Luzkhov’s wife] gaining control over approximately 20% of the Moscow housing market ... [She] has become the only Russian woman having a personal fortune in excess of one billion dollars. Pursuant to Article 34 of the Family Code, property which is acquired by one spouse is owned jointly with the other spouse. This means that Luzhkov, during his years as mayor, has become a dollar billionaire, just like his wife.”
On 17 September 2009 the Kommersant newspaper published a piece by Ms Tirmaste under the headline “Moscow mayor ready to sue Boris Nemtsov. Opposition politician to be called to account for the ‘Luzhkov: Results’ report”. The publication stated that the Moscow mayor would bring several defamation claims against Mr Nemtsov. Ms Tirmaste approached the mayor’s spokesperson Mr Ts. for comment. Mr Ts. stated that Mr Luzhkov and Mr Nemtsov were “men of a different calibre”:
“How could they be compared? Luzhkov is a well-known figure while Nemtsov is a non-entity. Even from a distance of a thousand kilometres he would not measure up to the mayor.”
The article went on to quote Mr Nemtsov’s reply to the spokesman’s comment:
“I fully agree with Mr [Ts.] that Luzhkov and I are men of a different calibre: I consider that Luzhkov is a corruptionist and a thief while I am neither!”
On 7 October 2009 the Moscow Government and Mayor Luzhkov sued the applicants for defamation. They challenged various statements in the report, including the first three sentences quoted in paragraph 4 above. Mr Luzhkov also claimed that Mr Nemtsov’s description of him as a “corruptionist and thief” had been untrue and damaging to his reputation.
On 30 November 2009 the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court in Moscow granted the defamation claim in part. It found that a number of statements in the text of the report did not concern Mr Luzhkov or imply that he had committed any wrongful acts. By contrast, the court found, with regard to the second and third sentences of the second paragraph of the report’s conclusions (“It is an open secret ... a harmful example”), that they had injured the honour and dignity of the Moscow Mayor and the business reputation of the Moscow Government:
“... they contain allegations that the complainants acted contrary to the norms of law and morals, and used their official position to harm the lawful interests of society and the State ... The information created the impression that the activities of the Moscow Government under the leadership of Mr Luzhkov had brought about widespread corruption in all spheres of city life ... [These phrases] ... contain allegations of a crime ... and the word ‘harmful’ means ‘wicked, pernicious’.”
As to Mr Nemtsov’s reaction to Mr Ts.’s comment, the court held:
“the statement ... reflects Mr Nemtsov’s judgment (суждение) which undermines Mr Luzhkov’s honour, dignity and business reputation and is insulting.”
Referring to the “factual elements of the case, the contents of publications, and the scope of dissemination of untrue information”, the court awarded Mr Luzhkov 500,000 Russian roubles (RUB, 11,430 euros at the material time) in respect of non-pecuniary damage, from each of Mr Nemtsov and the Kommersant publishing house, and also required them to publish a rectification.
On 9 February 2010 the Moscow City Court rejected appeals by all parties to the proceedings and upheld the findings of the District Court in a summary fashion.
On 2 March 2010 Mr Nemtsov paid RUB 13,650 for publishing a rectification. On 13 April 2010 he paid the amount awarded to Mr Luzhkov.