The case originated in an application (no. 33488/04) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Amnat (also spelled as Aminat) Khambulatova, on 15 September 2004.
The applicant was represented by lawyers of the NGO EHRAC/Memorial Human Rights Centre. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged that her son had been unlawfully detained, illtreated and then killed by State agents and that there had been no adequate investigation into the matter. She relied on Articles 2, 3, 5 and 13 of the Convention.
On 20 September 2007 the Court decided to apply Rule 41 of the Rules of Court and to grant priority treatment to the application and to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of the former Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility. The President of the Chamber acceded to the Government’s request not to make publicly accessible the documents from the criminal investigation file deposited with the Registry in connection with the application (Rule 33 of the Rules of Court).
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of the application. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court dismissed it.
The applicant was born in 1957. At the material time she lived in . She now lives in . The applicant is the mother of Mr Timur (also spelled Temur) Khambulatov, who was born in 1980.
Information submitted by the applicant
At the material time the applicant and her son Timur Khambulatov lived together at  in the village of Saveliyevskaya in .
On the night of 17-18 March 2004 the applicant and her son were at home. At about 2.30 a.m. two armoured personnel carriers (“APCs”) and two UAZ vehicles without registration numbers arrived at the applicant’s house. Around ten or fifteen armed men in camouflage uniforms broke down the outer door and rushed in. The intruders spoke unaccented Russian; the majority of them were masked and those without masks were of Slavic appearance.
The servicemen locked the applicant in one of the rooms and woke up Timur Khambulatov. Then, without producing any warrant, they searched the house. They found a bottle-shaped object wrapped in foil and asked Timur Khambulatov if he knew what it was; he replied in the negative.
The servicemen handcuffed Timur Khambulatov, took him out of the house, put him into one of the vehicles and drove away.
In the morning of 18 March 2004 the applicant visited the Naurskiy district department of the Federal Security Service (“the FSB”) and unsuccessfully inquired about her son’s whereabouts.
In the morning of 18 March 2004 Mr V.T., an officer of the Naurskiy district department of the interior (“the Naurskiy OVD”), wrote down Timur Khambulatov’s confession. The text of the document, signed by the applicant’s son, included the following:
In the morning of 18 March 2004 (in the submitted documents the date is also stated as 19 March 2004) Timur Khambulatov was found dead in a detention cell of the Naurskiy OVD. On the same date the Naurskiy district prosecutor’s office (“the district prosecutor’s office”) notified the applicant of this and told her that she could pick up the body from the Mozdok town morgue. The applicant brought her son’s dead body home and took photographs of it. On an unspecified date in 2004 Timur Khambulatov was buried.
The Government disputed some of the circumstances of the case. They submitted that Timur Khambulatov had been arrested and taken to the Naurskiy OVD. According to their submission on the admissibility and merits of the application of 17 December 2007 (page 5),
(Pages 7-8):
In the very same submission of 17 December 2007 the Government further stated (page 13):
The same submission also contained the following statement (page 13):
Information submitted by the applicant
On 20 March 2004 the Naurskiy district department of the FSB (“the Naurskiy FSB”) wrote to the head of the Naurskiy OVD informing him of a special operation carried out in respect of Timur Khambulatov by FSB officers with representatives of the Naurskiy OVD and the military servicemen. The letter read as follows:
On 18 March 2004 the district prosecutor’s office ordered an autopsy on Timur Khambulatov’s body. Between 19 March and 26 April 2004 an expert from the Mozdok forensic assessment office carried out the autopsy. Its results were given in a six-page report, which described the circumstances of Timur Khambulatov’s death as follows:
The forensic assessment read as follows:
The expert concluded that:
On 27 March 2004 the applicant requested the district prosecutor’s office to open a criminal investigation into her son’s detention and death.
On 21 April 2004 the Memorial Human Rights Centre, acting on the applicant’s behalf, requested the Prosecutor General’s Office, the Russian Ministry of the Interior and the head of the Russian FSB to inform them about the progress in the investigation of the criminal case.
On 24 May 2004 the applicant requested the district prosecutor’s office to carry out another post-mortem examination of her son’s body.
On 29 May 2004 the  prosecutor’s office informed the applicant that her son had been arrested in the course of a special operation carried out by the FSB, the military and two policemen of the Naurskiy OVD. They further stated that the military prosecutor’s office of military unit no. 20111 had decided not to institute criminal proceedings against the FSB servicemen and the military personnel, that the criminal proceedings against the policemen of the Naurskiy OVD were pending and that an exhumation of Timur Khambulatov’s body had been planned.
On 3 June 2004 the applicant again requested the district prosecutor’s office to carry out another post-mortem examination of her son’s body.
On 29 June 2004 the district prosecutor’s office instituted an investigation into the death of Timur Khambulatov under Article 105 § 2 of the Russian Criminal Code (aggravated murder). The case file was given the number 40046 (in the submitted documents also referred to as 40560, 40026 and 40506). The text of the document included the following:
On 11 May 2006 Mr T., an investigator from the Chechnya prosecutor’s office, informed the applicant that the case had been transferred from the Nadterechniy district prosecutor’s office to the Chechnya prosecutor’s office and that for the sake of progress in the investigation it was necessary to exhume Timur Khambulatov’s body, because the photographs and videotapes of it had disappeared from the investigation file. At some point later the applicant gave her consent to have her son’s body exhumed, but only in the presence of an independent expert. The investigators replied that this was impossible.
On 13 June 2006 the applicant visited the Chechnya prosecutor and told him that she would allow an exhumation on condition that it was carried out in  in the presence of a panel of experts. The prosecutor replied that he would discuss her proposal with the Prosecutor General’s Office.
On 11 June 2004 the applicant gave an interview to representatives from Amnesty International. She described the circumstances of Timur Khambulatov’s arrest and reported the conversations that she had had with State officials after her son’s death. She also described the injuries that she had discovered on her son’s body. The interview was videotaped.
At some point later Amnesty International provided the tape and the photographs of Timur Khambulatov’s body to the applicant’s representatives, who submitted them to the Court on 13 July 2007, along with the transcript of the interview.
Information submitted by the Government
On 18 March 2004 officer T. of the Naurskiy OVD conducted a crime scene examination in the applicant’s house. The examination was carried out with the assistance of a trained search dog. As a result, some items of clothing and an object resembling a home-made explosive device were collected from the scene.
On 18 March 2004 the Naurskiy OVD opened criminal case no. 40560 in connection with the discovery of a home-made explosive device in the applicant’s house.
On 19 April 2004 the  forensic assessment office concluded that the device found in the applicant’s house was an intact home-made explosive device.
On 18 March 2004 investigator T. from the district prosecutor’s office examined Timur Khambulatov’s body. As a result it was established that the body, head and extremities had numerous traumas, abrasions and injuries of various dimensions.
On 18 March 2004 the investigator ordered a forensic examination of Timur Khambulatov’s body, which was to be carried out in Mozdok, North Ossetia.
On 18 March 2004 investigators from the district prosecutor’s office questioned the doctor’s assistant of the Naurskiy OVD, Ms V.L., who stated that at about 8 a.m. on 18 March 2004 she had been asked by police officer V.T. to provide medical help to an arrested man who had lost consciousness while being questioned in the OVD. She had found the detainee lying unconscious on the floor; she had given him some injections, but all her efforts were in vain as he had died.
On the same date the investigators questioned Ms V.L. for the second time. She stated that when she had arrived at the office Timur Khambulatov had been conscious, on the floor, and that he had been able to say his name. He had been beaten up. Then she had asked him who had beaten him up, and Timur Khambulatov had told her that he had not been beaten in the Naurskiy OVD, but that he was already in this state when he was brought there and that he had pain all over his body. Then Timur Khambulatov died.
On the same date the investigators questioned the police officer of the Naurskiy OVD, Mr V.V., who stated that he had taken part, with his search dog, in the special operation against Timur Khambulatov, that the latter had been arrested at home and taken somewhere by masked armed men, and that the next morning he had learnt that the arrested man had died.
On the same date, 18 March 2004, the investigators questioned police officer Mr V.T., who stated that he had taken part in the special operation against Timur Khambulatov; the latter had been brought from his house to the Naurskiy OVD by FSB officers in a UAZ car and that after that, in the OVD, after the FSB officers had left, he had noticed that Timur Khambulatov had two abrasions on his face and a swollen left ear. After that he had questioned the arrested man alone; the latter had confessed to making the explosive device and taking part in terrorist attacks in 2000. Then Timur Khambulatov had suddenly fallen off his chair; the witness had asked the doctor’s assistant to provide Timur Khambulatov with medical help. When it had been established that Timur Khambulatov had died, the witness had notified the head of the Naurskiy OVD of the incident. On the same date the investigators questioned officer V.T. for the second time. He added to his previous statement that he had asked neither the FSB officers nor Timur Khambulatov about the origins of the injuries on the latter’s face.
On 23 March 2004 the investigators questioned Mr A.B., an officer of the Naurskiy OVD, who stated that at about 8.15 a. m. on 18 March 2004 he had arrived at work and had seen in his office his colleague Mr V.T., who was writing down the statement given by Timur Khambulatov. Mr V.T. had explained to him that the applicant’s son had been arrested as a result of a special operation. After that the witness had left the office for a meeting. At some point later, after he had gone to the office of the head of the OVD, officer V.T. had entered and informed those present that Timur Khambulatov had died.
On 24 March 2004 the investigators questioned two servicemen of military unit no. 6841, Privates A.K. and N.P., both of whom stated that they had participated in the special operation against Timur Khambulatov and that during the operation and after it nobody had used any physical force against the applicant’s son. On 28 June 2005 the investigators questioned Private N.P. for the second time; he confirmed his previous statement. On 10 February 2006 the investigators questioned private N.P. for a third time; he confirmed his previous statements.
On 25 March 2004 the investigators questioned the head of the Naurskiy FSB, Mr V.Kh., who stated that on the night of 17-18 March 2004 officers of his department had participated, along with members of other law-enforcement agencies, in a special operation against Timur Khambulatov. The next morning the head of the criminal investigation division of the Naurskiy OVD, Lieutenant-Colonel A.P., informed him that Timur Khambulatov had died, and that when the FSB officers had handed Timur Khambulatov over to the police officers in the OVD the arrested man had had numerous injuries. After that, LieutenantColonel A.P. had asked the witness to give him a statement to the effect that the FSB officers had caused the injuries on Timur Khambulatov’s body. Then the witness had written the required statement for Lieutenant-Colonel A.P., stating that while being transported from his home to the Naurskiy OVD Timur Khambulatov had attempted to abscond and that the FSB officers had had to give him “immobilising blows to the torso”. The witness further stated that he had made up this account and that in fact his officers had not used any physical force against Timur Khambulatov whatsoever and that the written statement which he had given to Lieutenant-Colonel A.P. had been false. According to the witness, he had spoken with his subordinates, the FSB officers who had participated in the special operation, and all of them had stated that Timur Khambulatov had had no sign of the use of physical force on him before he had been brought by them to the Naurskiy OVD, and that they had no idea what had happened to him in the police station.
On 26 March 2004 the investigators questioned an officer of the Naurskiy OVD, Mr N. Sh., whose statement about the events was similar to the ones given by Privates A.K. and N.P.
On 27 March 2004 the investigators questioned the applicant, who stated, among other things, that at about 4 a.m. on 18 March 2004 her son Timur Khambulatov had been taken away by armed men in camouflage uniforms who were speaking Russian and who had arrived in two APCs (armoured personnel carriers), two GAZ minivans (tabletka) and two UAZ cars. The men had not hit Timur Khambulatov; they had not even handcuffed him.
On 5 April 2004 the investigators questioned servicemen of military unit no. 93489, officers S.S., A.T., and A. Sh., all of whom stated that they had taken part in the special operation against Timur Khambulatov and that from Timur Khambulatov’s arrest at his home to his delivery to the Naurskiy OVD nobody had used physical force against him.
On 6 April 2004 the military prosecutor’s office of military unit no. 20111 refused to initiate a criminal investigation in connection with Timur Khambulatov’s death. The decision stated, amongst other things, the following:
On 26 April 2004 the Mozdok forensic expert assessment office completed its examination of Timur Khambulatov’s body (see paragraph 19 above).
On 12 May 2004 the investigators questioned forensic expert Mr P.L., who stated that on 19 March 2004 he had conducted a forensic examination of Timur Khambulatov’s body. According to the witness, the body had had numerous injuries and abrasions on the head, torso and the extremities, which in his opinion could be qualified as minor injuries; at the same time it had been established that Timur Khambulatov had had signs of pulmonary heart disease.
On 29 June 2004 the district prosecutor’s office initiated a criminal investigation into the circumstances of Timur Khambulatov’s death under Article 286 § 3 (a) of the Criminal Code (abuse of authority with use of physical force).
On 16 and 17 July 2004 the investigators questioned the applicant’s neighbours Ms B.M., Ms L.A. and Ms R. Kh., all of whom provided positive references as to Timur Khambulatov’s character and behaviour.
On 21 July 2004 the investigators again questioned Mr A.K. (see paragraph 40 above) who had witnessed Timur Khambulatov’s arrest and taken part in the search of the applicant’s house. He stated, among other things, that Timur Khambulatov had been taken to the Naurskiy OVD, where he had been put face down on the floor.
On various dates in the summer of 2004 the investigators questioned a number of other representatives of law-enforcement agencies and the military, such as Mr A.K., Mr S.S., Mr S.G., Mr B.A., Mr G.V., Mr S.T., Mr A.G., Mr A.O., Mr I.P. and Mr I.K. All their statements were similar to each other and could be reduced to them neither having seen anyone beating Timur Khambulatov nor beating him themselves during or after the special operation.
On 20 September 2004 the applicant was granted victim status in the criminal case.
On 5 March 2005 the investigators questioned Ms V.L. for the third time. She stated that Timur Khambulatov had told her that he had pain all over his body and that something had torn off inside him. Then officer V.T., who had questioned the applicant’s son, had suggested taking Timur Khambulatov to hospital, but the latter had died. Ms V.L. was of the opinion that Timur Khambulatov had died from internal bleeding.
On 10 March 2005 the applicant was familiarised with the report of the forensic examination of April 2004.
On 7 July 2005 the investigators questioned the applicant for the second time. She informed them that she did not agree with the results of the forensic examination of her son’s body and requested that the investigators order an additional expert assessment of Timur Khambulatov’s body. She further stated that in her opinion the police officers of the Naurskiy OVD had killed her son. The applicant requested the investigators to exhume her son’s body for an additional forensic examination as she did not agree with the conclusions of the initial forensic examination.
On 12 July 2005 the investigators ordered a forensic examination of tissue samples taken from the internal organs of Timur Khambulatov during the forensic examination in April 2004. The text of the document did not provide the reasons for the forensic examination of the tissue.
On 18 July 2005 the investigators ordered the exhumation of Timur Khambulatov’s body.
On the same date the applicant made a request to the investigators for the exhumation of her son’s body to be carried out in the presence of independent experts.
On 12 May 2006 the  prosecutor’s office informed the applicant that she should find an appropriate forensic expert assessment office for the new expert examination of Timur Khambulatov’s body.
On 25 May 2006 the applicant informed the investigators that she was insisting on a forensic assessment of her son’s body by independent experts and therefore she was against the exhumation of Timur Khambulatov’s body by representatives of local law-enforcement agencies. She emphasised that she did not trust the findings of the previous forensic examination, as the local law-enforcement agencies had attempted to cover up her son’s death and make it look like an accident.
On 2 June 2006 the investigators questioned the applicant for the third time; she insisted on an independent forensic examination of her son’s body.
On 2 June 2006 the  prosecutor’s office informed the applicant that the participation of independent experts in the further forensic examination of her son’s body would be impossible.
On 27 September 2006 the investigators questioned Mr M.Ch., an expert from the Chechnya forensic assessment office, who stated that on the basis of two photographs of Timur Khambulatov’s body shown to him by the investigators, it was necessary to conduct a forensic expert examination of the actual body in order to determine the cause of death.
On 29 September 2006 the investigators questioned Mr V.Kh., officer of the Naurskiy OVD, who informed them that the applicant had left  with her family.
On 30 September 2006 the investigation in the criminal case was suspended for failure to identify the perpetrators.
On 14 January 2007 the investigators ordered a complex forensic examination of the cause of Timur Khambulatov’s death, to be based on the documents contained in three volumes of the criminal case file no. 40046.
On 21 November 2007 the supervising prosecutor overruled the decision of 30 September 2006 and ordered that the investigation be resumed.
According to the documents submitted by the Government, the investigation was suspended and resumed on several occasions, and has so far failed to identify the cause of death of the applicant’s son.
According to the Government, the applicant had been duly informed of all decisions taken during the investigation.
Despite specific requests by the Court the Government did not disclose most of the contents of criminal case no. 40046, providing only 248 pages of copies of documents. The Government requested the Court to apply Rule 33 § 3 of the Rules of Court concerning confidentiality of the submitted documents and to restricting public access to the submitted documentation. In their request the Government stated that the criminal investigation was still in progress and that public disclosure of the documents could be detrimental to the interests of participants in the criminal proceedings.
Article 91 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the  (the CCP) sets out the grounds for the arrest of a suspect. The investigators or the prosecutor have the right to detain a suspect on suspicion of the commission of a crime punishable by deprivation of liberty on one of the following grounds:
the person is caught while the crime is being committed or immediately afterwards;
the victim or witnesses points out the person as the perpetrator of the crime;
obvious traces of crime are discovered on the person, his/her clothing or in their place of residence.
Article 92 of the CCP sets out the procedure for the arrest of a suspect. The detention record must be drawn up within three hours of the time the suspect is brought to the investigating authorities or the prosecutor. The detention record must include the date, time, place, grounds and reasons for the arrest. It should be signed by the suspect and the person who made the arrest. Within twelve hours of the time of the arrest the investigator must notify the prosecutor of it in writing. The suspect must be questioned in accordance with the questioning procedure and a lawyer must be provided to him/her at his/her request. Before the questioning the suspect has the right to a confidential two-hour meeting with a lawyer.
Article 125 of the CCP sets out the judicial procedure for the consideration of complaints. Orders of the investigator or prosecutor refusing to institute criminal proceedings or terminating a case, and other orders and acts or omissions which are liable to infringe the constitutional rights and freedoms of the parties to criminal proceedings or to impede the citizens’ access to justice, may be appealed against to a local district court, which is empowered to check the lawfulness and grounds of the impugned decisions.
Article 161 of the CCP prohibits disclosure of information from the preliminary investigation file. Under part 3 of the Article, information from the investigation file may be divulged only with the permission of a prosecutor or investigator and only in so far as it does not infringe the rights and lawful interests of the parties to the criminal proceedings or prejudice the investigation. Divulging information about the private lives of parties to criminal proceedings without their permission is prohibited.