The case originated in an application (no. 5993/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Sergey Vladimirovich Babushkin (“the applicant”), on 24 December 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr T. Misakyan, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he was detained in cramped and appalling conditions in correctional colony no. IK-2 in Livny, Orel region, and that he had no effective remedy in this respect.
On 27 August 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1961 and lives in Livny, Orel region.
The applicant suffers from locomotor impairment resulting from a gunshot wound he received in 1997.
On an unspecified date the applicant was found guilty of assault on a police officer, theft and illegal possession of firearms and sentenced to fifteen years’ imprisonment. He was sent to correctional colony no. IK-2 in Livny, Orel region, to serve the prison sentence. He was released in September 2013.
The Government submitted copies of official floor plans of the colony premises and statements from the colony administration. The information provided can be summarised as follows:
Each unit comprised a dormitory, a lavatory, a cafeteria, a TV room, a storage room and a locker room. At all times the applicant was provided with an individual bed, bedding and cutlery. All the dormitories were equipped with a ventilation system in good working order. The windows in the dormitories, except for those in the quarantine section, were not covered with grilles and provided adequate access to daylight. All the premises in the correctional colony were equipped with electric lighting. The lavatory was separate from the living area of the units. Each toilet was located in a separate cubicle. The inmates were allowed at least one hour’s exercise twice a day in a specially designated area which was equipped with a volleyball playground and exercise bars.
The Government submitted a copy of the daily schedule of correctional colony no. IK-2 which reiterated the routines as set out in the model daily schedule approved by the Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation for correctional colonies (see paragraph 22 below). According to the Government, most detainees spent their day at work. Because of the disability, the applicant was not obligated to work. He was offered a job in a sewing shop where the working conditions were appropriate for his disability.
The applicant did not challenge the data submitted by the Government in respect of the measurements and population of the dormitories. He submitted that the beds were arranged in two tiers which prevented access to daylight. The dormitories were not equipped with any ventilation system. They were infested with lice. The lighting was dim and insufficient. The water supply was irregular. The level of medical service provided was unsatisfactory. The applicant did not provide any detail as to his daily routines. Nor did he explain whether he had accepted a job offer in the sewing shop or not.
On numerous occasions the applicant was placed in a disciplinary cell for failure to comply with internal regulations. Each time his head was allegedly shaved.
In response to a complaint by the applicant about the conditions of his detention, on 30 March 2007 the Federal Department of Corrections confirmed that the applicant was detained in an overcrowded dormitory where the living area per inmate was below the statutory two square metres. In particular, the letter stated as follows:
“The medical division of the Federal Department of Corrections has considered your complaint ... .
Pursuant to Article 99 § 1 of the Russian Code on the Execution of Criminal Sentences, the personal space in the correctional colony afforded per convict cannot be below 2 square metres. The disabled persons are not entitled to additional personal space. Currently the number of convicts serving a prison sentence in correctional colony no. IK-2 exceeds its maximum capacity by 6%. The conditions of detention are the same in all units.
The use of shower facilities by the convicts, laundry and drying of the bed linen and working clothes are carried out in accordance with the schedule ... approved by the head of the colony. The shower, laundry and drying facilities are in a working order.”
On 23 August 2007 the applicant allegedly submitted to the administration of the correctional colony a letter addressed to the Court. According to the applicant, the letter was not dispatched. He brought a civil claim for damages against the correctional colony.
On 14 August 2008 the Livny District Court of the Orel Region dismissed the applicant’s claims as unsubstantiated. The court noted that the inmates who testified on the applicant’s behalf could not state the date on which the applicant had allegedly submitted the letter to the administration in their presence. The court also examined the outgoing correspondence registers, which contained no reference to the applicant’s letter of 23 August 2007. Nor was there any information confirming that the witnesses who testified on the applicant’s behalf submitted any documents to the administration on that day.
On 10 December 2008 the  upheld the judgment of 14 August 2008 on appeal.
It appears that in 2005 the applicant was recognised as “category three” disabled owing to his locomotor impairment.
Prior to 2006 the applicant had purchased orthopaedic shoes at his own expense. On 13 September 2006 the applicant placed an order for orthopaedic shoes with the correctional colony. On 3 April 2007 he received four pairs of shoes free of charge.
On an unspecified date he brought an action against the correctional colony seeking, inter alia, reimbursement of the sums he had paid for the shoes on previous occasions.
On 15 May 2007 the Livny District Court of the Orel Region dismissed the applicant’s claim in full. The court noted, inter alia, that the applicant had not asked the colony to provide him with orthopaedic shoes prior to 2006. Once he had placed the order, the colony had complied with its obligation to provide him with the shoes free of charge. The delay in making the shoes had been caused by the financial difficulties of the shoe factory. The court further noted that the applicant had in any event failed to demonstrate what expenses he had incurred when purchasing the shoes himself. Nor was it incumbent on the administration of the correctional colony to take steps to purchase shoes for him in the absence of any corresponding request on his part. On 11 July 2007 the  upheld the judgment of 15 May 2007 on appeal.
Article 99 of the Code on the Execution of Criminal Sentences of 8 January 1997, as amended, provides that the personal space allocated to each individual in a dormitory should be no less than two square metres. Inmates are to be provided with individual sleeping places, bed sheets, toiletries and seasonal clothes.
According to the Internal Regulations of the Correctional Colonies as approved by Order No. 5 of the Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation on 3 November 2005, the model daily schedule for correctional colonies is as follows:
“Wake up call – no later than 5-6 a.m.
Morning physical exercise (duration) – up to 15 minutes
Time for morning toilet and making the bed – up to 10 minutes
Morning and evening muster – up to 40 minutes
Breakfast – up to 30 minutes
Travel to work site – up to 40 minutes
Work – in accordance with labour legislation
Lunch break – up to 30 minutes
Work day ends, time for cleanup – up to 25 minutes
Dinner – up to 30 minutes
Personal time – up to 1 hour
Educational programmes – up to 1 hour
Specialised and recreational activities, school and vocational training – in accordance with a separate schedule
Preparation for sleep – up to 10 minutes
Sleep (continuous) – 8 hours.”
Chapter 25 sets out the procedure for a judicial examination of complaints about decisions, acts or omissions of the State and municipal authorities and officials. Pursuant to Ruling no. 2 of 10 February 2009 by the Plenary Supreme Court of the Russian Federation, complaints by suspects, defendants and convicts about inappropriate conditions of detention must be examined in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 25 (point 7).
The burden of proof as to the lawfulness of the contested decision, act or omission lies with the authority or official concerned. If necessary, the court may obtain evidence of its own initiative (point 20 of Ruling no. 2).
If the court finds the complaint justified, it issues a decision requiring the authority or official to fully remedy the breach of the citizen’s rights (Article 258 § 1). The court determines the time-limit for remedying the violation with regard to the nature of the complaint and the efforts that need to be deployed to remedy the violation in full (point 28 of Ruling no. 2).
The Ombudsman may receive complaints concerning the actions by federal and municipal State bodies or employees, provided that the complainant has previously lodged a judicial or administrative appeal in this connection (section 16 § 1).
Having examined the complaint, the Ombudsman may apply to a court or prosecutor for the protection of the rights and freedoms which have been breached by an unlawful action or inaction of a State official or petition the competent authorities for institution of disciplinary, administrative or criminal proceedings against the State official who has committed such a breach (section 29 § 1).
The Ombudsman prepares a summary of individual complaints and he or she may submit to State and municipal authorities recommendations of a general nature on the ways to improve the protection of individual rights and freedoms or suggest legislative amendments to the lawmakers (section 31).
Public supervision commissions are responsible for public monitoring, reporting and promoting cooperation in human rights compliance in places of detention (Article 6). They may, inter alia, visit places of detention, consider detainees’ complaints, provide recommendations and interact with state and municipal authorities and mass media (Article 15).
The relevant extracts from the General Reports of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“the CPT”) read as follows:
Extracts from the 2nd General Report [CPT/Inf (92) 3]
“46. Overcrowding is an issue of direct relevance to the CPT’s mandate. All the services and activities within a prison will be adversely affected if it is required to cater for more prisoners than it was designed to accommodate; the overall quality of life in the establishment will be lowered, perhaps signiﬁcantly. Moreover, the level of overcrowding in a prison, or in a particular part of it, might be such as to be in itself inhuman or degrading from a physical standpoint.
A satisfactory programme of activities (work, education, sport, etc.) is of crucial importance for the well-being of prisoners ... [P]risoners cannot simply be left to languish for weeks, possibly months, locked up in their cells, and this regardless of how good material conditions might be within the cells. The CPT considers that one should aim at ensuring that prisoners in remand establishments are able to spend a reasonable part of the day (8 hours or more) outside their cells, engaged in purposeful activity of a varied nature ...
Speciﬁc mention should be made of outdoor exercise. The requirement that prisoners be allowed at least one hour of exercise in the open air every day is widely accepted as a basic safeguard ... It is also axiomatic that outdoor exercise facilities should be reasonably spacious ...
Ready access to proper toilet facilities and the maintenance of good standards of hygiene are essential components of a humane environment ...
The CPT would add that it is particularly concerned when it ﬁnds a combination of overcrowding, poor regime activities and inadequate access to toilet/washing facilities in the same establishment. The cumulative effect of such conditions can prove extremely detrimental to prisoners.
It is also very important for prisoners to maintain reasonably good contact with the outside world. Above all, a prisoner must be given the means of safeguarding his relationships with his family and close friends. The guiding principle should be the promotion of contact with the outside world; any limitations upon such contact should be based exclusively on security concerns of an appreciable nature or resource considerations ...”
Extracts from the 7th General Report [CPT/Inf (97) 10]
“13. As the CPT pointed out in its 2nd General Report, prison overcrowding is an issue of direct relevance to the Committee’s mandate (cf. CPT/Inf (92) 3, paragraph 46). An overcrowded prison entails cramped and unhygienic accommodation; a constant lack of privacy (even when performing such basic tasks as using a sanitary facility); reduced out-of-cell activities, due to demand outstripping the staff and facilities available; overburdened health-care services; increased tension and hence more violence between prisoners and between prisoners and staff. This list is far from exhaustive.
The CPT has been led to conclude on more than one occasion that the adverse effects of overcrowding have resulted in inhuman and degrading conditions of detention ...”
Extracts from the 11th General Report [CPT/Inf (2001) 16]
“28. The phenomenon of prison overcrowding continues to blight penitentiary systems across Europe and seriously undermines attempts to improve conditions of detention. The negative effects of prison overcrowding have already been highlighted in previous General Reports ...
In a number of countries visited by the CPT, particularly in central and eastern Europe, inmate accommodation often consists of large capacity dormitories which contain all or most of the facilities used by prisoners on a daily basis, such as sleeping and living areas as well as sanitary facilities. The CPT has objections to the very principle of such accommodation arrangements in closed prisons and those objections are reinforced when, as is frequently the case, the dormitories in question are found to hold prisoners under extremely cramped and insalubrious conditions ... Large-capacity dormitories inevitably imply a lack of privacy for prisoners in their everyday lives ... All these problems are exacerbated when the numbers held go beyond a reasonable occupancy level; further, in such a situation the excessive burden on communal facilities such as washbasins or lavatories and the insufﬁcient ventilation for so many persons will often lead to deplorable conditions.”