The case originated in an application (no. 22053/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Igor Vasilyevich Belov (“the applicant”), on 19 February 2002.
The applicant was represented by Ms E. Belova. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 19 February 2002 the applicant lodged with the Court a handwritten application, alleging, in particular, that he had been detained unlawfully for a long time and that the first set of criminal proceedings against him had been extremely long. The handwritten application was accompanied by a printed version which was addressed to the Court by Ms E. Belova. The latter application was not signed. On 23 July and 22 August 2002 the applicant’s representative submitted additional applications which were duly signed. In these applications the applicant complained about ill-treatment in a detention facility, various procedural violations in the course of the criminal proceedings and violations of the rights of his family members as a consequence of his conviction.
On 3 June 2005 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of the application. Having examined the Government’s objection, the Court dismissed it.
The applicant was born in 1969 and lived until his arrest in the town of  in the Moscow Region.
On 18 August 1995 criminal proceedings were instituted against the applicant on suspicion of unlawful possession of weapons.  He was arrested on the following day. It appears that the applicant immediately obtained legal representation and also appointed Ms B. to act as his public defender. The Taldomskiy District Prosecutor’s office additionally charged the applicant with aggravated robbery and extortion.
On 13 September 1995 the Taldomskiy District Prosecutor, relying on the gravity of the charges against the applicant and his liability to reoffend, authorised his placement in custody. His detention was extended a number of times, having regard to the gravity of the charges.
On 29 December 1995 the Sergiyevo-Pasad Town Court of the Moscow Region authorised the applicant’s release on a written undertaking not to leave the town. Two months later the Dmitrov Town Prosecutor revoked the undertaking and authorised the applicant’s arrest.
The applicant was served with the bill of indictment on 30 July 1996. Two days later he was committed to stand trial in the Dmitrov Town Court of the Moscow Region. On 2 August 1996 the Volokolamsk Town Court of the Moscow Region authorised the applicant’s release under his own recognisance.
On 27 November 1997 the  stayed the proceedings due to the applicant’s illness.  In 1997 and the beginning of 1998 on a number of occasions the applicant underwent treatment in a psychiatric hospital.
On 26 January 1998 the  found that the applicant had not attended hearings on 19 and 26 January 1998 and had failed to provide any excuse. It remanded the applicant in custody. According to the Government, the applicant was not detained because he had notified the  that he had been treated in a psychiatric hospital.
On 23 April 1998 the  ordered that the applicant be submitted to a psychiatric examination. A psychiatric expert opinion was lodged with the  on 29 May 1998. However, the experts did not give answers to certain questions and on 25 September 1998 the Town Court revoked the applicant’s undertaking not to leave the town and ordered that he be placed in custody and be transported to the Serbskiy Psychiatric Centre for an additional psychiatric evaluation. It appears that the applicant was placed in custody on 28 September 1998. The additional psychiatric evaluation was completed on 8 December 1998.
According to the Government, on an unspecified date the criminal proceedings were stayed because another criminal case had been brought against the applicant.
On 1 March 2000 the  found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to eight years’ imprisonment. The judgment became final on 25 May 2000 when the  upheld it on appeal.
On 4 January 2001, acting upon an application by the President of the  and by way of a supervisory review, the Presidium of the  quashed the judgments of 1 March and 25 May 2000 and remitted the case for a fresh examination. The Presidium did not rule on the detention issue. The applicant remained in custody.
The  received the case file on 21 February 2001. According to the Government, on 6 March 2001 the  listed the first trial hearing and ordered that the measure of restraint applied to the applicant “should remain unchanged”.
On 12 October 2001 the  extended the applicant’s detention for an additional three months, until 21 November 2001, holding that he was charged with serious criminal offences and was liable to abscond and reoffend. The  noted that the applicant had already absconded once. A month later the  upheld the extension order, noting the gravity of the charges against the applicant.
According to the Government, no further extension orders were issued.
On 27 April 2002 the  found the applicant guilty of aggravated robbery, dismissed the remaining charges and sentenced the applicant to four years and six months’ imprisonment. The applicant did not appeal.
On 22 September 1998 the Dmitrov Town Prosecutor’s office instituted criminal proceedings against the applicant. He was suspected of having murdered two persons. On the same day the acting Dmitrov Town Prosecutor authorised the applicant’s detention on the ground that he was suspected of a particularly serious offence and that he could not be found at his place of residence. The prosecutor concluded that the applicant had absconded.
After his arrest on 28 September 1998, the applicant was served with a copy of the decision of 22 September 1998 on which he made a handwritten note. It reads as follows:
“Served [with the decision]:
I do not agree that I absconded, because I underwent treatment in Moscow Regional psychiatric hospital no. 5”
That copy of the decision also bears a handwritten note from a certain official, who wrote that due to the state of his mental health the applicant could not be placed in a temporary detention unit or detention facility under normal conditions.
On 19 November and 4 December 1998 prosecution authorities further extended the applicant’s detention, until 16 December 1998 and 16 March 1999 respectively. The reason for both the extensions was similar: the applicant was charged with a serious criminal offence and the investigating authorities needed additional time.
On 18 October 1999 and 28 August 2000 the  acquitted the applicant. Both judgments were quashed on appeal by the Supreme Court of the , on 15 March and 20 December 2000, respectively. The Government submitted that from 18 October 1999 to January 2001 the domestic courts had not determined the detention matter.
On 16 January 2001 the Moscow Regional Court fixed the first trial hearing for 26 February 2001 and authorised the applicant’s detention on the ground that he had been convicted by the Dmitrov Town Court on 1 March 2000, he was serving his sentence in a correctional colony in the Ryazan Region and his presence was necessary at future court hearings.
On 17 September 2001 the  again acquitted the applicant and ordered that the issue of his further detention should be determined in the course of the first set of the criminal proceedings against him. On 10 April 2002 the Supreme Court of the  upheld that judgment.
The applicant was detained in detention facility no. IZ-50/2 in Volokolamsk.
According to the applicant, on 28 December 2001 warders entered his cell and severely beat him up. The applicant claimed that as a result of the beatings he had sustained a broken rib, concussion, a displaced joint on his left leg and multiple bruises.
The Government disputed the applicant’s statement of facts, alleging that on 28 December 2001 he had been placed in a punishment cell for a refusal to follow lawful orders of the facility administration. When warders attempted to escort him to the punishment cell he resisted and put up a fight. A warder twisted the applicant’s arm behind his back and forced him into the cell. The Government, relying on a medical certificate issued on 28 December 2001 by a prison doctor and a certificate issued on 28 July 2005 by the facility director, further submitted that on the same day the prison doctor had examined the applicant and had not recorded any injuries. Furthermore, the applicant had not made any complaints to the prison administration concerning his state of health.
On 22 January 2001 the applicant lodged a complaint with the  alleging ill-treatment in detention facility no. IZ-50/2. The  redirected that complaint to the Volokolamsk Town Prosecutor’s office which had jurisdiction over it.
On 25 January 2002 an investigator of the Volokolamsk Town Prosecutor’s office issued a decision dismissing the applicant’s complaint. The investigator found no prima facie case of ill-treatment. The applicant did not appeal to a court.
Until 1 July 2002 criminal-law matters were governed by the Code of Criminal Procedure of the  (Law of 27 October 1960, “the old CCrP”). From 1 July 2002 the old CCrP was replaced by the Code of Criminal Procedure of the  (Law no. 174-FZ of 18 December 2001, “the new CCrP”).
“Preventive measures” or “measures of restraint” include an undertaking not to leave a town or region, a personal guarantee, bail and remand in custody (Article 89 of the old CCrP, Article 98 of the new CCrP).
The Russian Constitution of 12 December 1993 provides that a judicial decision is required before a defendant can be detained or his or her detention extended (Article 22).
Under the old CCrP, a decision ordering detention could be taken by a prosecutor or a court (Articles 11, 89 and 96).
The new CCrP requires a judicial decision by a district or town court on a reasoned request by a prosecutor, supported by appropriate evidence (Article 108 §§ 1, 3-6).
When deciding whether to remand an accused in custody, the competent authority is required to consider whether there are “sufficient grounds to believe” that he or she would abscond during the investigation or trial or obstruct the establishment of the truth or reoffend (Article 89 of the old CCrP). It must also take into account the gravity of the charge, information on the accused’s character, his or her profession, age, state of health, family status and other circumstances (Article 91 of the old CCrP, Article 99 of the new CCrP).
Before 14 March 2001, remand in custody was authorised if the accused was charged with a criminal offence carrying a sentence of at least one year’s imprisonment or if there were “exceptional circumstances” in the case (Article 96). On 14 March 2001 the old CCrP was amended to permit defendants to be remanded in custody if the charge carried a sentence of at least two years’ imprisonment, if they had previously defaulted, had no permanent residence in Russia or if their identity could not be ascertained. The amendments of 14 March 2001 also repealed the provision that permitted defendants to be remanded in custody on the sole ground of the dangerous nature of the criminal offence they had allegedly committed. The new CCrP reproduced the amended provisions (Articles 97 § 1 and 108 § 1) and added that a defendant should not be remanded in custody if a less severe preventive measure was available.
Time-limits for detention
The Codes make a distinction between two types of remand in custody: the first being “during investigation”, that is, while a competent agency – the police or a prosecutor’s office – is investigating the case, and the second being “before the court” (or “during trial proceedings”), at the judicial stage. Although there is no difference in practice between them (the detainee is held in the same detention facility), the calculation of the time-limits is different.
After arrest the suspect is placed in custody “during investigation”. The maximum permitted period of detention “during investigation” is two months but this can be extended for up to eighteen months in “exceptional circumstances”. Under the old CCrP, extensions were authorised by prosecutors of ascending hierarchical levels but they must now be authorised by judicial decisions, taken by courts of ascending levels (under the new CCrP). No extension of detention “during investigation” beyond eighteen months is possible (Article 97 of the old CCrP, Article 109 § 4 of the new CCrP).
The period of detention “during investigation” is calculated up to the day when the prosecutor sends the case to the trial court (Article 97 of the old CCrP, Article 109 § 9 of the new CCrP).
Access to the materials in the file is to be granted no later than one month before the expiry of the authorised detention period (Article 97 of the old CCrP, Article 109 § 5 of the new CCrP). If the defendant needs more time to study the case file, a judge, on a request by a prosecutor, may grant an extension of the detention until such time as the file has been read in full and the case sent for trial (Article 97 of the old CCrP, Article 109 § 8 (1) of the new CCrP). Under the old CCrP, such an extension could not be granted for longer than six months.
Under the old CCrP, the trial court had the right to refer the case back for “additional investigation” if it established that procedural defects existed that could not be remedied at the trial. In such cases the defendant’s detention was again classified as “during investigation” and the relevant time-limit continued to apply. If, however, the case was remitted for additional investigation but the investigators had already used up all the time authorised for detention “during investigation”, a supervising prosecutor could nevertheless extend the detention period for one additional month, starting from the date he received the case. Subsequent extensions could only be granted if the detention “during investigation” had not exceeded eighteen months (Article 97).
From the date the prosecutor refers the case to the trial court, the defendant’s detention is classified as “before the court” (or “during judicial proceedings”).
Before 15 June 2001 the old CCrP set no time-limit for detention “during judicial proceedings”. On 15 June 2001 a new Article, 239-1, entered into force which established that the period of detention “during judicial proceedings” could not generally exceed six months from the date the court received the file. However, if there was evidence to show that the defendant’s release might impede a thorough, complete and objective examination of the case, a court could – of its own motion or on a request by a prosecutor – extend the detention by no longer than three months. These provisions did not apply to defendants charged with particularly serious criminal offences.
The new CCrP provides that the term of detention “during judicial proceedings” is calculated from the date the court received the file up to the date on which the judgment is given. The period of detention “during judicial proceedings” may not normally exceed six months, but if the case concerns serious or particularly serious criminal offences, the trial court may approve one or more extensions of no longer than three months each (Article 255 §§ 2 and 3).
Proceedings to examine the lawfulness of detention
Under the old CCrP, the detainee or his or her counsel or representative could challenge the detention order issued by a prosecutor, and any subsequent extension order, before a court. The judge was required to review the lawfulness of and justification for a detention or extension order no later than three days after receipt of the relevant papers. The review was to be conducted in camera in the presence of a prosecutor and the detainee’s counsel or representative. The detainee was to be summoned and a review in his absence was only permissible in exceptional circumstances if the detainee waived his right to be present of his own free will. The judge could either dismiss the challenge or revoke the pre-trial detention and order the detainee’s release (Article 220-1). An appeal to a higher court lay against the judge’s decision. It had to be examined within the same time-limit as appeals against a judgment on the merits (see paragraph 96 below) (Article 331 in fine).
Under the new CCrP, an appeal may be lodged with a higher court within three days against a judicial decision ordering or extending detention. The appeal court must rule on the appeal within three days of its receipt (Article 108 § 10).
Upon receipt of the case file, the judge must determine, in particular, whether the defendant should be held in custody or released pending the trial hearings (Article 222 § 5 and Article 230 of the old CCrP, Article 228 (3) and Article 231 § 2 (6) of the new CCrP) and rule on any application by the defendant for release (Article 223 of the old CCrP).
At any time during the judicial proceedings the court may order, vary or revoke any preventive measure, including remand in custody (Article 260 of the old CCrP, Article 255 § 1 of the new CCrP). Any such decision must be given in the deliberation room and signed by all the judges on the bench (Article 261 of the old CCrP, Article 256 of the new CCrP).
An appeal against such a decision lies to a higher court. It must be lodged within ten days and examined within the same time-limit as an appeal against the judgment on the merits (Article 331 of the old CCrP, Article 255 § 4 of the new CCrP – see paragraph 96 below).
Under the old CCrP, within fourteen days after receipt of the case file (if the defendant was in custody), the judge was required either: (1) to fix the trial date; (2) to refer the case back for further investigation; (3) to stay or discontinue the proceedings; or (4) to refer the case to a court having jurisdiction to hear it (Article 221). The new CCrP empowers the judge, within the same time-limit, (1) to refer the case to a competent court; (2) to fix a date for a preliminary hearing; or (3) to fix a trial date (Article 227). In the latter case, the trial proceedings must begin no later than fourteen days after the judge has fixed the trial date (Article 239 of the old CCrP, Article 233 § 1 of the new CCrP). There are no restrictions on fixing the date of a preliminary hearing.
The duration of the entire trial proceedings is not limited in time.
Under the old CCrP, the appeal court was required to examine an appeal against the first-instance judgment within ten days after it was lodged. In exceptional circumstances or in complex cases or in proceedings before the Supreme Court this period could be extended by up to two months (Article 333). No further extensions were possible.
The new CCrP provides that the appeal court must start the examination of the appeal no later than one month after it is lodged (Article 374).
The RSFSR Code of Criminal Procedure (in force until 1 July 2002, “the CCrP”) established that a criminal investigation could be initiated by an investigator on a complaint of an individual or on the investigative authorities’ own initiative when there were reasons to believe that a crime had been committed (Articles 108 and 125). A prosecutor was responsible for general supervision of the investigation (Articles 210 and 211). He could order a specific investigative action, transfer the case from one investigator to another or order an additional investigation. If there were no grounds to initiate a criminal investigation, the prosecutor or investigator issued a reasoned decision to that effect which had to be notified to the interested party. The decision was amenable to an appeal to a higher prosecutor or to a court of general jurisdiction (Article 113).
On 29 April 1998 the Constitutional Court of the  held that anyone whose legitimate rights and interests had been affected by a decision not to institute criminal proceedings should have the right to appeal against that decision to a court.