The case originated in an application (no. 4864/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Turkish nationals, Mr Yiğit Turhan Oyal, Ms Neşe Oyal and Mr Nazif Oyal (“the applicants”), on 13 November 2004.
The applicants, who had been granted legal aid, were represented by Mr M.E. Keleş and Ms M. Keleş, lawyers practising in . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicants alleged that the infection of the first applicant, a newborn baby at the relevant time, with the HIV virus during blood transfusions at a State hospital, had given rise to a violation of Articles 2, 6 and 13 of the Convention.
On 6 March 2008 the President of the Second Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicants were born in 1996, 1973 and 1961, respectively, and live in .
The first applicant was born prematurely on 6 May 1996 at the Dr Behçet Uz Children's Hospital in .
On 7 May 1996 he was diagnosed with an “inguinal and umbilical hernia” by doctors working in the same hospital.
On an unspecified date in May or June 1996, the third applicant, who is the first applicant's father, purchased a unit of red blood cells and a unit of plasma from the Izmir Directorate of the Kızılay (the Turkish Red Cross, hereinafter “the Kızılay”). A number of blood and plasma transfusions were carried out on 19 May 1996, 24 May 1996, 26 May 1996, 29 May 1996 and 6 and 7 June 1996. The first applicant was discharged from the hospital on 17 June 1996.
Approximately four months after the blood transfusion, the second and third applicants learned that the first applicant had been infected with the HIV virus which could develop into the more severe Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS).
According to the information given by the Government, on 31 October 1996 a donor (no. 1294, code MUALAB-43) donated blood to the Kızılay. Subsequent to screening and tests carried out on the donated blood (serial no. 210619), HIV was found and the blood in question was destroyed. Following two more tests, it became certain that donor no. 1294 had been infected with HIV. The authorities conducted an investigation with a view to determining whether donor no. 1294 had donated blood previously. It appeared that the unit of plasma (serial no. 202367) used for the first applicant's treatment had been given by donor no. 1294. The first applicant was admitted to the  for treatment. The costs of treatment were paid by the Izmir Social Solidarity and MutualAid Foundation.
On 7 May 1997 the applicants filed a complaint with the Public Prosecutor's office in . They claimed that the Kızılay had provided contaminated blood and the Ministry of Health had been negligent in conducting the requisite screening and testing in accordance with the relevant domestic legislation. They requested that criminal proceedings be initiated against the doctors and laboratory personnel involved in the transfusion process, as well as against the Director of the Izmir Health Department (İzmir İl Sağlık Müdürü) and the Director of the Kızılay Izmir Branch.
On 2 October 1997 the Audit Department of the Ministry of Health prepared a report in which it stated that the unit of plasma used for the first applicant's treatment had been screened and tested for the HIV virus. However at that stage the HIV antibodies had not yet been produced in the unit of plasma donated by donor no. 1294. The report further noted that all around the world the HIV infection had been screened by Anti-HIV (ELISA) tests on the recommendation of the World Health Organisation. Therefore, it had been scientifically impossible to diagnose the HIV contained in the unit of plasma in question by the routine tests. Thus, relying on the statements given by health personnel and expert reports, the report concluded that there was no negligence attributable to the health personnel involved in the incident or to any other authority.
Notwithstanding, the Audit Department advised that (1) a circular be issued to relevant departments; (2) the health personnel be reminded to ensure that questionnaires were properly filled in by blood donors; (3) questions be asked about the sexual history of the donors and (4) donations be refused in doubtful cases. The Audit Department added that health personnel's attention should be drawn to the need to wait for a sufficient period of time before delivering blood in case antibodies had not yet been produced. In this connection, on 3 January 1998 circular no. 141 and its attachments were communicated to all blood centres and stations in order to prevent infections resulting from blood transfusions.
On 2 July 1998 the Izmir Administrative Council decided that no investigation could be conducted into the doctors who had been involved in the blood transfusion process on the ground that the children's hospital where the transfusions had taken place was not equipped with facilities for the ELISA test. Therefore the doctors had not been at fault in the incident.
On 7 May 1997 the applicants filed a complaint with the Public Prosecutor's office in , this time against the Minister of Health and the Director General of the Kızılay.
On 23 May 1997 the Public Prosecutor issued a decision of nonprosecution. He reasoned that an investigation into the actions of a minister could only be conducted in accordance with Article 100 of the Turkish Constitution, which requires a motion to be brought in parliament. Therefore the Public Prosecutor concluded that he lacked jurisdiction ratione materiae and ratione personae in this matter. As regards the Director General of the Kızılay, the Public Prosecutor noted that he was in Ankara whereas the incident had taken place in  and that there was no fault directly attributable to him, bearing in mind particularly that he had not been involved in selling the infected blood.
On 8 September 1997 the applicants filed an objection with the  against the Public Prosecutor's decision.
On 14 October 1997 the  dismissed the applicants' objection for non-compliance with the fifteen-day statutory time-limit to lodge their objection.
On 19 December 1997 the applicants initiated compensation proceedings against the Kızılay and the Ministry of Health. They requested non-pecuniary damage for the infection of the first applicant with HIV as a result of medical negligence on the part of the defendants.
On 13 July 1998 the Ankara Civil Court of First Instance issued a decision of non-jurisdiction in respect of the case brought against the Ministry of Health. It stated that these complaints must be brought before the competent administrative tribunal.
As regards the case instituted against the Kızılay, the court held that it was strictly liable for the incident as it had been established through a witness statement that the test which gave clear results on the presence of the HIV virus could not be carried out due to its high costs and that the health questionnaire system had not been in full practice at the time of the incident (see paragraph 13 above). It thus awarded the applicants 30,000,000,000 Turkish lira (TRL) plus interest at the statutory rate running from 17 June 1996, the date of the incident. The court held, in particular:
“...As briefly mentioned above, Yiğit Turhan Oyal suffers from AIDS after receiving HIV virus infected blood supplied by the  the Kızılay District Office. The Kızılay District Office is at fault for the infection of the child. This appeared from the sworn statements given on 8 June 1998 by Prof. Dr. Hakkı Bahar, who works at the Dokuz Eylül University School of Medicine, Department of Biology and Clinical Microbiology. Hakkı Bahar, who is a specialist on this subject, is the only witness of the Red Crescent Directorate General and holds an academic title of “professor”. In his statements, he submitted that AIDS was a disease which could be detected with certainty by a special test but that, because it was very expensive, it was not employed. Bearing in mind that it was possible to detect HIV with sufficient certainty and that the Kızılay did not employ the test in question, because it was costly, then it should be held responsible for the infection of [the child]. The Kızılay has to bear the consequences of this [negligence]. It cannot escape this [responsibility]. Either it has to employ the test which determines with certainty AIDS, or it fails to do the test and assumes responsibility for providing blood which was infected with AIDS.
Moreover, the Kızılay is at fault for the following reason: As is clear from the statements of the doctors indicated by the Red Crescent and, following the contamination of the plaintiffs' child, the Ministry of Health issued a circular on 3 January 1997 and required the questioning of donors. It thus follows that this circular had to be issued because no such questioning took place at all previously or was not done properly.
Even assuming for a moment that the the Kızılay was not at fault in this incident, it still has strict liability (kusursuz sorumluluk). This is the very requirement of justice.
Yiğit Turhan Oyal was infected with HIV at a very young age because of the blood given by the the Kızılay. He caught AIDS, which is, together with cancer, one of the most dangerous diseases of our age. It is unnecessary to explain how evil and fatal this disease is. It is highly unlikely that little Yiğit will survive this disease; most probably he will lose his life. Even if he survives, he will live with this disease throughout his lifetime and everybody will avoid him. Strictly speaking, by having been infected with this disease, Yiğit has become a social outcast. He should not have sexual intercourse and should not get married during his lifetime. It is impossible for a living person to endure this. Furthermore, Yiğit should be taken care of very well. It is impossible to put into words how father Nazif Oyal and mother Neşe Oyal suffer from sorrow because of Yiğit's infection with this disease. In view of the foregoing, the court considers that the award of TRL 10,000,000,000 for each plaintiff in respect of non-pecuniary damages appears to be low. In fact, the sorrow and pain suffered by the plaintiffs cannot be compensated even if quadrillions were awarded. As noted above, the amount of compensation awarded is an insignificant one and merely aims at lessening their pain to some extent. Having regard to the fact that today compensation of three to five billion Turkish liras is awarded in a defamation case and that the amount in question would not even suffice to buy a car by the current prices of the day, it is obvious that the increase of awards is inevitable. It is considered that today is the time to increase compensation to a satisfactory level. For this reason, the determination of the amount in this case, albeit insignificant, was in line with this view.
Notwithstanding the above, I should like to stress the following: the fact that an aid organisation like the Kızılay ... chose to pursue all avenues with full strength in order to avoid compensating Yiğit, instead of redressing his suffering, is thought provoking...”
On 9 February 1999 the Court of Cassation upheld the judgment and stated the following:
“... The case concerns the payment of damages incurred as a result of the tortious act of the defendant. In order to hold the defendant liable for the alleged act, it should be established that the defendant was at fault, that the plaintiff incurred damage as a result of the tortious act and that there was a causal link between the act and the damage suffered. There is no dispute between the parties that the damage in question occurred as a result of the blood used by [Yiğit] and that such an act is unlawful. Again, it is also undisputed that the plaintiffs purchased the blood, which was used for the treatment of Yiğit, from the the Kızılay Izmir District office and that the blood was infected HIV positive.
The focal point of the dispute is whether the Kızılay Directorate General is at fault... It is a known fact that a foundation such as the Kızılay has a noteworthy prominence in meeting the need for blood and is worthy of credence on account of this vocation. In other words, there is an assumption that the blood obtained from the defendant meets expectations. However, it appeared that the blood obtained and used [in the present case] was unclean and so malignant that there was no possibility of purifying it. The fact that the [donor] was the bearer of the known virus cannot absolve the defendant from liability. The defendant should have subjected such an important and vital substance to all necessary tests and screening using the necessary technology in accordance with the purpose of its use and the importance of that substance. Nevertheless it appears that the blood in question was not subjected to the requisite tests available in today's technology. Furthermore, bearing in mind the particular circumstances of the case, witness statements have no bearing on the establishment of the lack of fault on the part of the defendant. In other words, it cannot be concluded by witness statements that the defendant was not at fault. In the instant case, it was not alleged that the defendant acted deliberately. Nor was it implied. The defendant did not wish such an outcome in the present case. However, the defendant did not display due attention and diligence in order to avoid the impugned result.
Turning to the defendant's contention that the amount awarded in respect of nonpecuniary damage was excessive, ... [I]t should be noted that the present and future life of the child, his mother and father have become dramatically insufferable. All segments of society will now avoid having any kind of social or physical contact with these people. Thus, it is apparent that the physical, social and personal values of all the plaintiffs, especially those of the child, shall be under attack during their lives. Having regard to the foregoing and particularly to the rule under Article 49 of the Code of Obligations which stipulates '...parties' social and economic conditions should also be taken into account...', as well as to the current purchase value of money, the court concludes that the amount awarded in respect of non-pecuniary damage was not excessive. In this connection, when determining an amount for non-pecuniary damage, the amount in question should be satisfactory for the suffering party and should have a dissuasive effect for the harming party. Therefore, the defendant's objections on this part of the case must be dismissed...”
On 24 February 1999 the Kızılay paid a total amount of TRL 54,930,703,000 to the applicants, to cover the nonpecuniary damage awarded by the court and the statutory interest applied to that sum.
On 13 October 1998 the applicants initiated proceedings against the Ministry of Health, requesting non-pecuniary damage.
On 20 November 1998 the  rejected the case on the ground that the judgment of the Izmir First Instance Court which had issued a non-jurisdiction decision in respect of the proceedings concerning the Ministry of Health had been pending before the Court of Cassation. On 8 February 1999 the applicants appealed against this decision.
On 7 May 2001 the  quashed the decision and remitted the case to the  for examination on the ground that the proceedings concerning the Ministry of Health must have been considered to have become final, given that the Ministry of Health had not appealed against the Izmir First Instance Court's judgment.
On 14 July 2003 the  refused the applicants' compensation claims. Referring to the Izmir First Instance Court's judgment, the  reiterated that the Kızılay and the Ministry of Health were both liable for the first applicant's HIV infection. The court added, however, that the purpose of awarding nonpecuniary damage was not to provide full restitution and the award of non-pecuniary damage twice for the same incident would have resulted in unjust enrichment.
On 3 October 2003 the applicants appealed.
On 31 March 2006 the  quashed the judgment of 14 July 2003, holding that there was no provision in domestic law which could have prevented the administration from being held liable jointly with other real or corporate bodies.
On 13 March 2007 the  dismissed the Ministry of Health's rectification request against the above decision.
In a judgment dated 7 June 2007, the  held that the Ministry of Health personnel had been negligent in the performance of their duties. The court thus awarded the applicants TRL 30,000 plus interest at the statutory rate running from the date on which the proceedings had been initiated, namely 19 December 1997. Both the applicants and the Ministry of Health appealed against the judgment. The applicants challenged the failure of the court to order the defendant to pay the legal fees, whereas the Ministry of Health challenged the outcome of the case.
On 26 December 2007 the  dismissed the Ministry of Interior's appeal but partly quashed the judgment insofar as it concerned the fees. The parties did not inform the Court about the outcome of these proceedings.
On 30 April 2008 the Ministry of Health paid 159,369.49 New Turkish Liras to the applicants.
On 16 February 2005 the newly appointed Administrative Board of the Kızılay presented their apologies to the applicants and decided to give a scholarship to the first applicant in order to contribute towards his educational costs. A delegation of board members visited the applicants and told them that the medical expenses of the first applicant would also be paid by the Kızılay.
According to the information given by the applicants, the Kızılay rejected the applicants' claim for treatment and medical costs which amounted to TRL 3,000 (approximately EUR 1,340) and EUR 5,469, respectively, per month. The Ministry of Health also rejected their request for payment of these expenses.
The green card issued by the Governorship of Izmir was cancelled right after the announcement of the judgments ordering the administration to pay compensation to the applicants.
The compensation awarded by the civil and administrative courts covered only one year's medical treatment expenses and did not suffice to pay the costs of medication used by the first applicant.
The first applicant was not admitted to any school because of his condition and reactions from families of other pupils. He thus started his education at a hospital. Following public pressure and negotiations with the National Education Directorate, he was ultimately admitted to a public school. Yet he has no close friends and suffers from stammering. Every week he sees a psychologist. Upon the latter's advice, he attends drama and painting courses.
The third applicant's (the father) health has been severely affected as a result of reactions from parents of other children and the school administration's refusal to admit his son to school. Currently he is unable to work and provide any income for the family.
The family is in serious economic difficulty and is trying to pay the first applicant's medical expenses with the help of family friends. Meanwhile, although some health associations offered help, they wanted to test some medications on the first applicant, which the family refused.
41  Article 4 of the Law on Blood and Blood Products (Law no. 2857 dated 25 June 1983) provides:
“The powers and duties of the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare ... are as follows:
...
(c)  Inspection and supervision of real and corporate entities which deal with blood and blood products...”
Article 23 of the Regulation on the Blood and Blood Products (dated 25 November 1983) reads:
“The following blood screening tests shall be conducted; blood type, Rh, compatibility and cross-match, VDRL tests, Hepatitis B, malaria parasite...”
Common provisions in the Law on Blood and Blood Productions and the Regulation on Blood and Blood Products are as follows:
Article 7 and Article 38 respectively
“All entities which deal with blood and blood products shall be inspected by the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare at least twice a year. Defects found during inspections shall immediately be remedied by the relevant entities. In the event the same defects are found to exist during the following inspection, the respondent individuals shall be subject to administrative and criminal proceedings.”
On 18 August 1983 the Ministry of Health sent a letter to all governors, for distribution to hospitals, blood centres and public institutions, informing them about AIDS and the measures to be taken to prevent the spread of this disease. The Ministry stressed that particular vigilance must be shown when choosing blood donors. In particular, it required that blood donors be subjected to a medical examination prior to giving blood and that their blood be refused in case any symptoms of HIV AIDS were detected.
By a letter dated 21 November 1985, the Ministry of Health informed the governors that all HIV AIDS cases must be reported to the health authorities. It noted that persons suspected of having HIV AIDS must be medically examined, and their blood, bodily fluids and all other relevant substances subjected to the requisite tests.
On 4 February 1987 the Ministry of Health issued a circular to all governors (circular no. 1141), for distribution to public and private hospitals and clinics as well as to the Kızılay, for prevention of the spread of the HIV AIDS disease. The Ministry noted in this circular that HIV AIDS could only be transmitted through sexual intercourse, blood transfusion or multiple use of a syringe. In this connection, the Ministry stated that the anti titre test was the most effective way of diagnosing HIV AIDS. This could only be done by the ELISA method. It stressed that, prior to blood transfusions, the requisite ELISA tests must be carried out. To that end, all hospitals should be equipped with facilities for carrying out ELISA tests on blood given by donors. The hospitals which did not have such facilities should send blood samples to the hospitals which had blood centres.
By a circular dated 1 April 1992, the Ministry of Health required all blood centres and stations to conduct VDRL, HBsAg, AIDS and malaria tests on all blood and blood products. It stressed that no blood transfusions should be carried out if the aforementioned tests had not been conducted.
Between 1980 and 1988, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted a number of recommendations aimed at ensuring the adoption of common rules in the health field. In the below-mentioned Recommendations, the Committee of Ministers drew Member States' attention to the growing importance of a new and severe health hazard, namely AIDS, which was caused by an infectious agent transmissible by blood and blood products, and invited them to adopt a number of measures to prevent the spread of this infectious disease. These Recommendations were as follows:
–  Recommendation No. R (80) 5, dated 30 April 1980, on blood products for the treatment of haemophiliacs;
–  Recommendation No. R (81) 14, dated 11 September 1981, on preventing the transmission of infectious diseases in the international transfer of blood, its components and derivatives;
–  Recommendation No. R (84) 6 on the prevention of the transmission of malaria by blood transfusion;
–  Recommendation No. R (83) on preventing the possible transmission of AIDS from affected blood donors to patients receiving blood and blood products;
–  Recommendation 985 (1984) on the supply and utilisation of human blood and blood products; and
–  Recommendation No. R (85) 12 on the screening of blood donors for the presence of AIDS Markers.