The case concerns the allegedly excessive duration of restitution proceedings.
The applicant was born in 1923.
The applicant passed away on 16 June 2015 and his heirs – his wife Ms Ruska Ivanova Panayotova and his daughters Ms Biana Andreeva Laguardia and Ms Veneta Andreeva Panayotova – expressed the wish to pursue the case in his stead.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Dimova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
In 1991 the applicant applied under the Agricultural Land Act for the restitution of a plot of land measuring 2,800 square metres in the vicinity of Haskovo, previously owned by his father of whom he was the only heir.
The applicant’s entitlement to the restitution of the plot was acknowledged in a decision of the competent body, the Haskovo land commission, of 19 February 1993.
However, in October 1994 1,000 square metres of the plot were sold by the municipality to a third party, Mr K., who had earlier been granted the right of use of that part and had, under domestic law, the right to buy it up. The price to be paid by Mr K. to the municipality was set at 40,000 old Bulgarian levs (BGL), the equivalent at the time of 928 German marks (DEM).
The applicant became aware of the sale in 2007 and enquired with the municipality about the compensation due to him in lieu of restitution. He was informed that, pursuant to the relevant provisions of the Agricultural Land Act, such compensation could only be paid after the adoption of a so­called plan of the newly-created plots (see paragraphs 16-17 below).
In 2013-14 the applicant attempted to claim the compensation due to him through the courts, and even though at first instance he was awarded 3,628 new Bulgarian levs (BGN, the equivalent of about 1,850 euros – EUR), the second-instance court found his claim premature, pointing out once again that any compensation in his case was only due after the adoption of a plan of the newly-created plots.
The plan of the newly-created plots for the respective area was approved in September 2019.
In a letter dated 29 October 2019 the Haskovo mayor informed the applicant’s heirs that the compensation due to them was equal to the value of the plot in 1994, namely BGL 40,000, equivalent to BGN 40 (EUR 20.4).
However, in a letter to the Government dated 20 January 2020, sent after the communication of the present application, the mayor specified that, due to the devaluation of the amount paid by K. in 1994, “consultations with lawyers and other competent bodies [were] under way about the amount of compensation”.
The Court has not been informed of the subsequent course of the procedure, and it is in particular unclear whether any formal decision on the compensation due to the applicant’s heirs (see paragraph 17 below) has been taken.
The relevant provisions of domestic law concerning restitution of agricultural land in cases where the land had been the subject of right of use, and the compensation due to former owners who could not on that ground obtain restitution in kind, have been described in Naydenov v. Bulgaria (no. 17353/03, §§ 21-42, 26 November 2009).
In particular, the procedure involves the preparation and the adoption of a so-called plan of the newly-created plots, which traces the exact borders of the plots subject to restitution in kind and of those acquired by former users. Such a plan is to comply with urbanisation requirements as to the minimum surface and accessibility of individual plots.
Section 4l of the transitional provisions of the Agricultural Land Act specifies that the compensation due to former owners is to be determined within three months after the adoption of the plan of the newly-created plots. The decision on the matter, to be taken by the mayor of the respective municipality, is subject to judicial review.