The case originated in an application (no. 62439/12) against the Republic of Finland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by nineteen Finnish nationals (“the applicants”), on 28 September 2012. A list of the applicants, by household, is set out in the appendix.
The applicants were represented by Mr Esa Puranen, a lawyer practising in Jyväskylä. The Finnish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Mr Arto Kosonen and Ms Krista Oinonen, both of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the police had omitted to protect the lives of their deceased relatives under Article 2 of the Convention.
On 8 December 2015 the application was communicated to the Government.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties and as established in the domestic proceedings, may be summarised as follows.
The applicants are relatives of individuals who were killed in a school shooting in Kauhajoki on 23 September 2008. The tragedy took place at a vocational institute attended by young adults. The perpetrator, a 22-year-old student of the institute, killed ten people, of whom nine were students and one was a teacher, and then killed himself. The attack attracted wide publicity both in Finland and internationally.
The factual background of the shooting was clarified after the fatal attack in the pre-trial investigation and established in the subsequent criminal proceedings against the Detective Chief Inspector involved in the licensing of the perpetrator’s weapon (see paragraphs 19-35 below) as well as in the proceedings conducted by an investigation commission set up by the Government (see paragraph 38 below). The established facts as they transpired from the said investigations and proceedings are the following.
On 25 June 2008 the perpetrator sought at the local police station licence to acquire and carry a weapon. In his application he indicated that he needed a weapon for practicing precision shooting at the local shooting range and that he had already practiced shooting at the summer house with his father’s weapon. In reality his father or step-father had not shot with him, nor did they have a weapon or a firearms licence at that time. This fact was not known to the police at the relevant time. The perpetrator had attached to his firearms application a receipt of paid “membership fee” of 10 euros to the local shooting club which entitled him to practice at the local shooting range. The regular membership fee was 26 euros and would have entitled him also to participate to competitions but the perpetrator did not choose that option. He was thus not a member of the local shooting club.
On 21 July 2008 the perpetrator visited a psychologist at the local health centre for panic and aggression attacks. From 11 August 2008 onwards he visited a nurse specialised in depression about once a week, in total five times, the last visit being on 9 September 2008. On 13 August 2008 he was prescribed medication destined for treatment of severe depression and panic attacks. The police did not have this information before the shooting.
On 7 August 2008, after having interviewed the perpetrator, the Detective Chief Inspector granted him a permission to acquire a weapon. On 12 August 2008 the perpetrator purchased a weapon in another part of the country. On 2 September 2008 a police officer approved the perpetrator’s weapon at the local police station.
During the night of 17-18 September 2008 there was an attempt to explode the mail box of a local teacher. No evidence has been found linking the perpetrator to this event.
On the early morning of Friday 19 September 2008 a cleaning lady of a local high school, which is situated about a kilometre away from the vocational institute attended by the perpetrator, saw a lit grave candle in the proximity of the high school. She told about the candle to two other persons, one of whom a few hours later discovered on the Internet three video clips in which the perpetrator was seen firing a weapon at a shooting range. It later appeared that he was filmed by his friend who also practiced shooting. In addition, the posted material contained pictures in which the perpetrator was holding a handgun as well as texts in English about war and dying. This information was submitted to the police the same day. Also another concerned citizen informed the local police in the neighbouring town about the same perpetrator’s postings on the Internet on the same day but this information never reached the police officers involved in the present case.
After having received the above information, several police officers viewed the video clips. They found out that the videos had been posted under a pseudonym which the perpetrator used. These postings contained only little textual elements and no references to a school shooting. The same pseudonym had also been used at a social media site (IRC-Galleria) as a member of a community called “Zero Hour: Massacre at Columbine High”. The perpetrator had also commented this movie as “entertainment as its best” on 18 August 2008. On the basis of these materials, several police officers had started to suspect that the perpetrator might commit a school killing since he seemed to imitate, with his way of dressing and gestures, the perpetrator of the previous school killing which took place in Finland less than a year earlier. Since the Detective Chief Inspector was off duty that day, the police officers contacted his replacement and requested a permission to temporarily seize the perpetrator’s weapon. This request was granted at 3.40 p.m. When the police officers about 10 minutes later went to execute this assignment, they no longer found the perpetrator at his home or at school since he had left for the weekend to visit his home town.
On Saturday 20 September 2008 the Detective Chief Inspector learned about the events of the day before in a social event attended by him and some of the police officers.
On Monday 22 September 2008 the Detective Chief Inspector was told in more detail about the observations made, and he himself viewed the videos and read the English texts. It appears that he also knew about the reference to the massacre at Columbine High. The Detective Chief Inspector called in the perpetrator for an interview the same afternoon, which lasted about a quarter of an hour. The perpetrator explained to the Detective Chief Inspector, inter alia, that the English text were the lyrics of a song by a certain band. He was given a verbal warning. After the interview, the Detective Chief Inspector concluded that “no such circumstances had appeared in this matter on the basis of which [the perpetrator’s] weapon and his firearms licence should be withdrawn at this stage”. After this decision was taken, the police officers sent him three more IRC-Galleria pages at 3.20 p.m.
The same evening and the next morning the perpetrator purchased some tools which were used in the killing. Some hours before the act he also made video clips indicating an intention to commit killings. He filmed these video clips by himself. According to the investigation commission, this material was subsequently discovered in deleted camera files, and it had probably not been posted or shown anywhere.
On Tuesday 23 September 2008 the school killing took place at 10.42 a.m.
During the investigations it appeared that the perpetrator had been discharged from his military service in August 2006 due to mental problems. It was also established that the perpetrator had already in 2002 planned a school shooting which had come to the knowledge of the local police department in another part of the country. It appears from the pre-trial investigation materials that this piece of information came to the knowledge of the police officers involved in the present case only on 23 September 2008, several hours after school killing had already taken place. The perpetrator also wrote in his farewell letter that he had been planning such a killing since 2002.
Criminal proceedings were instituted against the Detective Chief Inspector who had been responsible for the decisions concerning the licensing of the weapon used by the perpetrator. The case was investigated by the National Bureau of Investigation (Keskusrikospoliisi, Centralkriminalpolisen). The pre-trial investigation against the Detective Chief Inspector was concluded on 8 December 2008.
The public prosecutor pressed charges against the Detective Chief Inspector on 16 February 2009. He was charged with negligent breach of an official duty (tuottamuksellinen virkavelvollisuuden rikkominen, brott mot tjänsteplikt av oaktsamhet) by the public prosecutor for having decided not to seize the firearm from the perpetrator on 22 September 2008, the date on which he was called in for questioning by the police. He was also charged by the applicants with breach of an official duty (virkavelvollisuuden rikkominen, brott mot tjänsteplikt) covering the period of 22 June 2008 to 23 September 2008, and on ten counts of grossly negligent homicide (törkeä kuolemantuottamus, grovt dödsvållande) covering the period of 25 June to 23 September 2008. The applicants also joined the charges brought by the public prosecutor and presented their compensation claims against the Finnish State.
On 29 January 2010 the Kauhajoki District Court (käräjäoikeus, tingsrätten) dismissed in part the charges brought by the public prosecutor and the applicants and dismissed in part, without examining the merits, the charges brought by the applicants in so far as they concerned a time that was too distant from the shooting. The applicants’ compensation claims were also rejected.
The court found that the firearms licence had been issued to the perpetrator in accordance with the law as at the time as he had fulfilled the legal requirements for such a licence. The first suspicions of a possible risk of a shooting had arisen only a few days before it took place. It was shown that the day before the school shooting the Detective Chief Inspector had been aware of the material that the perpetrator had posted on the Internet but had not found it threatening. However, he had called the perpetrator in for questioning on the same day. As the interview with the perpetrator had not revealed any clear reason to withdraw his firearms licence, the Detective Chief Inspector had only given him a verbal warning. The court found that the Detective Chief Inspector had had all relevant material in his possession and he had discussed the situation with his colleagues. He had questioned the perpetrator in person, and found nothing unusual in his behaviour. The decision had been within his discretion and there was no evidence of any negligence. He had thus not breached his official duties.
By a letter dated 30 April 2010 the applicants appealed against the District Court’s judgment to the Vaasa Court of Appeal (hovioikeus, hovrätten), requesting that it be overturned and that the Detective Chief Inspector be convicted. The public prosecutor also lodged an appeal.
On 19 January 2011 the Vaasa Court of Appeal made a procedural decision concerning the locus standi of the applicants as far as the charges of negligent breach of official duty and breach of official duty were concerned. It found that the applicants could not be considered directly concerned by these counts and that they did not therefore have any locus standi in this respect.
On 15 April 2011 the Vaasa Court of Appeal convicted the Detective Chief Inspector of negligent breach of official duty for having failed to confiscate the perpetrator’s gun temporarily the day before the shooting.
The court found that the firearms licence had been issued in accordance with the law as the perpetrator had fulfilled the legal requirements applicable at the time for such a licence and he had been personally interviewed by the Detective Chief Inspector before obtaining it. The Detective Chief Inspector had acted in accordance with the practice at the time. Having examined all the circumstances and the evidence relating to the granting of the licence, the Court of Appeal concluded that there had been no negligence in this context.
Concerning the question of whether the Detective Chief Inspector had had reasoned grounds to consider that the perpetrator had been misusing his gun, the court found that such misuse had already taken place a few days before the school shooting and that the Detective Chief Inspector should have temporarily seized the perpetrator’s gun. In this connection, the court noted that such a seizure was a precautionary measure with a low threshold and that such a measure was not conditional upon any unlawful conduct having occurred, nor on any suspicion that unlawful conduct might follow; it was sufficient that the weapon had been involved when its holder had behaved disturbingly.
The court noted that the material posted on the Internet showed the perpetrator posing with a gun and shooting at a shooting range. This in itself could not be regarded as misuse of firearms. A separate posting cited the lyrics of a song dealing with war, dying children and crying mothers. In addition, the perpetrator’s profile on IRC-Galleria contained some pictures and comments which led the court to consider that the perpetrator’s Internet postings, taken as a whole, had constituted disturbing behaviour of a kind that warranted temporary seizure of his gun. The court therefore considered that, under the circumstances, the Detective Chief Inspector’s decision to refrain from seizing the gun had not been within his discretion and that he was guilty of negligent breach of official duty.
As to the charges of grossly negligent homicide, the court found that the Detective Chief Inspector had not had any concrete grounds to suspect that the perpetrator would commit a murderous attack. The court noted that the subordinate police officers, based on the evidence collected prior to the interview conducted by their superior, had expressed mutually differing views concerning the risk posed by the perpetrator. The court found it likely that their perceptions, as reflected in their testimonies, might in part have been affected by the shock of the subsequent events, reinforcing a sense of risk. On the evidence the court found that neither the circumstances relating to the perpetrator’s prior behaviour, nor his behaviour in the context of the interview, had been of a kind to give the Detective Chief Inspector reasonable grounds for suspecting that the perpetrator might commit a school shooting. In fact, it was possible that it had been only after the interview and the verbal warning that the perpetrator had decided to commit such an act. This hypothesis was supported by the fact that nothing in the extensive evidence adduced in the case suggested that the perpetrator had had an intention to commit such an attack, and that it had been only following his encounter with the Detective Chief Inspector and shortly before the attack that he had downloaded to Internet material indicating his intention to carry out the attack.
Therefore, the court concluded that, when taking the decision not to seize the weapon, the Detective Chief Inspector had not had any probable cause to suspect that the perpetrator would commit a school shooting. The risk he had taken and the negligence he had committed in deciding not to seize the gun had not been causally relevant to the criminal acts subsequently committed by the perpetrator. The Detective Chief Inspector was thus not, through his negligence, responsible for the homicides.
When assessing the punishment, the court took into account the harm caused to the Detective Chief Inspector by the extremely wide media publicity of the incident, mainly caused by the acts of the perpetrator, and found that this publicity had been disproportionate vis-à-vis the Detective Chief Inspector’s negligence. He was therefore given a warning.
The Court of Appeal also examined the applicants’ compensation claims against the State. Taking into account the conclusions it had reached concerning the criminal charges against the Detective Chief Inspector, the court concluded that, as the negligence attributable to him was not causally related to the criminal acts committed by the perpetrator, that negligence did not engage the liability of the State vis-à-vis the applicants. The court further examined whether the liability of the State was engaged on the grounds of cumulative negligence on the part of the authorities. In this context, the court considered, inter alia, the significance of the applicants’ allegations according to which the perpetrator had already in 2002, together with another pupil, planned to carry out a school shooting in his previous school in another part of the country. The court stated that no evidence had been adduced regarding the timing, circumstances, content or seriousness of the alleged threat, or regarding the authorities’ reaction in respect of the perpetrator. The court concluded that the liability of the State was not engaged on the grounds of negligence on the part of the authorities.
Furthermore, the Court of Appeal examined whether the liability of the State was engaged on the grounds of a violation of Article 2 of the Convention. Having analysed the Court’s case-law in Osman v. the United Kingdom, 28 October 1998, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1998VIII and subsequently in cases such as Mastromatteo v. Italy [GC], no. 37703/97, ECHR 2002VIII; Kontrová v. Slovakia, no. 7510/04, 31 May 2007; and Güngör v. Turkey, no. 28290/95, 22 March 2005, the court found that the circumstances of the case did not give rise to liability of the State on this basis.
By a letter dated 13 June 2011, the applicants appealed to the Supreme Court (korkein oikeus, högsta domstolen), reiterating the grounds of appeal already presented before the Court of Appeal.
On 30 March 2012 the Supreme Court refused the applicants leave to appeal.
By a letter dated 1 June 2012 the applicants lodged an extraordinary appeal with the Supreme Court, alleging that one of the Supreme Court justices had been biased as he had been working at the Office of the Prosecutor General (valtakunnansyyttäjänvirasto, riksåklagarämbetet) at the time when the charges had been brought.
On 25 April 2014 the Supreme Court rejected the applicants’ application. It found that it could not be shown that the judge in question had been involved in the matter when charges had been brought. He had not even had any competence to influence the prosecutor’s decision. The sole fact that he had worked at the Office of the Prosecutor General at the time when charges had been brought did not give any reason to doubt his impartiality or independence as a judge. Nor was there any other reason to doubt his impartiality.
In November 2008 the Government appointed an investigation commission to enquire into the Kauhajoki school killing (Kauhajoen koulusurmien tutkintalautakunta, Kommissionen för undersökning av skolmorden i Kauhajoki). On 17 February 2010 the commission issued nine recommendations concerning, inter alia, the availability of firearms, mental-health services for young people, comprehensive security planning in educational institutions, co-operation between authorities in preventing similar incidents, and co-ordination of psychosocial support. According to the commission, attempts to identify potential criminal intentions in an interview conducted by the police or a doctor had proved unreliable as evidenced by the fact that in school killings the perpetrators had been able to behave inconspicuously when the need arose. A person could not be deemed suitable or unsuitable to possess a firearm on the basis of mental health diagnoses either.
Section 18 of the Firearms Act (ampuma-aselaki, skjutvapenlagen, Act no. 1/1998) provides:
“[u]nless otherwise provided in this Act, the following activities are subject to authorisation:
1) transfer and import to Finland, transfer and export from Finland, transit for commercial purposes as well as trade, acquisition, possession and manufacture of firearms, firearm components, cartridges and especially dangerous projectiles;
2) repair and conversion of firearms and firearm components;
A licence or permit for the activities referred to in subsection 1 may be granted if there is an acceptable reason for granting the licence or permit, and if there is no reason to suspect misuse of the licence or permit or the objects acquired or possessed under it.”
Section 45 of the same Act provided, at the relevant time, the following:
“A firearms acquisition permit may be granted to a person who has reached the age of eighteen and who, on the basis of his or her state of health and behaviour, is deemed suitable for possessing firearms and firearm components. With the consent of his or her parents or guardians, the permit may, however, also be granted, for the shooting of animals permitted by hunting legislation or for target shooting or practice, to a person who is fifteen but not yet eighteen years old and who otherwise fulfils the requirements for a firearms acquisition permit applicant.
When applying for a permit
1) for the shooting of animals permitted by hunting legislation or for target shooting or practice, an applicant shall produce a reliable account of his or her hobby;
...”
Pursuant to section 92, subsection 1, of the same Act, if there are reasonable grounds to suspect misuse of a firearm, firearm component, cartridges or especially dangerous projectiles, or if a procedure to revoke a related permit has been initiated, the police shall, without delay, make a decision on seizing the objects temporarily.
According to section 35, subsection 2, of the Police Act (poliisilaki, polislagen, Act no. 493/1995), in force at the relevant time,
“[w]hen assessing the continued validity of a driving licence, firearm permit or other such licence, the police have the right, on making a justified request, to obtain information on the licence holder’s state of health, use of intoxicants or violent behaviour, notwithstanding the secrecy obligation, if there are reasons to suspect that the licence holder no longer meets the conditions set for obtaining a licence.”
Similar provision is contained in Chapter 4, section 2, subsection 2, of the current Police Act (poliisilaki, polislagen, Act no. 872/2011) which entered into force on 1 January 2014.
Chapter 40, Article 10 of the Penal Code (rikoslaki, strafflagen, Act no. 39/1889, as amended by Act no. 604/2002) provides:
“[I]f a public official, when acting in his or her office, through carelessness in a manner other than that referred to in Article 5, subsection 2, violates his or her official duty based on the provisions or regulations to be followed in official functions, and the act, when assessed as a whole, taking into consideration its detrimental and harmful effects and the other circumstances connected with the act, is not petty, he or she shall be sentenced for negligent violation of official duty to a warning or to a fine.”
Section 45 of the Firearms Act was amended by Act no. 124/2011 which entered into force on 13 June 2011. The amended section 45 reads as follows:
”A firearms acquisition permit may be granted to a person who has reached the age of eighteen and who, on the basis of his or her state of health and behaviour, is deemed suitable for possessing firearms and firearm components. The licencing authorities have the right to obtain a medical evaluation of the applicant, when the licencing authorities have, on the basis of received information or an interview, a reason to suspect that the applicant is not, for personal reasons, suitable possess a firearm. The licencing authorities have the right, notwithstanding the secrecy obligation, to obtain such health records on the applicant which are necessary for the authorities when assessing the applicant’s suitability to carry a firearm. A conscript shall provide clarification on the completed military or unarmed service. If service has not yet been completed, the conscript shall present an induction order or a decision on an exemption from the service, a postponement of the service or a reasoned decision on discharging from the service. An acquisition permit for a pistol, small-bore pistol, revolver or small-bore revolver or their component can only be granted to a person over twenty years old. An acquisition permit for firearms used in shooting sports and in shooting hobby and listed in section 6 § 2, points 4-7 can be granted to a natural person only if he or she provides a certificate on this hobby, issued by a licenced shooting instructor of such an association as referred to in section 4 of the Associations Act (Act no. 503/1989), and the hobby has actively continued at least two years. This period of two years may include a period corresponding to a half of the conscript’s completed military service or a half of the completed women’s voluntary military service. An acquisition permit for firearms used in shooting sports and in shooting hobby and listed in section 6 § 2, points 4-7 can also be granted if the applicant provides reliable clarification on his or her hobby as well as a certificate issued by the State authorities as an employer attesting that the applicant carries, within the context of his or her official duties, a firearm listed in section 6 § 2, points 4-7.
When applying for a licence:
...
2) for shooting sports or shooting hobby, the applicant shall provide reliable clarification on his or her hobby;
...”
According to section 97a of the Conscription Act (asevelvollisuuslaki, värnpliktslagen, Act no. 1438/2007, as amended by Act no. 127/2011), necessary information on military service or fitness for such service can be given, notwithstanding the secrecy obligation, from the data base on conscripts on persons applying for or holding a firearms licence under the Firearms Act  in order to assess their personal suitability for the possession of a firearms licence. This provision entered into force on 13 June 2011.
  This is a most tragic case and one cannot but have the greatest sympathy for the victims and their families and friends.
  Unfortunately, however, such tragic events also create a risk of (and perhaps an incentive for) regulatory overreach with the stated aim of achieving yet greater security for everybody (or at least the impression thereof). In particular, there is a danger to seek to devise rules or standards with the benefit of hindsight which would (or might) have prevented the very event from having occurred. To my regret, I have come to the conclusion that, for the reasons set out below, the present judgment does exactly that. It is, in my eyes, an example of such overreach in the form of an undue extension or enlarging of the existing case-law under Article 2. It creates what, in my view, are new requirements on domestic authorities which they, in their endeavour to ensure they comply with the requirements under Article 2, are likely to find difficult to apply “in a manner which fully respects the due process and other guarantees which legitimately place restraints on the scope of their action” (see Mubilanzila Mayeka and Kaniki Mitunga v. Belgium, no. 13178/03, § 53, ECHR 2006-XI; Members of the Gldani Congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses and Others v. Georgia, no. 71156/01, § 96, 3 May 2007).
  While there can be no doubt that firearms are inherently dangerous, it is for this very reason that – at least in Europe – their acquisition, licensing and use is already highly regulated both at domestic level as well as at EU level. Whether as a result of this already existing level of regulation or not, the evidence suggests that the rate of gun homicides in the European Union is at only 0.24 per 100,000 people (0.2 in Finland) as compared with e.g. 4.46 in the United States. is for this very reason that – at least in Europe – their acquisition, licensing and use is already highly regulated both at domestic level as well as at EU level.
  It is, therefore, important
(a)  on the one hand not to overstate the general risk arising from the use of firearms and, in particular, from the – as in this case – lawful and licensed ownership of firearms and,
(b)  on the other hand, to bear in mind that the principles laid down by this Court in its case-law under Article 2 need to be capable of being applied beyond the facts of any one particular case, without, as the majority accept in § 67, imposing “an excessive burden on the authorities, bearing in mind, in particular, the unpredictability of human conduct and the operational choices which must be made in terms of priorities and resources”.
  In this context, it is perhaps also worth bearing in mind that, while the Grand Chamber in Nicolae Virgiliu Tănase v. Romania [GC], no. 41720/13, §§ 147-148, 25 June 2019 did not take a final view on whether driving a car is a “particularly dangerous activity or not” for the purposes of Article 2, there is evidence that, in fact, vehicles and bladed weapons, the former of course also commonly subject to a licensing regime, are increasingly used as weapons in terrorist attacks. As the Court rightly said in Nicolae Virgiliu Tănase v. Romania [GC], cited above, § 136, “[n]ot every alleged risk to life can entail for the authorities a Convention requirement to take operational measures to prevent that risk from materialising”.
  The Grand Chamber, in its judgment in Nicolae Virgiliu Tănase v. Romania [GC], cited above, §§ 134 - 145, has most recently sought to provide an authoritative summary out the different obligations arising under Article 2 on the basis that this provision requires states “not only to refrain from the ‘intentional’ taking of life, but also to take appropriate steps to safeguard the lives of those within its jurisdiction” (§ 134). These are:
(a)  “to put in place a legislative and administrative framework designed to provide effective deterrence against threats to the right to life” (described as a “substantive positive obligation”; § 135);
(b)  “to take preventive operational measures to protect an identified individual from another individual (see Osman v. the United Kingdom, 28 October 1998, § 115, Reports 1998VIII) or, in particular circumstances, from himself” (also a “substantive positive obligation”; § 136); and
(c)  “to have in place an effective independent judicial system. Such system may vary according to circumstances. It should, however, be capable of promptly establishing the facts, holding accountable those at fault and providing appropriate redress to the victim (described as a “procedural positive obligation”; § 137).
  The issue of “intentional” taking of life by a state agent does not, of course, arise in this case. Consequently, the circumstances of this case fall to be considered by reference to the established obligations under Article 2 as listed above.
  Having considered the evidence available to the Court in this case, I completely agree with the majority that:
(a)  there is no reason to consider that the regulatory framework applicable in the respondent State at the relevant time was deficient in a way that would have justified a finding of a violation of the State’s positive obligations under Article 2 (§ 76);
(b)  on the evidence before the Court (as confirmed by the findings of the domestic courts), there was no basis to conclude that there had been a real and immediate risk to life directed at identifiable individuals of which the authorities knew or ought to have known at the relevant time so as to give rise to a “duty of personal protection toward the victims of the subsequent killing, or toward the other pupils or staff of the school concerned” (§ 81). Like the majority, in this context I would highlight the clear findings of the domestic courts that (i) the license granted to the perpetrator was issued in compliance with the relevant legislation (§ 77); (ii) there was no evidence of negligence on the part of the Detective Chief Inspector in charge of the initial licensing (ibid); and (iii) the information available to the local police authority at the time preceding the perpetrator’s criminal act did not give rise to any reason to suspect an actual risk of an attack in the form of a school shooting (§ 78); and.
(c)  there has been no violation of the procedural aspect of Article 2 of the Convention (§§ 91 – 98).
  On the facts of this case, this is where – for me – the analysis should have stopped, leading to an inevitable finding of no violation of Article 2.
  Unfortunately, the majority went on to create a further obligation, or as the judgment puts it “duty of diligence”, in relation to “the protection of public safety” more generally, over and above the duty to protect an identified individual as laid down in the Court’s Osman jurisprudence (§ 84).
  The majority seeks to justify the creation of this “duty of diligence” (§ 85) by reference to the case-law identified in § 71 of the judgment where it is rightly noted that:
“... the Court has drawn a distinction between cases concerning the requirement of personal protection of one or more individuals identifiable in advance as the potential target of a lethal act, and those in which the obligation to afford general protection to society was in issue (see Maiorano and Others, cited above, § 107, and Giuliani and Gaggio v. Italy [GC], no. 23458/02, § 247, ECHR 2011 (extracts)). In the latter context, the Court has stressed the duty of diligence incumbent on the State authorities, in dealing with the danger emanating from the potential acts of certain individuals in their charge, to afford general protection of the right to life (see Mastromatteo, [no. , § 74, ECHR 2002VIII], and Maiorano and Others, [no. , § 121, 15 December 2009]). Similarly, in a case concerning a police officer who deliberately shot two persons with his police gun while off-duty, the Court found a violation of Article 2 on the grounds that the officer had been issued with the gun in breach of the existing domestic legislation governing police weapons and there had been a failure to properly assess his personality in the light of his known history of previous disciplinary offences (see Gorovenko and Bugara v. Ukraine, nos. 36146/05 and 42418/05, § 39, 12 January 2012).”
  The judgments in Mastromatteo and Maiorano, however, make absolutely clear that they arose in (and are limited to) the very specific context of what the Court referred to as a “duty of care” owed by the State in relation to the adoption and implementation of decisions to grant temporary prison leave or semi-custodial treatment to dangerous prisoners, while they are in the charge of State authorities. In those cases, the Court stressed that the individuals in question were (a) in the custody of the state (in prison) on the basis of what the Court referred to as “[o]ne of the essential functions of a prison sentence [namely] to protect society, for example by preventing a criminal from re-offending and thus causing further harm” (Mastromatteo § 72) and (b) their temporary release for the purposes of “progressive social reintegration” was dependent upon the prisoner having shown that he had been “of good behaviour while in prison and ... his release would not present a danger to society” upon temporary release (ibid).
  While the application of this narrow test, based on the “duty of care” owed by the state “to ‘do all that could reasonably be expected of them to avoid a real and immediate risk to life of which they had or ought to have had knowledge’” (§74, quoting Osman) led to a finding of no violation in Mastromatteo, it led to a finding of a violation in Maiorano. The latter finding was based on the Court’s assessment of the balance between the reports of the prisoner’s positive behaviour while in prison weighed against the available adverse information. This included in particular the extremely serious criminal history of the prisoner (including his “condamnation à perpétuité pour des faits considérés comme étant d’une cruauté exceptionnelle”) as well as the information/warnings received by the authorities before the murder was committed (including information that he was getting ready to commit murder and other serious offences). The test, however, remained whether the authorities knew or ought to have known of the existence of a real and immediate risk to life.
  The majority suggests, at the end of § 85, that this “duty of care”/obligation can, without more, be extended to situations where “[a]lthough the perpetrator was not in the charge of State authorities, those authorities are responsible for determining and upholding the requirements for the lawful possession of firearms” solely on the basis of the “particularly high level of risk to life which is inherent in their use”.
  I am unable to agree that the extension of the existing duty of protection (so as to create an additional “duty of diligence”) in a case such as the present is either justified or appropriate. After all, in the present case, we have none of the building blocks identified in the Court’s case-law as being necessary either for the “duty of care” (as identified by the Court in Maiorano) to arise or for a finding of a breach thereof: (a) the perpetrator in the present case was not at any time under the control of the state; (b) the need to protect society (so as to warrant prison or otherwise) had not previously been established and was not known, (c) the judgment positively (and rightly in my view) concludes that the authorities did not know and could not reasonably have known of the existence of a real and immediate risk to life posed by the perpetrator whether to identified individuals or generally and (d) the “warnings” in the present case were nowhere near as specific or serious as in Maiorano (and even less so in the context of a person of no prior finding of risk/threat).
  The case of Gorovenko and Bugara v. Ukraine also does not, in my view, significantly expand the narrow class of cases established in Mastromatteo and Maiorano. In that case, the culprit was a police officer (i.e. an agent of the State) who killed two persons with his service gun. The Court there, expressly based its decision inter alia on the fact that “the States are expected to set high professional standards within their law-enforcement systems and ensure that the persons serving in these systems meet the requisite criteria (...). In particular, when equipping police forces with firearms, not only must the necessary technical training be given but the selection of agents allowed to carry such firearms must also be subject to particular scrutiny” (§38).
  In the prison context (especially involving serious criminals) it is understandable that any (early) release into the community would and should be dependent on the prisoner establishing that s/he was of good character (so as to outweigh the risks to society they pose which had already been established by the criminal courts). In this specific context, this Court would – by reference to the right to life under Article 2 – recognise that the state had a “duty of care” when making that assessment at the time of (and during) any temporary release. The Grand Chamber in Murray v. the Netherlands [GC], no. 10511/10, § 111, 26 April 2016 described this as part of the State’s “positive obligation to protect the public by continuing to detain life prisoners for as long as they remain dangerous”.
  The same can be said of the duty to set and apply high professional standards within their law-enforcement systems so as to prevent killings by state agents. After all, in both these scenarios the risk emanates/the danger is created by a positive act of the State (undertaken with actual or constructive knowledge of the dangers posed), namely the release of a convicted and known dangerous criminal into society or the provision of a service gun to a police officer without the necessary safeguards. In the context of the latter - again unlike in the present case – this occurred without the requirements expressly laid down in domestic regulations having been followed.
  By contrast, in my view, Article 2 provides no basis for such an approach in the context of the licensing of firearms (or other potentially dangerous equipment or activities) to persons of, at the relevant time, apparently good character. In the present case, the perpetrator was competently assessed at the relevant time and there is no criticism of that assessment. Even if the assertion in § 88 of the judgment were right that the suspension of this perpetrator’s licence and/or a temporary seizure of his gun “would not have entailed any significant interference with any competing rights under the Convention” (and this will, of course, not necessarily always be the case), it is difficult to see how (and subject to what safeguards) such a licence holder would be able to establish to the authorities that the information (e.g. as in this case internet postings) which led to the temporary seizure/suspension did not, in fact, give rise to a suspicion that s/he poses a threat to the right to life. There is a very real difficulty (and unfairness) in being required to prove a negative in such circumstances.
  The difficulty with the proposed approach is in my view further highlighted by the fact that the majority:
(a)  rightly identified the generic nature of the (internet) material on which the suspicion had been based and emphasised (§ 80) that “there remains a substantial difference between conduct involving video clips and cryptic postings on the Internet without any specific or even unspecific threats, and the indiscriminate killing of persons present at a specific location”; and
(b)  endorses again (§ 89) the decision of the Court of Appeal that “it could not be held that the decision not to seize the gun was causally relevant to the subsequent killings”.
  Finally, the question has to be asked: where does this leave the domestic (police or licencing) authorities who, as a result of this judgment, will from now on have to apply this new “duty of diligence” as set out therein? They will have to do so in the context of the continuing supervision of those who (at the time) are properly and appropriately licensed to carry out a dangerous activity (in this case ownership of a gun) - and do so knowing that the State is likely to be liable in compensation by reference to a breach of Article 2 of the Convention if they are not “sufficiently cautious”. In my view, the present judgment risks leaving those authorities in a true lose-lose situation.
  While a domestic legislature may, of course, chose to enable national authorities to take a “precautionary measure with a low threshold ... not conditional upon any unlawful conduct” (§ 27), no doubt with its own specific safeguards, there is in my view no legitimate basis for this Court seeking to create such a requirement for the authorities of the 47 Contracting Parties to the European Convention on Human Rights and certainly not under Article 2 of the Convention which is rightly described as “one of the most fundamental provisions in the Convention [...] enshrines one of the basic values of the democratic societies making up the Council of Europe” (§65).