The case originated in four applications (nos. 23045/05, 21236/09, 17759/10 and 48402/10) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four Russian nationals, Ms Mariya Gennadyevna Shelkova, Mr Mikhaydar Ayseyevich Tazikov, Ms Olga Ivanovna Shevchenok and Ms Marina Fedorovna Surkova (“the applicants”), on 3 May 2005, 2 April 2009, 17 February 2010 and 27 July 2010 respectively. On 26 March 2009 the first applicant informed the Court that she had changed her name to Mariya Gennadyevna Malmberg.
Ms Malmberg and Ms Surkova were represented respectively by Mr A.L. Lifshits, a lawyer practising in St Petersburg, and Mr I.V. Starov, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants each alleged that the judgments in their civil cases had not been pronounced publicly as required by Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 13 January 2012 the applications were communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1957 and lives in St Petersburg.
She had a dispute with private individuals over a contract of sale for a flat, concluded in 1998, in which the applicant was the purchaser. According to the contract, she was to pay the equivalent of 26,500 US dollars (USD) in two instalments: half of the price on signing the contract, and the rest before 2 January 1999. The sellers were to vacate the flat before the same date. The applicant paid a sum equal to USD 13,250 on signing the contract and a further sum equal to USD 6,155 in 2001, but never paid the remaining sum. The sellers were evicted from the flat in 2004. The applicant claimed interest on the amounts paid by her for the period up to the time at which she had taken possession of the flat.
At a public hearing on 17 March 2004, in the presence of the applicant’s representative and the defendants, the Vasileostrovskiy District Court of St Petersburg partially found for the applicant, awarding her interest on the amount of USD 13,250 at an annual rate of 12% for the period from 2 January 1999 until the day on which she had taken possession of the flat, and dismissed the remainder of her claims. It read out the operative part of its judgment.
At a public hearing on 21 December 2004 the St Petersburg City Court examined the case on appeal in the presence of the applicant’s representative and the defendants. It quashed the part of the judgment in which the District Court had found for the applicant, and dismissed the applicant’s claims in view of her own failure to pay the price of the flat in full. It upheld the remainder of the judgment. The applicant’s claims were thus dismissed in their entirety.
At the close of the hearing the City Court read out the operative part of its judgment.
On 17 January 2005 the applicant’s representative received a copy of the City Court’s reasoned judgment.
The applicant was born in 1957 and lives in Ulyanovsk.
A private individual brought proceedings against the applicant seeking recovery of a debt in the amount of 1,116,619 Russian roubles (RUB).
At a public hearing on 13 October 2008 the Leninskiy District Court of Ulyanovsk examined the case in the presence of the claimant and the applicant’s representative. It ordered that the applicant pay the amount of the debt in full, as well as interest in the amount of RUB 10,000 and the court fee in the amount of RUB 2,861.19.
At the close of the hearing the District Court read out the operative part of its judgment.
On 16 October 2008 a copy of the District Court’s reasoned judgment was sent to the applicant by post.
At an open hearing on 25 November 2008 the Ulyanovsk Regional Court examined the case on appeal in the presence of the parties’ representatives. It dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the judgment. At the close of the hearing the Regional Court read out the operative part of its judgment.
On 9 December 2008 the applicant’s representative received a copy of the Regional Court’s reasoned judgment.
The applicant was born in 1958 and lives in Tyumen.
The Tavda Town Administration brought proceedings against the applicant for recovery of “unjust enrichment” in the amount of RUB 175,276.40 resulting from the use of a plot of urban land for a period of two years and interest in the amount of RUB 17,704.57.
At a public hearing on 26 June 2009 the Tavda Town Court of the Sverdlovsk Region examined the case in the presence of the claimant’s representative and the applicant. It found for the claimant and ordered that the applicant repay the sum gained through unjust enrichment and interest as claimed, as well as the court fee in the amount of RUB 3,529.80.
At the close of the hearing the Town Court read out the operative part of its judgment.
On 2 July 2009 the applicant received the Town Court’s reasoned judgment.
The applicant appealed against the judgment.
On 18 August 2009 the Sverdlovsk Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the Town Court’s judgment. It rejected the applicant’s argument that the Town Court’s judgment had not been pronounced publicly as required by Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, stating that the Town Court had read out the operative part of its judgment at the hearing and prepared the reasoned judgment within five days thereafter in compliance with domestic law.
The applicant was born in 1946 and lives in Moscow.
The applicant brought proceedings against the Moscow department of the Federal Service for State Statistics, challenging its refusal to employ her for the campaign of the population census on the ground of her disability and claiming damages in the amount of RUB 356,145. The applicant argued, in particular, that despite her disability she was perfectly fit for the work and that she had successfully performed that type of work in the past.
At a public hearing on 30 October 2009 the Basmanniy District Court of Moscow examined the case in the presence of the applicant and the defendant’s representative. It dismissed her claims in full, having found, inter alia, that the refusal to employ her had been lawful in view of a medicosocial expert report confirming her total incapacity for any kind of work. The District Court noted that it had been open to the applicant to challenge the conclusion of the medico-social expert report, but that she had chosen not to do so. At the close of the hearing the court read out the operative part of its judgment.
On 17 November 2009 the applicant received a copy of the District Court’s reasoned judgment.
On 28 January 2010 the Moscow City Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the District Court’s judgment. The City Court read out the operative part of its judgment at the close of its public hearing in the presence of the parties’ representatives. The applicant’s representative received a copy of its reasoned judgment in March 2010.
Article 10 § 8 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the Russian Federation of 2002, in force at the material time, provided:
“Judgments shall be pronounced publicly, save in cases where the public pronouncement of a judgment would infringe the rights and lawful interests of a minor.”
Article 199 of the Code provided:
“Judgment shall be delivered immediately after the examination of a case. The preparation of a reasoned judgment may be postponed for not more than five days from the date on which the examination of the case ended, provided that the court has pronounced the operative part of the judgment at the same hearing in which the examination of the case ended. The pronounced operative part of the judgment shall be signed by all judges and included in the case file.”
Under Article 193 § 2 of the Code, if only the operative part of the judgment was read out at the hearing, the presiding judge had to announce when parties to the proceedings and their representatives would become acquainted with the reasoned judgment.
Under Article 198 of the Code, judgments were to include an introduction (including the date and place of the adoption of the judgment, the name and composition of the court, the registrar, parties to and other participants in the proceedings, their representatives, and the subject matter of the dispute), a description (the claims and parties’ submissions), the reasons (the circumstances of a case as established by the court, the evidence on which the court based its conclusions, the reasons for which the court rejected one or another piece of evidence, and the statutes by which the court was governed) and an operative part (the court’s decision whether to grant or reject the suit, instructions as to how court costs should be divided and explanations concerning an appeal against the judgment).
Under Article 214 of the Code, copies of judgments were to be sent to those participants in the proceedings who had not been present at the court hearing not later than five days after the adoption of the final text of the judgment.
The Courts Administration Office at the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation provides administrative support for district and regional courts. In particular, it organises their clerical work, including archives. Thus, at the material time, the clerical work in a district court was governed by Courts Administration Office Instruction no. 36 of 29 April 2003 (“the Instruction”).
Paragraph 12.1 of the Instruction contained an exhaustive list of persons who could consult a case file in a court building. For civil proceedings, it was limited to the parties to the proceedings, their representatives, other participants in the proceedings, judges and officers of higher courts, public prosecutors and officers of the Courts Administration Office.
Paragraph 12.4 of the Instruction provided that, at the discretion of the president or deputy president of a court, a copy of case-file documents could be given to the parties to the civil case and their representatives.
The Instruction was unsuccessfully challenged in the Supreme Court. In its decision of 2 November 2004, the latter found that the Instruction had fully complied with the Code of Civil Procedure of 2002. The Supreme Court relied on Articles 34 and 35 of the Code, which vested the right to consult a case file and receive a copy of judgments and other documents only in the participants in the proceedings. On 13 January 2005 the decision was upheld by the Cassation Division of the Supreme Court.
The relevant part of paragraph 12.4 of the Instruction, as amended on 23 January 2007, read as follows:
“Original case-file documents and their certified copies ... are issued by authorised officers of the court’s registry or archives to ... participants in the civil proceedings and their representatives ...
Copies of final judgments in civil cases are issued to other persons if those persons’ rights and lawful interests have been infringed by the judgments ...
... copies of final judgments are issued in the order as established by the president of the court ...”
In accordance with Courts Administration Office Instruction no. 169 of 28 December 1999 (paragraph 12.19) and Instruction no. 161 of 13 December 2004 (paragraph 12.16), a judgment by an appeal instance is dispatched after its delivery (not later than five and seven days, respectively), together with the case file, to the first-instance court that delivered the judgment in the case.
Federal Law no. 262-FZ of 22 December 2008 on Access to Information on the Functioning of Courts in the Russian Federation (Об обеспечении доступа к информации о деятельности судов в Российской Федерации), which came into force on 1 July 2010, provided for the publication of domestic courts’ judgments on the internet.