The case originated in an application (no. 48099/08) against Georgia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Georgian national, Mr Shalva Ramishvili (“the applicant”), on 30 September 2008.
The applicant was represented by Ms S. Japaridze, Ms T. Khidasheli, Ms T. Abazadze, Ms N. Jomarjidze, and Ms T. Dekanosidze of the Georgian Young Lawyers Association (GYLA). The Georgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr B. Dzamashvili, of the Ministry of Justice.
On 14 September 2016 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1971 and lives in Tbilisi.
On 29 March 2006 the applicant was convicted of conspiracy to commit extortion and sentenced to four years’ imprisonment. The sentence was upheld on appeal on 30 June 2006. Pursuant to Article 5 § 2 of the Electoral Code and Article 28 § 2 of the Constitution, the applicant was debarred, as a convicted prisoner, from participating in any elections.
On 25 July 2007 the applicant challenged the constitutionality of the ban under Article 5 § 2 of the Electoral Code in relation to Article 28 of the Constitution. He referred to the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights on prisoners’ voting rights and submitted, among other things, that he would be unable to participate in the parliamentary elections in 2008.
On 31 March 2008 the Constitutional Court declared the application inadmissible in view of an identical restriction contained in the Constitution. It noted the following:
“It would be absolutely futile for the Constitutional Court to abolish the impugned provision [Article 5 § 2 of the Electoral Code] as this will not relieve the complainant of the restriction placed upon him by Article 28 § 2 of the Constitution. To achieve [this latter result] it would be necessary to introduce amendments with respect to the relevant provision of the Constitution, which is beyond the Constitutional Court’s competence. ...
... the Parliament of Georgia has directly copied the prohibition contained in Article 28 § 2 of the Constitution into Article 5 § 2 of the Electoral Code. The impugned provision is [thus] analogous to the rule contained in Article 28 § 2 of the Constitution and its constitutionality ‒ which implies the assessment of a constitutional norm’s constitutionality ‒ is not within the Constitutional Court’s jurisdiction.”
As a result, the applicant was unable to vote in the parliamentary elections held on 21 May 2008.
Article 28 § 2 of the Constitution (1995), as it stood at the material time, provided that “citizens ...who are convicted by a court and detained in a penal institution shall have no right to participate in elections and referenda.”
Article 5 § 2 of the Electoral Code (2001), as it stood at the material time, contained an identically formulated provision.
Article 28 § 2 of the Constitution was amended on 27 December 2011 in the following manner: “citizens ...who are convicted by a court and detained in a penal institution, except those convicted of less grave crimes, shall have no right to participate in elections and referenda.” On the same date, the Parliament adopted the new Electoral Code (2011) which contained an identical formulation.
According to Article 89 § 1 (a) and (f) of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court adjudicates “the constitutionality of a Constitutional Agreement, laws, normative acts of the President and the Government, the normative acts of the higher state bodies of the Autonomous Republic of Abkhazia and the Autonomous Republic of Adjara” and “on the basis of an application from an individual, reviews the constitutionality of normative acts adopted in relation to the fundamental human rights and freedoms enshrined in Chapter Two of the Constitution.”