The case originated in two applications (nos. 15845/15 and 56300/15) against the Republic of Poland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Russian nationals – Mr A.B. and Mrs T.K. and their son, S.B. (“the applicants”) – on 4 November 2015. The President of the Section decided of his own motion to grant the applicants anonymity (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicants were represented by Mr J. Białas, a lawyer practising in Warsaw. The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms J. Chrzanowska, and subsequently by Mr J. Sobczak, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
On 14 June 2016 notice of the applications was given to the Government. In line with the Court’s judgment in I v. Sweden (no. 61204/09, §§ 40-46, 5 September 2013), the Russian Government were not given notice of the present application.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After considering the Government’s objection, the Court dismissed it.
The applicant in the first case, Mr A.B. (“the first applicant”), was born in 1972. The applicant in the second case, Ms T.K. (“the second applicant”), was born in 1986. The first and second applicants are married to each other and have a son, S.B., who was born on 5 February 2014 (“the third applicant”).
In 2004 the first applicant lodged an application for refugee status in Poland but subsequently left for Austria, where he unsuccessfully lodged an application for refugee status. The proceedings in Poland were discontinued. In 2011 the first applicant again entered Poland and re-applied for refugee status. He was removed from the country in the same year and those proceedings were discontinued.
In January 2015 the three applicants on four occasions unsuccessfully tried to enter Poland. According to the applicants, on each of those four occasions they were not allowed by the border guards to lodge applications for refugee status.
On 26 January 2015, in the Polish town of Terespol, situated on the Polish-Belarusian border, the applicants applied for refugee status in Poland. The first and the second applicant each received a temporary identification document allowing them to stay with their son on the territory of Poland during the refugee status proceedings. On the same day all three applicants were arrested by border guards.
On 27 January 2015 the Biała Podlaska District Court delivered two separate decisions ordering the detention of the first and the second applicant together with their child at the guarded centre for aliens (Strzeżony Ośrodek dla Cudzoziemców) in Biała Podlaska (“the Guarded Centre for Aliens”). The court held a hearing at which it heard the first and the second applicant, in the presence of an interpreter. The court noted that the first applicant had already twice applied for refugee status in Poland but that on each occasion he had not pursued his application, so the respective proceedings had been discontinued. In 2004 he had illegally left Poland for Austria, where he had stayed for nine years. In January 2015 he had attempted to enter Poland on four occasions, without applying for asylum. The court considered that that indicated his intention to abuse the procedure for obtaining international protection. In view of the fact that the first and the second applicants had indicated that they had been in good health, placing them in the Guarded Centre for Aliens had not posed any risk to them. In respect of the applicants’ son the court held that the best interests of the child lay in his remaining with his parents.
On 30 January 2015 the first and second applicants lodged appeals against that decision. The applicants complained that given the fact that they had applied for refugee status proceedings they should not have been placed in detention. Moreover, in 2015 they had attempted to enter Poland on four occasions without being allowed by the border guards to apply for international protection. Non-governmental organisations had been warning for a long time that Polish border guards were preventing foreigners from lodging applications for refugee status at the border and sending them back instead. The fact that they had been victims of such an illegal practice on the part of the Polish authorities should not be held against them and constitute grounds for placing them in detention. Lastly, the applicants complained that a guarded centre for aliens could hardly be considered a suitable place for their one-year-old son. The harsh conditions inherent in detention could negatively influence the mental and physical development of their child.
On 18 February 2015 the Lublin Regional Court dismissed the appeals. The court held a hearing in the presence of a prosecutor. The applicants were not notified in advance of the hearing and they were not present at that hearing. In its decision the court stated that there had been a risk of the applicants abusing the refugee status procedure, as in the past the first applicant had not waited for the resolution of his case in Poland, but had gone to live in Austria. Furthermore, the court considered that it had not been possible to apply other measures provided by law since the applicants had not had sufficient financial means to sustain themselves during the asylum proceedings.
Between 17 and 24 March 2015 the third applicant, who was at that time thirteen months old, was hospitalised with pneumonia. While he was hospitalised the second applicant (his mother) stayed with him. After the third applicant was released from hospital they returned to the Guarded Centre for Aliens.
On 19 March 2015 the Biała Podlaska District Court extended the detention measure against the applicants for a further ninety days. The court referred solely to the fact that the refugee status proceedings were still pending, in spite of the first-instance decision dismissing the applicants’ application (see paragraph 23 below). The applicants appealed. They submitted that since their placement in detention their child had been sick, which had necessitated his hospitalisation. They argued that the detention had had a negative influence on his state of health.
On 8 April 2015 the Lublin Regional Court held an appeal hearing at which only the above-mentioned prosecutor was present. The applicants were by that time represented by a lawyer of their own choosing; however, neither the applicants nor their lawyer had been notified of the hearing. The court dismissed their appeal. It considered that the applicants’ child had been released from the hospital in a good state of health.
On 13 May 2015 the first and second applicants applied for the release of all the applicants from detention, arguing that that was necessary for the well-being of their child. On 20 May 2015 an expert opinion on the state of health of the third applicant was presented to the authorities. During the proceedings the authorities requested and obtained an expert opinion on the third applicant’s psychological state; an expert opinion on the third applicant’s educational development was also prepared by the head of the educational team at the Guarded Centre for Aliens. Their applications were dismissed, by a decision of 9 June 2015, by the head of the border guards unit in Biała Podlaska (Komendant Placówki Straży Granicznej). An appeal lodged by them against that decision was dismissed by the Biała Podlaska District Court on 30 June 2015. The domestic authorities, referring to the above-mentioned expert opinions, asserted that the child had been developing harmoniously and that his placement in the centre had not had any negative consequences for him. The authorities noted his hospitalisation and considered that he had received the correct treatment for his illness and had been released from the hospital in a good state of health.
The applicants’ detention at the Guarded Centre for Aliens was prolonged for a further ninety days on 22 June 2015 by the District Court. The applicants lodged an appeal in which they submitted, inter alia, that they had not been notified of the application that had been lodged by the border guards with the District Court for the measure to be extended.
On 15 September 2015 the applicants again lodged an application for their release from the Guarded Centre for Aliens. They submitted that they had been detained for eight months, which had had specific adverse effects on their child. Specifically, he had been suffering from various medical problems (in particular, skin infections, a persistent cough, cavities, and frequent fevers).
On 18 September 2015 the Biała Podlaska District Court again extended the measure against the applicants. On 2 October 2015 the first applicant appealed against that extension, relying on a psychological report prepared on 25 September 2015 by the International Humanitarian Initiative Foundation, a non-governmental organisation. The report concluded that there was a high probability that the first applicant had been suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder due to, very probably, his having been subjected to torture in his country of origin.
Following the allegations raised by the first applicant in his appeal the authorities requested him to undergo another medical examination. On 9 October 2012 the first applicant was examined by a psychiatrist, whose opinion was given to the border guards unit on 12 October 2012.
On 12 October 2015 the head of the border guards unit in Biała Podlaska decided to release all three applicants from the Guarded Centre for Aliens. The reasoning for that decision cited the negative impact of detention on the first applicant’s mental health.
On the same day the applicants were released. Afterwards they left for Germany. On an unspecified date in 2018 the applicants were returned from Germany to Russia.
On 6 February 2015 the applicants were heard in the course of the proceedings concerning their application for refugee status.
On 3 March 2015 the head of the Office for Foreigners (Urząd do spraw Cudzoziemców) dismissed the applicants’ application for refugee status.
Following an appeal by the applicants, on 18 May 2015 the Refugee Board confirmed the decision to refuse refugee status to the applicants. An appeal by the first applicant against that decision was dismissed on 10 June 2016 the Warsaw Administrative Court. The applicants lodged a further appeal with the Supreme Court.
On 2 June 2015 the head of the Biała Podlaska border guards issued a decision obliging the applicants to leave the territory of Poland.
On 11 December 2015 the head of the Office for Foreigners declined to grant international protection to the applicants. The Office for Foreigners noted that the applicants’ latest application for refugee status had constituted their fourth, unsuccessful attempt to secure international protection. The applicants lodged an appeal against the decision not to grant them international protection; the course of the subsequent proceedings is not known.
The relevant domestic law and practice has been set out in the Court’s judgment in the case of Bistieva and Others v. Poland, no. 75157/14, §§ 34-41, 10 April 2018. In particular, matters regarding the administrative detention of aliens and their placement in and release from guarded centres are regulated by the Aliens Act of 12 December 2013, which entered into force on 1 May 2013.