The case originated in an application (no. 18030/11) against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a nongovernmental organisation registered under Hungarian law, Magyar Helsinki Bizottság (“the applicant NGO”), on 14 March 2011.
The applicant NGO was represented by Mr T. Fazekas, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Justice.
The applicant NGO alleged under Article 10 of the Convention that the Hungarian courts’ refusal to order the disclosure of the information to which it had sought access amounted to a breach of its right to freedom of expression.
The application was assigned to the Second Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). On 4 December 2012 the application was communicated to the Government. On 26 May 2015 a Chamber of the Second Section, composed of Işıl Karakaş, András Sajó, Nebojša Vučinić, Helen Keller, Egidijus Kūris, Robert Spano, 	Jon Fridrik Kjølbro, judges, and Stanley Naismith, Section Registrar, relinquished jurisdiction in favour of the Grand Chamber, neither of the parties having objected to relinquishment within the time allowed (Article 30 of the Convention and Rule 72 § 1).
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined according to the provisions of Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24. At the final deliberations, Boštjan M. Zupančič and Ksenija Turković, substitute judges, replaced Egidijus Kūris and Iulia Antoanella Motoc, who were prevented from sitting (Rule 24 § 3).
The applicant NGO and the Government each filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1) on the merits.
On 2 September 2015 the United Kingdom Government were granted leave by the President of the Grand Chamber to intervene as a third party in the proceedings (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3). They filed their written observations on 18 September 2015.
In addition, on 21 September 2015 third-party comments were received from the following organisations, which had been granted leave by the President of the Grand Chamber to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 2): Media Legal Defence Initiative, Campaign for Freedom of Information, ARTICLE 19, Access to Information Programme and the Hungarian Civil Liberties Union, acting jointly, and also Fair Trials.
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 4 November 2015 (Rule 59 § 3).
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Mr Tallódi, Mr Sepsi and Mr Coppel, as well as their replies to questions put by the Court.
The applicant, Magyar Helsinki Bizottság (Hungarian Helsinki Committee), is a non-governmental organisation (NGO) that was founded in 1989. It monitors the implementation of international human-rights standards in Hungary, provides legal representation to victims of alleged human-rights abuses and promotes legal education and training both in Hungary and abroad. Its main areas of activity are protecting the rights of asylum seekers and foreigners in need of international protection, and monitoring the human-rights performance of law-enforcement agencies and the judicial system. In particular, it focuses on access to justice, conditions of detention, and the effective enforcement of the right to defence.
Between 2005 and 2007 the applicant NGO conducted a project “Model Legal Aid Board Programme” aimed at developing and testing a model to overcome shortcomings in the system for the ex officio appointment of defence counsel. The study summarising the outcome of the project was published in 2007 under the title “Without Defence”, suggesting that there should be a standard set of criteria developed to assess the quality of defence counsel’s work.
In 2008, as a follow-up to its 2005-2007 survey, the applicant NGO launched a new project entitled “The Right to Effective Defence and the Reform of the ex-Officio Appointment System”. Together with the Ministry of Justice and Law Enforcement and various bar associations, the applicant NGO developed a questionnaire aimed at evaluating the performance of defence counsel. It also assessed the quality of legal representation provided by ex officio appointed and retained defence counsel, by examining the case files in 150 closed criminal cases. In parallel, the applicant NGO made a contribution in respect of Hungary to the comparative research project “Effective Defence Rights in the European Union and Access to Justice: Investigating and Promoting Best Practices” carried out in nine European countries and funded by the European Commission and the Open Society Justice Initiative.
The results of the two projects were presented at a conference in April 2009, the conclusions of which were summarised in the report “In the Shadow of Suspicion: A critical account of enforcing the right to an effective defence”.
In addition, the applicant NGO carried out continuous advocacy activities for reform of the ex officio appointments system; in cooperation with the Budapest Bar Association, it also drew up recommendations for a proposed code of professional ethics for ex officio defence counsel.
In the applicant NGO’s assessment, its research showed that the system of ex officio appointed defenders did not operate adequately, essentially because the investigative authorities, in particular the police, were free to choose defence counsel from a list compiled by the relevant bar associations. This gave rise to distrust on the part of defendants. Furthermore, according to the applicant NGO’s findings, many police departments had recourse to the same lawyers or law firms in the majority of cases, resulting in defence counsels’ dependency on ex officio appointments to earn their living. The applicant NGO also concluded that the selection system lacked transparency.
In 2009, in the framework of the project “Steps Towards a Transparent Appointment System in Criminal Legal Aid”, an experimental method was put in place, in cooperation with the applicant NGO, the county bar associations and certain county police departments. A key facet of this method was replacement of the existing system of discretionary appointments by a randomised computer-generated one.
As a feature of the project, the applicant NGO requested the names of the public defenders selected in 2008 and the number of assignments given to each lawyer from a total of twenty-eight police departments, situated in the seven Hungarian regions. The aim of the data request was to demonstrate whether there existed discrepancies in police departments’ practice in appointing defence counsel from the lists provided by the bar associations. These requests were made under section 20 (1) of Act no. LXIII of 1992 (“the Data Act”). The applicant NGO maintained that the number of defence counsel appointments was public-interest data (közérdekű adat) and that thus the names of defence counsel were data subject to disclosure in the public interest (közérdekből nyilvános adat).
Seventeen police departments complied with the request; a further five police departments disclosed the requested information following a successful legal challenge by the applicant NGO.
On 18 August 2009 the applicant NGO addressed the same request to the Hajdú-Bihar County Police Department, seeking access to information concerning the names of defence counsel appointed in the police department’s area of jurisdiction and the number of appointments given to each defence counsel.
In its response of 26 August 2009 the Hajdú-Bihar County Police Department refused the applicant NGO’s request, stating that “the names of the defence counsel are not public-interest data nor information subject to disclosure in the public interest under section 19(4) of the Data Act, since defence counsel are not members of a body performing State, municipal or public duties. Thus their names constitute private data, which are not to be disclosed under the law”. The police department also referred to the disproportionate burden the provision of the data would impose on it.
A similar request by the applicant NGO was rejected by the Debrecen Police Department on 27 August 2009.
On 25 September 2009 the applicant NGO brought an action against these two police departments, arguing that ex officio defence counsel performed a duty in the interest of the public which was financed from public funds. Data concerning them thus qualified as information subject to disclosure in the public interest.
In its counter-claim, the Hajdú-Bihar County Police Department maintained its view that the names of defence counsel constituted personal data rather than information subject to disclosure in the public interest, since they neither carried out their tasks within the scope of the duties and competences of the police departments, nor were they members of those bodies. It further maintained that processing the data requested by the applicant NGO would entail a prohibitive workload.
The Debrecen Police Department requested the discontinuation of the proceedings.
The Debrecen District Court joined the two cases. On 21 October 2009 the District Court found for the applicant NGO, ordering the respondents to release the relevant information within 60 days.
The court found that although defence counsel did not qualify as persons performing public duties, they were also not employees or agents of the respondent police departments, and the question whether defence was an activity of a public-interest nature was a matter which should be assessed with reference to its aim and role. Referring to Article 46 of the Code of Criminal Procedure on mandatory defence and to Article 48 of the same Code on the investigative authorities’ duty to appoint defence counsel under certain conditions, the court observed that the duties of the investigative authorities also included giving effect to the constitutional right to defence. The court concluded that measures concerning the exercise of mandatory defence qualified as public-interest activities, and any related data were of great importance for society and were not to be considered as a matter of personality rights or subject to the protection of private interests. The names of defence counsel and the number of their respective appointments did not therefore constitute information of a private nature, in relation to which disclosure would only be possible with the approval of the person concerned. The court went on to state that, given the public-interest nature of mandatory defence, the interest in informing society seemed to be stronger than the need to protect privacy, which in any case was not infringed since the role of defence counsel was public from the moment of indictment. The court ordered the respondents to surrender the information requested.
Both police departments appealed, reiterating in essence their argument that the names and number of appointments of defence counsel did not represent information subject to disclosure in the public interest, but personal data, since those persons did not perform State, municipal or public duties. They also maintained that the transfer of the requested information would cause an undue burden.
In its judgment of 23 February 2010, the Hajdú-Bihar County Regional Court, acting as a second-instance court, overturned the firstinstance judgment and dismissed the applicant NGO’s claim in its entirety. The court rejected the applicant NGO’s argument that ex officio defence counsel exercised public functions within the meaning of the Data Act. In the court’s view, the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure relied on by the applicant NGO provided for equal recognition before the law and for the right to defence and imposed a duty on the State to ensure these rights. However, the provisions did not prescribe that the activities of ex officio defence counsel were public duties, irrespective of the fact that they were financed by the State. The court held that the duty of the police to appoint defence counsel in certain cases was to be distinguished from the latter’s activities. It noted that personal data could only be processed under section 5(1) of the Data Act for a well-defined purpose in the exercise of a right or in fulfilment of an obligation, and that personal data processed by the police departments could only be transferred with the permission of the person concerned.
The applicant NGO sought review of the second-instance judgment, maintaining that although the names of the defence counsel and the number of their respective appointments were personal data, this was nevertheless information subject to disclosure in the public interest as being related to the public duties carried out by ex officio defence counsel.
The Supreme Court dismissed the applicant NGO’s petition for review on 15 September 2010. It upheld the Regional Court’s judgment in substance, partly modifying its reasoning.
The Supreme Court held as follows:
“... [W]hat needs to be examined is whether defence counsel are to be considered ‘other persons performing public duties’. The Supreme Court considers, in compliance with Recommendation no. 1234/H/2006 of the Parliamentary Commissioner for Data Protection, that the question of whether an individual was a person performing public duties has to be determined solely on the basis of the provisions of the Data Act. Only a person vested with independent powers and competences is to be considered a person performing public duties.
In answering this question [of interpretation of the notion of ‘persons performing public duties’], the applicant’s argument concerning Article 137(2) of the Criminal Code is irrelevant, since that provision only prescribes that defence counsel were to be regarded as persons performing public duties for the purposes of the Criminal Code itself, but not for the purposes of the Data Act or for any other legal relationship.
Under Article 57 § 3 of the Constitution, the State has a duty to secure the right to defence. The courts, the prosecution services and the investigative authorities perform this task by, in particular, ensuring the right to defence (Article 5 § 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure) and by appointing defence counsel when required under Articles 46 and 48 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. In so doing, these bodies accomplish their public duties, which are thus terminated with the appointment of defence counsel. Following his or her appointment, a defence counsel’s activities constitute private activities although they are performed in pursuance of a public goal.
The court has thus found that defence counsel cannot be regarded as ‘other persons performing public duties’, since no powers or competences defined by law are vested in them. The mere fact that procedural laws specify rights and obligations in respect of persons performing the task of defence counsel in criminal proceedings cannot be interpreted as constituting powers and competences defined by law. In respect of the right to defence, the Code of Criminal Procedure prescribes obligations only for authorities, not for defence counsel. The wording of Article 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which states that prosecution, defence and adjudication are separate tasks, also supports this view.
Thus, the names and number of appointments of defence counsel constitute personal data under section 2(1) of the Data Act. Accordingly, under section 19(4) of the Data Act, the respondent police departments cannot be obliged to surrender such personal data. It follows that the second-instance court was right to dismiss the applicant’s action.”
The Constitution, as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
“(1) In the Republic of Hungary everyone has the right to reputation, to privacy of the home and to protection of secrecy in private affairs and of personal data.”
“(1) In the Republic of Hungary everyone has the right freely to express his opinion, and to access and impart information of public interest.”
Act no. LXIII of 1992 on the Protection of Personal Data and the Disclosure of Information of Public Interest (the “Data Act”), as in force at the material time, provided, in so far as relevant:
“(1) ‘Personal data’ means any information relating to an identified or identifiable natural person (hereinafter referred to as ‘data subject’) and any reference drawn, whether directly or indirectly, from such information. In the course of data processing, such information shall be treated as personal data as long as the data subject remains identifiable through it. An identifiable person is one who can be identified, directly or indirectly, in particular by reference to an identification number or to one or more factors specific to his or her physical, physiological, psychological, economic, cultural or social identity. ...
(4) ‘Data of public interest’ (közérdekű adat, hereinafter ‘public-interest data’) means any information or knowledge, other than personal data, processed by an authority or a person performing State or municipal duties, or other public duties defined by law, including those data pertaining to the activities of the given authority or person, irrespective of the method or format in which it is recorded, and its individual or collective nature;
(5) ‘Data subject to disclosure in the public interest’ (közérdekből nyilvános adat) means any data, other than public-interest data, that are prescribed by law to be published or disclosed for the benefit of the general public; ...”
“(1) Personal data may be processed only for specified and explicit purposes, where this is necessary for guaranteeing certain rights or fulfilling certain obligations. This purpose must be satisfied at all stages of the data-processing operations.”
“(1) Personal data may be transferred, whether in a single operation or in a set of operations, if the data subject has given his or her consent or if the transfer is legally permitted, and if the safeguards for data processing are satisfied with regard to each and every component of the personal data.
(2) Subsection (1) shall also apply where data are shared between various filing systems of the same processor, or between those of government and local authorities.”
“(1) Authorities and persons performing State or municipal duties or other public duties defined by law (hereinafter jointly referred to as ‘the agency/agencies’) shall provide the general public with accurate and speedy information concerning the matters under their competence, such as the budgets of the central government and local governments and the implementation thereof, the management of assets controlled by the central government and by local governments, the appropriation of public funds, and special and exclusive rights conferred upon market actors, private organisations or individuals.
(2) The agencies specified in subsection (1) shall regularly publish by electronic means or otherwise make available – including, upon request, the means specified in section 20 – all information of importance concerning their competence, jurisdiction, organisational structure, professional activities, the evaluation of such activities (including their effectiveness), the categories of data they process, the legal regulations that pertain to their operations, and their financial management. The manner of disclosure and the data to be disclosed may be prescribed by legal regulation.
(3) The agencies defined in subsection (1) shall allow free access to data of public interest held on file by them to any person, with the exception of information classified by an agency vested with proper authorisation or if classified by virtue of commitment under treaty or convention, or if access to specific information of public interest is restricted by law in connection with:
(4) Unless otherwise prescribed by law, the personal data of any person acting in the name and on behalf of the agencies specified in subsection (1), to the extent that they relate to his or her duties, and the personal data of other persons performing public duties shall be deemed to be data subject to disclosure in the public interest. Access to such data shall be governed by the provisions of this Act pertaining to information of public interest.
(5) Unless otherwise prescribed by law, any data, other than personal data, that are processed by bodies or persons providing services prescribed mandatory by law or under contract with any central or local governmental agency, if such services are not available in any other way or form and to the extent that such processing is necessary for their activities, shall be deemed to be information subject to disclosure in the public interest.
(6) Access to business secrets within the context of access to and publication of information of public interest shall be governed by the relevant provisions of the Civil Code.
(7) The availability of public information may also be limited by European Union legislation in respect of any important economic or financial interests of the European Union, including monetary, budgetary and tax policies.”
“(1) Any data compiled or recorded by an agency referred to in subsection (1) of section 19 as part of and in support of a decision-making process for which it is vested with powers and competence, shall not be made available to the public for ten years from the date on which they were compiled or recorded. Access to these data may be authorised – in the light of the content of subsection (1) of section 19 – by the head of the agency that controls the data in question.
(2) A request for disclosure of data underpinning a decision may be rejected after the decision is adopted, within the time-limit referred to in subsection (1), if disclosure is likely to jeopardise the agency’s legal functioning or the discharging of its duties without any undue influence, such as, in particular, the freedom to express its position during the preliminary stages of the decision-making process on account of which the data were required in the first place.
(3) The time-limit for restriction of access as defined in subsection (1) to certain specific data may be reduced by law.”
“(1) Information of public interest shall be made available to any person upon a request that is submitted verbally, in writing or by electronic means.
(2) The agencies processing information of public interest must comply with requests for information without delay, and shall provide it within not more than 15 days.
(3) The applicant may also be provided a copy of the document or part of a document containing the data in question, regardless of the form of storage. The agency controlling the information in question may charge a fee covering only the costs of making the copy, and shall communicate this amount in advance when requested.
(4) If a document that contains information of public interest also contains any data that cannot be disclosed to the applicant, these data must be eliminated or rendered unrecognisable on the copy.
(5) Data shall be supplied in a readily intelligible form and by way of the technical means requested by the applicant, provided this does not entail unreasonably high costs. A request for data may not be refused on the grounds that they cannot be made available in a readily intelligible form.
(6) When a request for information is refused the applicant must be notified in writing within 8 days, or by electronic means if the applicant has conveyed his or her electronic mailing address, and the reasons for refusal must be given.
(7) A request for information of public interest by an applicant whose native language is not Hungarian may not be refused on the ground that it was written in his or her native language or in any other language he or she understands.
(8) State or local public authorities and agencies and other bodies carrying out the public duties specified by law shall adopt regulations governing the procedures for satisfying requests for information of public interest.
(9) The agencies specified in subsection (1) of section 19 shall notify the data protection commissioner once a year about refused requests, including the reasons for refusal.”
“(1) Where a person’s petition for public information is refused, he or she may file a court action.
(2) The burden of proof with regard to compliance with the law shall lie with the agency processing the data.
(3) Proceedings are to be brought within 30 days from the date of refusal, or from the last day of the time-limit specified in subsection (2) of section 20 if the refusal was not communicated, against the agency which has refused to disclose the information.
...
(7) If a decision is taken in favour of the plaintiff, the court shall order the agency processing the data to provide the information.”
“(1) The agencies specified in subsection (1) of section 19 may not render access to public information contingent upon the disclosure of personal identification data. The processing of personal data for access to information of public interest that have been published by electronic means is permitted only to the extent required for technical reasons, after which such personal data must be erased without delay.
(2) The processing of personal identification data in connection with any disclosure upon request is permitted only to the extent absolutely necessary, including the collection of payment of any charges. Following the disclosure of data and upon receipt of the said payment, the personal data of the applicant must be erased without delay.
(3) Provisions may be prescribed by law in derogation from what is contained in subsections (1) and (2).”
Act no. XIX of 1998 on the Code of Criminal Procedure, in its relevant part, provides as follows:
“(1) Defendants shall have the right to defend themselves...”
“The involvement of defence counsel in the criminal proceedings is mandatory where:
“(1) The court, the prosecutor or the investigating authority shall appoint defence counsel where defence is mandatory and the defendant has no defence counsel of his or her own choice ...
(2) The court, the prosecutor or the investigating authority shall also appoint defence counsel where defence is not mandatory but the defendant requests for the appointment of defence counsel because of his or lack of adequate means to provide his or her own defence.
(3) The court, the prosecutor or the investigating authority shall ... appoint defence counsel where they find this to be necessary in the interests of the defendant.
...
(5) The appointment of defence counsel shall not be subject to appeal but the defendant may – on submission of valid reasons – request the appointment of another defence counsel. Such requests shall be determined by the court, prosecutor or investigating authority before which the proceedings are pending.
(6) Where valid grounds exist, the defence counsel appointed may ask to be released from the appointment. Such requests shall be determined by the court, prosecutor or investigating authority before which the proceedings are pending.
...
(9) The appointed defence counsel shall be entitled to a fee and to his or her costs for appearing before the court, the prosecutor or the investigating authority when he or she is summoned or notified, for studying the case file and for advising a detained defendant in the detention premises.”
Recommendation no. 1234/H/2006 of the Parliamentary Commissioner for Data Protection on the harmonisation of laws applicable to the disclosure of personal data related to the functions of persons performing public duties reads, in its relevant part, as follows:
“...
(b) In determining the notion of “other person performing public duties”, an autonomous interpretation taking into account the internal logic of this provision of the Data Act should be made, independently of the use of the term in other laws. For example, the interpretative provision of the Criminal Code on the notion of “a person performing public duty” (Article 137 (2) of the Criminal Code) cannot be used, because in the light of the other rules of the Data Act, one part of the content of that provision falls under the first phrase of the Data Act, whereas other parts of its content fall outside the scope of the Data Act.
Therefore, in the context of the above subsection the notion of “other person performing public duties” includes State and municipal officials (for example, the President of the Republic, the Speaker of Parliament, the President of the Constitutional Court, the President of the Supreme Court, the President of the State Court of Audit, the President of the Hungarian National Bank, the Prime Minister, government ministers) who have independent functions and competences and operate as oneperson institutions. The persons entrusted with State and municipal tasks and competences are the specific individuals who hold such offices, and they are personally responsible for disclosing the data relevant to them.”
The Vienna Convention of 1969 on the Law of Treaties provides as follows:
“1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.
The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise, in addition to the text, including its preamble and annexes:
There shall be taken into account, together with the context:
A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the parties so intended.”
“Recourse may be had to supplementary means of interpretation, including the preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances of its conclusion, in order to confirm the meaning resulting from the application of article 31, or to determine the meaning when the interpretation according to article 31:
Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights provides:
“Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers.”
Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), which was adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations in Resolution 2200 A (XXI) of 16 December 1966, came into force on 23 March 1976 and was ratified by Hungary on 17 January 1974, provides as follows:
“1. Everyone shall have the right to hold opinions without interference.
Everyone shall have the right to freedom of expression; this right shall include freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or through any other media of his choice.
The exercise of the rights provided for in paragraph 2 of this article carries with it special duties and responsibilities. It may therefore be subject to certain restrictions, but these shall only be such as are provided by law and are necessary:
In its General Comment no. 34 on Article 19 of the ICCPR (Freedoms of opinion and expression), published on 12 September 2011, the United Nations Human Rights Committee stated as follows:
“Right of access to information
Article 19, paragraph 2 embraces a right of access to information held by public bodies. Such information includes records held by a public body, regardless of the form in which the information is stored, its source and the date of production. Public bodies are as indicated in paragraph 7 of this general comment. The designation of such bodies may also include other entities when such entities are carrying out public functions. As has already been noted, taken together with article 25 of the Covenant, the right of access to information includes a right whereby the media has access to information on public affairs and the right of the general public to receive media output.”
In the case of Gauthier v. Canada (Communication No. 633/1995, 5 May 1999), the Human Rights Committee stated as follows:
“13.3 The issue before the Committee is thus whether the restriction of the author’s access to the press facilities in Parliament amounts to a violation of his right under article 19 of the Covenant, to seek, receive and impart information.
4 In this connection, the Committee also refers to the right to take part in the conduct of public affairs, as laid down in article 25 of the Covenant, and in particular to General Comment No. 25 (57) which reads in part: ‘In order to ensure the full enjoyment of rights protected by article 25, the free communication of information and ideas about public and political issues between citizens, candidates and elected representatives is essential. This implies a free press and other media able to comment on public issues without censorship or restraint and to inform public opinion.’ General comment No. 25, paragraph 25, adopted by the Committee on 12 July 1996. Read together with article 19, this implies that citizens, in particular through the media, should have wide access to information and the opportunity to disseminate information and opinions about the activities of elected bodies and their members. The Committee recognizes, however, that such access should not interfere with or obstruct the carrying out of the functions of elected bodies, and that a State party is thus entitled to limit access. However, any restrictions imposed by the State party must be compatible with the provisions of the Covenant.
5 In the present case, the State party has restricted the right to enjoy the publicly funded media facilities of Parliament, including the right to take notes when observing meetings of Parliament, to those media representatives who are members of a private organisation, the Canadian Press Gallery. The author has been denied active (i.e. full) membership of the Press Gallery. On occasion he has held temporary membership which has given him access to some but not all facilities of the organisation. When he does not hold at least temporary membership he does not have access to the media facilities nor can he take notes of Parliamentary proceedings. The Committee notes that the State party has claimed that the author does not suffer any significant disadvantage because of technological advances which make information about Parliamentary proceedings readily available to the public. The State party argues that he can report on proceedings by relying on broadcasting services, or by observing the proceedings. In view of the importance of access to information about the democratic process, however, the Committee does not accept the State party’s argument and is of the opinion that the author’s exclusion constitutes a restriction of his right guaranteed under paragraph 2 of article 19 to have access to information...”
In the case of Toktakunov v. Kyrgyzstan (Communication No. 1470/2006, 28 March 2011), the Human Rights Committee stated:
“6.3...The Committee further notes that the reference to the right to ‘seek’ and ‘receive’ ‘information’ as contained in article 19, paragraph 2, of the Covenant, includes the right of individuals to receive State-held information, with the exceptions permitted by the restrictions established in the Covenant. It observes that the information should be provided without the need to prove direct interest or personal involvement in order to obtain it, except in cases in which a legitimate restriction is applied. The Committee also recalls its position in relation to press and media which includes a right for the media actors to have access to information on public affairs and the right of the general public to receive media output. It further notes that among the functions of the press and media are the creation of forums for public debate and the forming of public or, for that matter, individual opinions on matters of legitimate public concern, such as the use of the death penalty. The Committee considers that the realisation of these functions is not limited to the media or professional journalists, and that they can also be exercised, for example, by public associations or private individuals. With reference to its conclusions in Communication S.B. v. Kyrgyzstan, the Committee also notes that the author in the present case is a legal consultant of a human rights public association, and as such, he can be seen as having ... special ‘watchdog’ functions on issues of public interest. In light of the considerations listed above, in the present communication, the Committee is satisfied, due to the particular nature of the information sought, that the author has substantiated, for purposes of admissibility, that he, as an individual member of the public, was directly affected by the refusal of the State party’s authorities to make available to him, on request, the information on use of the death penalty.
...
4 In this regard, the Committee recalls its position in relation to press and media freedom that the right of access to information includes a right of the media to have access to information on public affairs and the right of the general public to receive media output. The Committee considers that the realisation of these functions is not limited to the media or professional journalists, and that they can also be exercised by public associations or private individuals (see paragraph 6.3). When, in the exercise of such ‘watchdog’ functions on matters of legitimate public concern, associations or private individuals need to access State-held information, as in the present case, such requests for information warrant similar protection by the Covenant to that afforded to the press. The delivery of information to an individual can, in turn, permit it to circulate in society, so that the latter can become acquainted with it, have access to it, and assess it. In this way, the right to freedom of thought and expression includes the protection of the right of access to State-held information, which also clearly includes the two dimensions, individual and social, of the right to freedom of thought and expression that must be guaranteed simultaneously by the State. In these circumstances, the Committee is of the opinion that the State party had an obligation either to provide the author with the requested information or to justify any restrictions of the right to receive State-held information under article 19, paragraph 3, of the Covenant.”
In the case of Rafael Rodríguez Castañeda v. Mexico (Communication No. 2202/2012, 29 August 2013), the Human Rights Committee held:
“7.6 The Committee observes the author claims that he requested access to the ballot papers to analyse how accurately their contents had been recorded in the polling station records and to identify any discrepancies that may have arisen during that process, merely with the intention of ensuring the transparency of public administration and evaluating the to access the ballot papers. The Institute did, however, place at his disposal the ballot paper accounts drawn up by randomly selected citizens at each polling station of the country’s 300 electoral districts. According to the national legislation, those accounts list the number of votes cast for each candidate, the number of spoilt ballot papers and the number of unused ballot papers. By law, votes are scrutinized in the presence of representatives of the political parties, as well as by accredited election observers in some cases, and the results returned by each polling station may be challenged and submitted for review by higher authorities, as indeed occurred in the 2006 presidential election when the initial results were partially reviewed by the Electoral Tribunal.
7 Given the existence of a legal mechanism for verifying the vote count, which was used in the election in question; the fact that the author was provided with the ballot paper accounts drawn up by randomly selected citizens at each polling station of the country’s 300 electoral districts; the nature of the information and the need to preserve its integrity; and of the complexity of providing access to the information requested by the author, the Committee finds that the denial of access to the requested information, in the form of physical ballot papers, was intended to guarantee the integrity of the electoral process in a democratic society. This measure was a proportionate restriction by the State party necessary for the protection of public order in accordance with the law and to give effect to electors’ rights, as set forth in article 25 of the Covenant. In the circumstances, the Committee therefore considers that the facts before it do not reveal a violation of article 19, paragraph 2, of the Covenant.”
Relevant extracts from the Report of the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression to the General Assembly on the right to access information, published on 4 September 2013 (A/68/362), read as follows:
“18. The right to seek and receive information is an essential element of the right to freedom of expression...
The right to access information has many aspects. It encompasses both the general right of the public to have access to information of public interest from a variety of sources and the right of the media to access information, in addition to the right of individuals to request and receive information of public interest and information concerning themselves that may affect their individual rights. As noted previously, the right to freedom of opinion and expression is an enabler of other rights (A/HRC/17/27, para. 22) and access to information is often essential for individuals seeking to give effect to other rights.”
The Joint Declaration of 6 December 2004 made by the UN Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, the Representative on Freedom of the Media of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe and the Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression of the Organization of American States contains the following passage:
“The right to access information held by public authorities is a fundamental human right which should be given effect at the national level through comprehensive legislation (for example Freedom of Information Acts) based on the principle of maximum disclosure, establishing a presumption that all information is accessible subject only to a narrow system of exceptions.”
The text prepared by the Committee of the Consultative Assembly of the Council of Europe on legal and administrative questions provided, in what became Article 10 of the Convention, as follows:
“In this Convention, the Member States shall undertake to ensure to all persons residing within their territories: ... freedom of opinion and expression, in accordance with Article 19 of the United Nations Declaration.”
The preliminary draft Convention prepared by the Committee of Experts at its first meeting (2-8 February 1950) provided in Article 2 § 6 (which was almost identical to Article 19 of the Universal Declaration) as follows:
“Everyone has the right of freedom of opinion and expression: this right includes freedom to hold opinion without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers.”
At the second meeting of the Committee of Experts (6-10 March 1950), the United Kingdom representative suggested replacing Article 2 § 6 of the preliminary draft with an Article 11, worded as follows:
“Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought and to freedom [of] expression without governmental interference; these rights shall include freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart information and ideas without governmental interference regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art or by duly licensed visual or auditory devices...”
The draft Convention submitted to the Committee of Ministers by the Committee of Experts at the end of its work contained two Articles corresponding to the present Article 10 of the Convention. In the alternative drafted following the method of enumeration of the rights and freedoms to be safeguarded, Article 2 § 6 was almost an exact repetition of Article 2 § 6 of the preliminary draft of the Committee of Experts and of Article 19 of the Universal Declaration. On the other hand, Article 10, in the alternative drafted following the method of precise definition of the rights and freedoms to be safeguarded, closely followed the wording of Article 11 suggested by the United Kingdom.
The Conference of Senior Officials (8-17 June 1950) convened by the Committee of Ministers adopted the method of precise definition as the basis of its work, and reached an agreement on a text of Article 10 worded as follows:
“Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This right shall include freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart information and ideas without interference by a public authority regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art or by duly licences visual or auditory devices...”
Article 10 received its final form on the basis of the above text.
Recommendation No. 582 on Mass communication media and Human Rights adopted by the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly on 23 January 1970 recommended instructing the Committee of Experts on Human Rights to consider and make recommendations on:
“... the extension of the right of freedom of information provided for in Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights, by the conclusion of a protocol or otherwise, so as to include freedom to seek information (which is included in Article 19(2) of the United Nations Covenant on Civil and Political Rights); there should be a corresponding duty on public authorities to make information available on matters of public interest, subject to appropriate limitations.”
At its 44th meeting, held from 10 to 14 November 1975, the Committee of Experts on Human Rights appointed a Sub-Committee to make an exploratory study of the question of extending the human rights covered by the European Convention on Human Rights and its Protocols with reference to the United Nations Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The Steering Committee for Human Rights (CDDH) adopted a preliminary draft final activity report containing Draft Protocol No. 6 to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and a draft Explanatory Report on the draft Protocol on 28 November 1980 (doc. CDDH (80) 28). The relevant part of the draft Protocol reads as follows:
“The right to freedom of expression referred to in Article 10 of the Convention shall include, in addition to the freedoms specified in the second sentence of paragraph 1 of that Article, freedom to seek information. The provisions of paragraph 2 of Article 10 and of Article 16 of the Convention shall also apply to freedom to seek information.”
The relevant part of the Explanatory Report on the Protocol reads as follows:
“1. According to both Article 10 of the Convention and Article 19 (2) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, freedom of expression includes freedom to receive and impart information and ideas regardless of frontiers. However, Article 19 (2) of the Covenant also refers to freedom to “seek” information and ideas, which is not referred to in Article 10 of the Convention. To dispel any doubts which might arise in this connection, Article 6 of the Protocol brings the Convention in line with the Covenant on this point.
This Article brings within the scope of Article 10 of the Convention the right to freedom to seek information. The right to freedom to seek information imposes no obligation on the authorities of a State to supply the information which may be sought.
The freedom may be made subject to restrictions of the kind permitted by Article 10, paragraph 2, and Article 16 of the Convention, including for example restrictions under /existing/national laws relating to the protection of official secrets.”
The European Commission of Human Rights set out its observations on the draft Protocol as follows (doc. DH (81) 3):
“19.  This article is a good illustration of the danger referred to in para 2. above that an amendment intended to clarify an existing provision can provide an argument in favour of a restrictive interpretation of the provision in question.
It is true that the present wording of Article 10 of the Convention does not mention the freedom to seek information, but it cannot be excluded that such a freedom is included by implication among those protected by that article. In this context the Commission recalls that in its Sunday Times judgment (para 66) the European Court of Human Rights found that Article 10 guarantees the public’s right to adequate information. The Commission for its part has stated that although this Article is primarily intended to guarantee access to general sources of information it cannot be excluded that in certain circumstances it includes a right of access to documents which are not generally accessible (No. 8383/78, DR 17, p. 227, at pp. 228 and 230).
It would therefore be wiser to forgo the formal enunciation which Article 6 of the draft seeks to make and leave the possibility of development to judicial interpretation of Article 10 in its present wording.
Furthermore, the second sentence of Article 6 appears superfluous in view of the provision of Article 13 (1) of the draft.”
The observations of the Court (doc. Court (81) 76) contain the following:
“15.  The Court considers that the freedom to receive information, guaranteed by Article 10 of the Convention, implies freedom to seek information. Further, it appears self-evident to the Court that the search for information (and indeed its receipt and communication) must in any event be effected by lawful means. The Court would also observe, as does the explanatory report (second sentence of paragraph 2), that the freedom to seek information does not imply any obligation to supply it on the part of the authority; it is a right to receive and not a right to be given information.”
The Request for an Opinion from the Committee of Ministers on an additional Protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights extending the list of civil and political rights set forth in the Convention, addressed to the Parliamentary Assembly (Doc. 5039, 7 February 1983), contains the following explanation:
“Lastly, the CDDH discussed the principle of the ‘freedom to seek information’, whose inclusion in Article 10, paragraph 1, of the Convention had already been authorised by the Committee of Ministers. The CDDH pointed out that a provision to that effect had been included in a preliminary draft of the Protocol but that, on reconsidering it in the light of the various observations submitted, notably by the European Commission and Court of Human Rights, it had finally decided not to retain the said provision because it could reasonably be considered that the ‘freedom to seek information’ was already comprised in the freedom to receive information guaranteed in Article 10, paragraph 1, of the Convention. That viewpoint seems to be confirmed by the case-law of the Commission and the Court, and particularly in the judgment given in the Sunday Times case.”
The Rapporteur for the Parliamentary Assembly’s Report on the draft Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms extending the list of political and civil rights set forth in the Convention (Doc. 5106, 9 September 1983) stated, in the Explanatory Memorandum on the freedom to seek information, as follows:
“21.  The Steering Committee raised the question of the ‘freedom to seek information’, which the Committee of Ministers had already agreed should be included in Article 10, paragraph 1, of the Convention. In the light of observations by the European Commission and Court of Human Rights, it was decided not to include such a provision in the Protocol. The Commission and the Court decided that the freedom to seek information may reasonably be construed as already included in the freedom to receive information guaranteed by Article 10, paragraph 1, of the Convention. The case-law of the Commission and Court confirms this point of view.
In the light of the foregoing, I consider that this right should not be formally included in Article 10 of the Convention and that the organs of the Convention should be left every opportunity to expand the interpretation of this article.”
On 21 February 2002 Recommendation Rec(2002)2 of the Committee of Ministers to the member States on Access to Official Documents was adopted. The relevant part of the Recommendation reads as follows:
“The Committee of Ministers...
Bearing in mind, in particular, Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Articles 6, 8 and 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, the United Nations Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters (adopted in Aarhus, Denmark, on 25 June 1998) and the Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data of 28 January 1981 (ETS No. 108); the Declaration on the freedom of expression and information adopted on 29 April 1982; as well as Recommendation No. R (81) 19 on the access to information held by public authorities, Recommendation No. R (91) 10 on the communication to third parties of personal data held by public bodies; Recommendation No. R (97) 18 concerning the protection of personal data collected and processed for statistical purposes and Recommendation No. R (2000) 13 on a European policy on access to archives;
...
Recommends the governments of member states to be guided in their law and practice by the principles set out in this recommendation.(...)”
Member states should guarantee the right of everyone to have access, on request, to official documents held by public authorities. This principle should apply without discrimination on any ground, including that of national origin.
Member states may limit the right of access to official documents. Limitations should be set down precisely in law, be necessary in a democratic society and be proportionate to the aim of protecting:
Access to a document may be refused if the disclosure of the information contained in the official document would or would be likely to harm any of the interests mentioned in paragraph 1, unless there is an overriding public interest in disclosure. ...”
The Council of Europe Convention on Access to Official Documents (opened to signature on 18 June 2009), which has so far been ratified by seven member States (Bosnia and Herzegovina, Finland, Hungary, Lithuania, Montenegro, Norway and Sweden) and which will enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of three months after the date on which ten member States of the Council of Europe express their consent to be bound by the Convention, contains the following:
“1.  Each Party shall guarantee the right of everyone, without discrimination on any ground, to have access, on request, to official documents held by public authorities.
Each Party shall take the necessary measures in its domestic law to give effect to the provisions for access to official documents set out in this Convention.
These measures shall be taken at the latest at the time of entry into force of this Convention in respect of that Party.”
“1.  Each Party may limit the right of access to official documents. Limitations shall be set down precisely in law, be necessary in a democratic society and be proportionate to the aim of protecting:
Concerned States may, at the time of signature or when depositing their instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, by a declaration addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, declare that communication with the reigning Family and its Household or the Head of State shall also be included among the possible limitations.
Access to information contained in an official document may be refused if its disclosure would or would be likely to harm any of the interests mentioned in paragraph 1, unless there is an overriding public interest in disclosure.
The Parties shall consider setting time limits beyond which the limitations mentioned in paragraph 1 would no longer apply.”
“1.  An applicant for an official document shall not be obliged to give reasons for having access to the official document.
...”
“1.  The public authority shall help the applicant, as far as reasonably possible, to identify the requested official document.
A request for access to an official document shall be dealt with by any public authority holding the document. If the public authority does not hold the requested official document or if it is not authorised to process that request, it shall, wherever possible, refer the application or the applicant to the competent public authority.
Requests for access to official documents shall be dealt with on an equal basis.
A request for access to an official document shall be dealt with promptly. The decision shall be reached, communicated and executed as soon as possible or within a reasonable time limit which has been specified beforehand.
A request for access to an official document may be refused:
A public authority refusing access to an official document wholly or in part shall give the reasons for the refusal. The applicant has the right to receive on request a written justification from this public authority for the refusal.”
The Council of Europe Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data (which entered into force on 1 October 1985) contains the following relevant passages:
“For the purposes of this convention:
...”
“Personal data undergoing automatic processing shall be:
“1.  No exception to the provisions of Articles 5, 6 and 8 of this convention shall be allowed except within the limits defined in this article.
Derogation from the provisions of Articles 5, 6 and 8 of this convention shall be allowed when such derogation is provided for by the law of the Party and constitutes a necessary measure in a democratic society in the interests of:
The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union provides as follows:
“1.  Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This right shall include freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart information and ideas without interference by public authority and regardless of frontiers.
The freedom and pluralism of the media shall be respected.”
“Any citizen of the Union, and any natural or legal person residing or having its registered office in a Member State, has a right of access to documents of the institutions, bodies, offices and agencies of the Union, whatever their medium.”
Regulation (EC) No. 1049/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2001 regarding public access to European Parliament, Council and Commission documents provides, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“1.  Any citizen of the Union, and any natural or legal person residing or having its registered office in a Member State, has a right of access to documents of the institutions, subject to the principles, conditions and limits defined in this Regulation.
The institutions may, subject to the same principles, conditions and limits, grant access to documents to any natural or legal person not residing or not having its registered office in a Member State.
This Regulation shall apply to all documents held by an institution, that is to say, documents drawn up or received by it and in its possession, in all areas of activity of the European Union.”
“1.  The institutions shall refuse access to a document where disclosure would undermine the protection of:
Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data provides as follows:
“For the purposes of this Directive:
“Member States shall provide for exemptions or derogations from the provisions of this Chapter, Chapter IV and Chapter VI for the processing of personal data carried out solely for journalistic purposes or the purpose of artistic or literary expression only if they are necessary to reconcile the right to privacy with the rules governing freedom of expression.”
The Court of Justice of the European Union (Grand Chamber), in its judgment of 9 November 2010, in Joined Cases C-92/09 and C-93/09, Volker und Markus Schecke Gbr and Hartmut Eifert v. Land Hessen, held as follows:
“48.  The right to the protection of personal data is not, however, an absolute right, but must be considered in relation to its function in society...
... It is necessary to bear in mind that the institutions are obliged to balance, before disclosing information relating to a natural person, the European Union’s interest in guaranteeing the transparency of its actions and the infringement of the rights recognised by Articles 7 and 8 of the Charter. No automatic priority can be conferred on the objective of transparency over the right to protection of personal data ..., even if important economic interests are at stake.”
In its judgment of 29 June 2010, the Court of Justice of the European Union (Grand Chamber) held, in Case C-28/08 P, Commission v. the Bavarian Lager Co. Ltd regarding the company’s claim to have full access to the minutes of a meeting, as follows:
“76.  This Court finds that, by releasing the expurgated version of the minutes of the meeting of 11 October 1996 with the names of five participants removed therefrom, the Commission did not infringe the provisions of Regulation No 1049/2001 and sufficiently complied with its duty of openness.
By requiring that, in respect of the five persons who had not given their express consent, Bavarian Lager establish the necessity for those personal data to be transferred, the Commission complied with the provisions of Article 8(b) of Regulation No 45/2001.
As Bavarian Lager has not provided any express and legitimate justification or any convincing argument in order to demonstrate the necessity for those personal data to be transferred, the Commission has not been able to weigh up the various interests of the parties concerned. Nor was it able to verify whether there was any reason to assume that the data subjects’ legitimate interests might be prejudiced, as required by Article 8(b) of Regulation No 45/2001.
It follows from the above that the Commission was right to reject the application for access to the full minutes of the meeting of 11 October 1996.”
Article 13 (Freedom of Thought and Expression) of the American Convention on Human Rights establishes, inter alia, that:
“1.  Everyone has the right to freedom of thought and expression. This right includes freedom to seek, receive, and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing, in print, in the form of art, or through any other medium of one’s choice.”
In the case of Claude Reyes et al. v. Chile (judgment of 19 September 2006), the Inter-American Court found that:
“... by expressly stipulating the right to ‘seek” and “receive’ ‘information,’ Article 13 of the Convention protects the right of all individuals to request access to State-held information, with the exceptions permitted by the restrictions established in the Convention. Consequently, this article protects the right of the individual to receive such information and the positive obligation of the State to provide it, so that the individual may have access to such information or receive an answer that includes a justification when, for any reason permitted by the Convention, the State is allowed to restrict access to the information in a specific case. The information should be provided without the need to prove direct interest or personal involvement in order to obtain it, except in cases in which a legitimate restriction is applied. The delivery of information to an individual can, in turn, permit it to circulate in society, so that the latter can become acquainted with it, have access to it, and assess it. In this way, the right to freedom of thought and expression includes the protection of the right of access to State-held information, which also clearly includes the two dimensions, individual and social, of the right to freedom of thought and expression that must be guaranteed simultaneously by the State.”
Article 9 of the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights provides as follows:
“1. Every individual shall have the right to receive information.
Every individual shall have the right to express and disseminate his opinions within the law.”
The Declaration of Principles on Freedom of Expression in Africa, adopted by the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights and published on 23 October 2002 reads, in its relevant part, as follows:
“1.  Freedom of expression and information, including the right to seek, receive and impart information and ideas... is a fundamental and inalienable human right and an indispensable component of democracy.
Everyone shall have an equal opportunity to exercise the right to freedom of expression and to access information without discrimination.”
“1.  Public bodies hold information not for themselves but as custodians of the public good and everyone has a right to access this information, subject only to clearly defined rules established by law.
The right to information shall be guaranteed by law in accordance with the following principles:
Everyone has the right to access and update or otherwise correct their personal information, whether it is held by public or by private bodies.”
It follows from the materials available to the Court on the legislation of member States of the Council of Europe that all of the thirty-one member States surveyed, save for Luxembourg, recognise the right of access to information and/or official documents held by public bodies. It would also appear that in most member States the right of access to information and/or documents appears not to be limited to the executive branch of power but extends to information and/or documents held by the legislative or judicial branches of power and even to State-owned companies and private bodies which perform public functions or receive substantial public funding. All access-to-information laws set out categories of information that can be withheld from release. Some countries have enacted a public-interest test which requires the public authorities and the supervisory bodies to balance the interest in withholding information against the public interest in disclosure.