The case originated in an application (no. 5773/10) against the Republic of Slovenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Slovenian national, Mr Boris Maselj (“the applicant”), on 18 December 2009.
The applicant was represented by Odvetniška Družba Matoz O.P. d.o.o., a law office practicing in Koper. The Slovenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs N. Pintar Gosenca, State Attorney.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the conditions of his detention in Ljubljana prison amounted to a violation of Articles 3 and 8 of the Convention, and that he had no effective remedy in this regard as required by Article 13 of the Convention.
On 5 September 2013 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1963 and lives in Ljubljana.
The applicant served his prison sentence in the closed and semi-open sections of Ljubljana prison and in the open section Ig, Ljubljana prison.
In the period between 19 May 2009 and 1 July 2009 he was held in the closed section: in cell 117, measuring 17.66 square metres (not including a separate 1.68 square metre sanitary facility) shared with three to five other inmates and with 2.66 to 3.99 square metres of personal space and in cell 2 measuring 16.18 square metres (not including a separate 1.7 square metre sanitary facility) shared with two to four other inmates and with 2.9 to 4.8 square metres of personal space.
In the period between 2 July 2009 and 31 October 2009 he was held in the semi-open section: in cell 139, measuring 19.36 square metres (not including a separate 1.76 square metre sanitary facility) shared with two to four other inmates and with 3.5 to 5.8 square metres of personal space and in cell 146 measuring 16.89 square metres (not including a separate 1.76 square metre sanitary facility) shared with two, three or four other inmates and with 3 to 5 square metres of personal space.
In the period between 1 November 2009 and 18 February 2010 he was held in the open section Ig in cell 1, measuring 41.64 square metres (not including a separate 13.90 square metre sanitary facility) shared with three to seven other inmates and with 3.5 to 6.9 square metres of personal space.
As regards the general characteristics of the cells in the closed and semi-open sections, material conditions inside the cells, sanitary conditions and health care, see the judgment in Štrucl and Others v. Slovenia, nos. ,  and , §§ 21 to 32, 20 October 2011.
As to the out-of-cell time in the closed section, the Court found in the aforementioned judgment that sentenced prisoners in the closed section of the prison were locked up in their cells and were only able to leave them if they applied for certain activities, most of which were to take place in the recreation room. There was, however, only one 50square-metre recreation room per floor, which was to be used by ten inmates at most (Štrucl and Others § 86).
As to the out-of-cell time in the semi-open section, the Government submitted that the cell doors in the semi-open section of the prison were unlocked, except from 9.45 p.m. (on Fridays, Saturdays and before holidays from midnight) until 6.00 a.m. (on Saturdays, Sundays and during holidays until 8.30 a.m.). During this time prisoners could move freely in the corridor (35.7 square metres), living quarters of co-prisoners or in the indoor or outdoor exercise areas, in accordance with prison rules. The Government contended that this regime had been in place for several years.
As to the open section, cells were open twenty-four hours per day and prisoners could, except when sleeping, move around freely, inside the open section (in a dining room, classroom, recreation room) and in outdoor areas (a park and sports ground). Further, the prisoners were allowed to exercise for four hours per day, they could do shopping in a shop outside the prison, their visits were unsupervised and their correspondence with people from outside the prison and the use of a telephone were not limited and supervised. The open section had a capacity for twenty seven prisoners in five cells. The prisoners shared sanitary facilities with five showers, five washbasins in the lavatory, three toilets on the ground floor and four toilets on the first floor of the section and a laundry room with a washing machine and a drier, which prisoners could freely use. Prisoners in the open section were also entitled to unsupervised visits outside prison for five hours during weekends, unsupervised leave and annual leave if working in Ljubljana prison.
As regards the cell temperature, the data provided by the Government showed that the average temperature in the cells in the late afternoon (5- 5.30 p.m.) in the second half of July and August 2009 had been approximately 28oC, exceeding 30oC on seven days.
For the relevant domestic law and practice as well as relevant international documents see Štrucl and Others, cited above, §§ 33-56.