The case originated in an application (no. 14918/14) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a stateless person, Mr Roman Rozhkani (“the applicant”), on 6 February 2014.
The applicant was represented by Mr L. Lewandowski, a lawyer practising in Dragacz. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 5 September 2016 the Government were given notice of the application. The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1976 in Tbilisi, Georgia. His mother, N.N., is a Russian national and lives in the settlement of Leontyevskoye in the Krasnodar Region, Russia.
In 2009 the Georgian authorities confirmed that the applicant was not a Georgian national. On 7 February 2011 they provided him with a stateless person’s identity card.
In November 2010 the applicant moved from Georgia to Russia with his wife Z.Kh. and their two children, who were minors, to live with his mother, who had a disability. In June 2011 the applicant was officially registered as residing at his mother’s address.
On 1 April 2011 the Department of the Federal Migration Service of the Krasnodar Region (Управлении Федеральной миграционной службы по Краснодарскому краю (ФМС), hereinafter “the FMS department”) granted the applicant a temporary (three-year) residence permit.
On 24 January 2012 the FMS department granted the applicant’s wife and his two minor children, all of whom were Georgian nationals, a threeyear temporary residence permit valid until January 2015.
On an unspecified date in 2012 the applicant applied for a long-term (five-year) residence permit. On 27 December 2012 the FMS department issued decision no. 157489, refusing to provide the applicant with the residence permit. The decision referred to section 9(1)(1) of the Foreign Nationals Act and stated that the applicant posed a threat to national security. The text of the decision also mentioned that as of 28 August 2012 there was no record of immigration violations in Russia in respect of him.
On 28 January 2013, by decision no. 47144, the FMS department revoked the applicant’s temporary residence permit issued on 1 April 2011.
The applicant challenged both decisions before the Belorechenskiy District Court of the Krasnodar Region (hereinafter “the District Court”). On 28 February 2013 the court found in the applicant’s favour and declared both decisions unlawful. In particular, the court stated:
“... the court has established, during the examination of the reasons for the refusal to issue the residence permit, that on 5 December 2012 the Department of the Federal Migration Service of the Krasnodar Region received a letter from the Department of the Federal Security Service of the Krasnodar Region concerning the lack of approval with regard to issuing a residence permit to the stateless person, Mr R. Rozhkani, in accordance with section 9(1)(1) of the Foreign Nationals Act. On the basis of that [lack of approval], the Department of the Federal Migration Service of the Krasnodar Region refused to issue a residence permit to Mr R. Rozhkani ... In connection with the refusal to issue the residence permit, on 28 January 2013 the Department of the Federal Migration Service of the Krasnodar Region revoked his temporary residence permit ...
As follows from the above, the information received in the letter of 5 December 2012 from the Department of the Federal Security Service of the Krasnodar Region served as the basis for the refusal to grant the residence permit and the revocation of the temporary residence permit. [However], the conclusion of the Department of the Federal Migration Service of the Krasnodar Region does not contain such information, whereas according to appendix 4 of Administrative Regulation no. 41, the operative part of such a conclusion should contain a well-reasoned foundation for a positive or negative decision concerning the issuance of a residence permit...
... no evidence has been provided to the court by the Department of the Federal Migration Service of the Krasnodar Region to demonstrate the reasons for taking the impugned decisions.
In such circumstances, in the absence of information and substantiating evidence, the court cannot agree with the decisions issued by the Department of the Federal Migration Service of the Krasnodar Region on 27 December 2012 concerning the refusal to grant the applicant a residence permit and on 28 January 2013 concerning the revocation of his temporary residence permit, ...
As the impugned decisions are not substantiated and do not comply with the requirements of the Administrative Regulations and the Foreign Nationals Act, the court finds it necessary to oblige the Department of the Federal Migration Service of the Krasnodar Region to remedy those deficiencies ...”
The FMS department appealed against the above decision to the Krasnodar Regional Court (hereinafter “the Regional Court”).
On 23 April 2013 the Regional Court overruled the decision of the District Court and found that the decisions of 27 December 2012 and 28 January 2013 had been lawful. Without referring to any specific information against the applicant obtained by the Department of the Federal Security Service of the Krasnodar Region (Федеральная служба безопасности по Краснодарскому краю (ФСБ), hereinafter “the FSB department”), the Regional Court stated, amongst other things:
“... the residence permit was annulled after the local FMS department received incoming letter no. 1260 of 5 December 2012 from the Department of the Federal Security Service of the Krasnodar Region. Such documents, which contain confidential information, could only be obtained following a reasoned request and written permission from the appropriate State official. Thus, [the letter] could not be disclosed to the applicant.
Therefore, the Department of the Federal Migration Service of the Krasnodar Region acted within its mandate and in compliance with domestic law ...”
The applicant appealed in cassation against the above decision to the Civil Chamber of the Regional Court, stating, amongst other things, that the impugned decisions of the FMS department had been taken based on undisclosed information, and that they made him liable to deportation, which would lead to the disruption of his family life with his wife, children and disabled mother.
On 9 July 2013 the Civil Chamber of the Regional Court refused to examine the applicant’s cassation appeal, finding no violations of substantive or procedural law which had influenced the outcome of the proceedings, and upheld the decision of 23 April 2013. The court stated as follows:
“... When allowing the applicant’s appeal [on 28 February 2013], the District Court stated that the FMS of the Krasnodar Region had not provided the court with evidence serving as the basis for its decisions [to revoke the applicant’s residence permit and to refuse him a long-term residence permit] ...
... The documents in the case file show that ... the FMS of the Krasnodar Region received letter no. 1260 dated 5 December 2012 from the Department of the Federal Security Service of the Krasnodar Region concerning its disapproval as regards issuing a residence permit for Mr Rozhkani ... In connection with this, on 27 December 2012 the FMS refused to issue the residence permit ...
... Letter no. 1260 of 5 December 2012 from the Department of the Federal Security Service, which served as the basis for the refusal, is marked ‘confidential’... The transfer of documents containing confidential information to other State bodies could be done only following a justified request and written approval from the relevant official... Therefore, the document which served as the basis for the impugned decisions could not be disclosed to the applicant.
In such circumstances, taking the impugned decisions was within the competence of the FMS of the Krasnodar Region, the relevant procedure was complied with, and the content of the impugned decisions was in accordance with the law.
As for the applicant’s points of appeal, they aim for a different interpretation of the law and do not disclose circumstances which have not already been examined or which would disprove the conclusions in the court’s decision [of 23 April 2013], and therefore cannot serve as a basis for overruling that decision ...”
On 13 September 2013 the Supreme Court of Russia refused to transfer the applicant’s cassation appeal to its chamber for administrative cases.
On 25 October 2013 the FMS department issued a decision on the applicant’s deportation. On an unspecified date between the end of October and the middle of November 2013 the applicant was deported to Poland.
The applicant currently lives in Toruń. It appears that on an unspecified date between 2014 and 2016 his wife and children joined him there. According to the applicant, in December 2016 the local authorities granted him and his family refugee status.
In reply to the Court’s request for the information and documents that had served as the basis for the applicant’s exclusion from Russia, the Government provided copies of the courts’ decisions in the applicant’s case and a copy of the transcript of the hearing on 23 April 2013 before the Regional Court. In addition, the Government submitted copies of the FMS department’s decisions of 27 December 2012 and 28 January 2013. Referring to section 18 of Federal Law no. 144- ФЗ on State Secrets of 21 July 1993, the Government refused to provide the Court with a copy of letter no. 1260 of 5 December 2012 from the FSB department (also referred to as letter no. 1/2/6-753 of 28 November 2012 in the documents submitted) which contained information serving as the basis for the applicant’s exclusion.
For the relevant domestic law and practice, see Liu v. Russia (no. 2), no. 29157/09, §§ 45-52, 26 July 2011, and Abramyan and Others v. Russia (dec.), nos. 38951/13 and 59611/13, §§ 76-96, 12 May 2015.
For the relevant Council of Europe material, see Gablishvili v. Russia, no. 39428/12, § 37, 26 June 2014.