The case originated in an application (no. 5699/11) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Mirko Lučić (“the applicant”), on 24 December 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Umićević, a lawyer practising in Zagreb. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged that he had not had a fair trial in that he had not been given the opportunity to examine a witness against him, as required by Article 6 § § 1 and 3 (d) of the Convention.
On 5 March 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1970 and lives in Zagreb.
On 3 May 1999, at around 8.00 p.m., J.N. lodged a criminal complaint with the Zagreb Police Department (Policijska uprava Zagrebačka – “the police”) alleging that during the previous night the applicant had raped her. He had offered to drive her home from bar A., where she worked, but had then driven into the nearby woods and raped her in his car. She had then asked him to drive her to a night-club, “S.”, where he had dropped her off and left.
The applicant was arrested on the same evening and J.N. identified him as her rapist.
During the night of 4 May 1999 J.N. was examined by a doctor who found no injuries on her body or genitals. The applicant was also taken to a doctor and the doctor found abrasions on his right upper arm and elbow and his right knee.
On 4 May 1999 the applicant was questioned by an investigating judge of the Zagreb County Court (Županijski sud u Zagrebu). He admitted to having had sexual intercourse with J.N. in his car but argued that it had been consensual. He contended that the abrasions on his right arm and leg were the result of friction during the intercourse. After the questioning the applicant was released.
On 31 May and 17 June 1999 J.N.’s lawyer asked the Zagreb County State Attorney’s Office (Županijsko državno odvjetništvo u Zagrebu) to request the investigating judge to have the applicant detained on the grounds that he had been trying to contact J.N., threatening her in order to make her withdraw her criminal complaint. She also argued that J.N. had sought psychiatric help and submitted medical reports in that connection.
On 18 June 1999 the Zagreb County State Attorney’s Office asked the investigating judge of the Zagreb County Court to open an investigation in respect of the applicant on charges of rape and to order his detention on the basis of the information submitted by J.N.
The investigating judge opened the investigation on 6 July 1999 but refused to order the applicant’s detention on the grounds that there was no reliable evidence suggesting that he might influence the witness or reoffend.
On 9 July 1999 J.N., in the presence of her lawyer, gave oral evidence at a hearing before the investigating judge. The applicant and his defence lawyer were not informed of the hearing and were not present during the questioning.
During the questioning, J.N. reiterated her previous allegation that the applicant had raped her.
On 13 July 1999 the Zagreb County State Attorney’s Office lodged an appeal with a three-judge panel of the Zagreb County Court against the investigating judge’s decision refusing the request for the applicant’s detention.
The three-judge panel granted the application and on 16 July 1999 ordered the investigating judge to re-examine the request for detention.
On 27 August 1999 the investigating judge again dismissed the request for the applicant’s detention on the grounds that there were no relevant reasons for his remand in custody. The Zagreb County State Attorney’s Office appealed, but on 2 September 1999 a three-judge panel upheld that decision.
In the course of the investigation the investigating judge heard several witnesses and commissioned medical reports.
On 24 September 1999 S.S., a colleague of J.N., testified before the investigating judge that she had been working with J.N. in bar A. on the day in issue and that when J.N. had wanted to go home, S.S. had asked the applicant to give her a lift. The next day, J.N. had told her that she had been raped by the applicant. S.S. had also seen the applicant later, and he had denied the rape accusation, stating that J.N. had had sex with him voluntarily. S.S. also stressed that she knew the applicant well and she had never heard of him attacking girls or doing anything of that kind.
An expert medical report of 10 November 1999 found that the reports on J.N.’s gynaecological and psychiatric examination showed no objective evidence of any injuries.
On 14 February 2000 the investigating judge heard evidence from K.N., who stated that on the night in issue he had been working as a musician in the night-club “S.” when J.N. had come in. She had bought a drink for the musicians and then he had taken her home. There had been nothing unusual about her; she had appeared normal and had not made any mention of rape.
Another witness, J.M., was questioned on 28 March 2000. She stated that on the morning after the event J.N. had come to a bar where she worked and told her that she had been raped the evening before. She had been very distressed and frightened. J.M. had told her to report the rape to a policeman who had been in a nearby bar.
A forensic report of 23 November 2000 found biological traces from J.N. on the applicant’s underwear.
An expert medical report of 7 February 2001 found that the abrasions on the applicant’s right upper arm could have resulted from finger nail scratches, while the injuries on his elbow and right knee could have been the result of a fall or friction.
On 19 February 2001 the Zagreb County State Attorney’s Office indicted the applicant in the Zagreb County Court on charges of rape.
At a hearing on 19 March 2003 the applicant pleaded not guilty. J.N., although properly summoned, failed to appear.
On 29 April 2003 the Zagreb County Court instructed the police to take J.N. to the hearing, scheduled for 2 June 2003.
On 27 May 2003 J.N., through her lawyer, informed the Zagreb County Court that she was living abroad and asked that the hearing be postponed until September 2003 when she would be in Croatia. The Zagreb County Court agreed to her request and scheduled a hearing for 22 September 2003.
At the hearing on 22 September 2003 J.N., although properly summoned, again failed to appear. Her lawyer, present at the hearing, informed the trial court that meanwhile she had not had any contact with J.N.
On 1 October 2003 the Zagreb County Court again ordered the police to take J.N. to a hearing scheduled for 4 November 2003.
However, that hearing was again adjourned because the police were unable to locate J.N. The only information available was that she had been living in Spain for the last four years.
On 19 December 2003 J.N.’s lawyer informed the trial court that she was no longer representing J.N.
On 19 March 2004 the Zagreb County Court requested the police to establish J.N.’s exact address, and the police informed it that the only information available was that she was living in Spain.
After several adjourned hearings, on 24 May 2005 a hearing was held at which the applicant pleaded not guilty. The Deputy State Attorney asked the trial court to admit in evidence the written record of J.N.’s oral statement given to the investigating judge. The defence opposed that request, arguing that given the gravity of charges against the applicant it was necessary to question J.N. at the hearing. The defence also stressed that she was a Croatian citizen and that her whereabouts in Spain could be established through the relevant police records and the appropriate diplomatic channels.
On 19 July 2005 the police informed the Zagreb County Court that from an interview with J.N.’s mother they had learned that J.N. was living in Madrid, Spain, and that she would be in Croatia for only a couple of days during the summer.
At a hearing on 20 October 2005 the trial court heard evidence from the witness K.N., who reiterated his statement given to the investigating judge (see paragraph 21 above). The Deputy State Attorney again requested the trial court to admit in evidence the record of J.N.’s oral statement to the investigating judge. The defence insisted that she should be questioned and provided an address in the Netherlands where she allegedly resided.
On 21 October 2005 the Zagreb County Court requested that J.N. be summoned to a hearing by means of international legal assistance in criminal matters through the authorities in the Netherlands.
On 24 February 2006 the Zagreb County Court was informed that the authorities in the Netherlands had not been able to serve the court summons on J.N.
At a hearing on 10 April 2006 the trial court heard evidence from the witness S.S., who reiterated her previous statement (see paragraph 19 above). The Deputy State Attorney requested that the record of J.N.’s oral evidence to the investigating judge, as well as the records of the statements of the witness J.M., who had never appeared before the trial court, and the witness K.N., be admitted in evidence without their questioning at the hearing. The defence agreed with regard to admitting the written statements of the other witnesses but insisted on that J.N. should be questioned at the hearing. The trial court agreed to the prosecution’s request and admitted the written record of J.N.’s oral evidence given before the investigating judge as evidence.
On the same day, the Zagreb County Court found the applicant guilty on the charges of rape and sentenced him to one year’s imprisonment.
On 7 June 2006 the applicant lodged an appeal with the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske) against the first-instance judgment, complaining that the Zagreb County Court had failed to secure the presence and examination of J.N. at the trial.
On 13 December 2007 the Supreme Court quashed the first-instance judgment and ordered a retrial. The Supreme Court found that the Zagreb County Court had failed to take all reasonable steps to secure the presence of J.N. at the trial even though her evidence was decisive for the case.
During the retrial, on 27 February 2008 the Zagreb County Court requested that J.N.’s whereabouts in Spain be established through contacting the Spanish national authorities by means of international legal assistance in criminal matters.
On 21 April 2008 the police informed the Zagreb County Court that they had obtained J.N.’s address in Spain from her parents, and the trial court summoned J.N. from that address.
On 25 September 2008 the Zagreb County Court received information from the Spanish authorities in respect of J.N.’s exact address and telephone number in Spain.
A hearing scheduled for 29 October 2008 was adjourned because J.N. failed to appear. There was, at the time, no information on whether she had received the court summons.
Another hearing was held on 18 December 2008 at which the trial court found that J.N. had been properly summoned both to that hearing and to the hearing of 29 October 2008.
At the hearing the applicant pleaded not guilty to the charges of rape and the trial court again questioned the witness K.N., who reiterated his previous statements. The Deputy State Attorney asked for all the witness statements to be admitted in evidence without the questioning of the witnesses. The defence agreed to this save for the evidence of J.N., insisting that she should be cross-examined at the trial and pointing out that the defence had been denied the opportunity to question her when she had given her statement to the investigating judge. The trial court accepted the Deputy State Attorney’s proposal and admitted the written record of J.N.’s oral statement to the investigating judge as evidence. However, it adjourned the hearing in order to question another witness on behalf of the defence, I.P.
At a hearing held on 21 January 2009 the Zagreb County Court noted that I.P. had died and concluded the trial. On the same day it found the applicant guilty of the charges of rape and sentenced him to one year’s imprisonment. The trial court relied on the statement given by J.N. and held that it had been corroborated with other evidence. In particular, it noted:
 “It follows from the statements given by witnesses S.S. and [J.M.], and the evidence provided by the forensic expert and other medical evidence concerning the victim, that the relevant (so-called control) facts, important for the assessment of contradictory statements of the accused and the victim, support the statement given by the victim.”
On 16 February 2009 the applicant lodged an appeal with the Supreme Court complaining that the first-instance court had failed to take all reasonable steps to secure the presence of J.N. at the trial and that her evidence had been crucial for his case.
On 5 May 2009 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the first-instance judgment. The relevant part of the Supreme Court’s judgment reads:
“As can be seen from the case file, after the investigation had been opened on 15 June 1999 ... the victim J.N. was questioned as a witness on 9 July 1999 ... The accused had been legally represented ever since 4 May 1999 ... and the defence counsel did not ask to be present during the questioning of this witness, within the meaning of Article 198 § 4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, nor did any circumstances at the time suggest that she might be absent from the hearing. Following the investigation, and after the accused had been indicted [in the Zagreb County Court], the victim’s representative informed the court that ‘... the victim is at the moment working abroad and therefore she is unable to appear at the trial, so she has asked if the hearing can be adjourned until September 2003, when she will be in Croatia ...’ ... The victim failed to appear at the hearing of 22 September 2003, although she had been properly summoned ... After that, on 24 November 2003, the Sesvete Police Station informed the court that the they had learned from the victim’s father that she ‘[had] been living in Spain for about four years and he [didn’t] know when she [would] return.’ ... On 1 July 2004 the court was again informed that she ‘... work[ed] in Spain’ ... Following the Sesvete Police Station’s further investigations into J.N.’s whereabouts, on 15 July 2005 the court was informed that she lived in Madrid, Spain, ‘with her husband’ ... However, after her exact address in Spain had been established, as this court had requested in its earlier decision, the court summoned the victim twice to a hearing ... Although she was properly summoned, she failed to appear and did not give any reason for her absence.
Thus, the victim J.N. was questioned during the investigation as required by law, after which it appears she did not want to appear at the hearing, although she did not give reasons for her absence. Since she lived abroad the trial court had no way of securing her presence at the hearing and therefore it rightly decided, under Article 331 § 1(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, to read out the written record of her oral statement.”
On 21 July 2009 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske), reiterating his previous complaints.
On 7 July 2010 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s constitutional complaint as ill-founded, endorsing the reasoning of the lower courts. The decision of the Constitutional Court was served on the applicant’s representative on 19 July 2010.
The relevant provision of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 56/1990, 135/1997, 8/1998, 113/2000, 124/2000, 28/2001, 41/2001, 55/2001, 76/2010, 85/2010) reads as follows:
 “In the determination of his rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law.
In case of any criminal charge brought against him, the suspect, defendant or accused shall have the following rights ...
- to question witnesses for the prosecution or to have them questioned and to have witnesses for the defence questioned under the same conditions as witnesses for the prosecution ...”
The relevant provision of the Criminal Code (Kazneni zakon, Official Gazette no. 110/1997) provides:
“(1) Whoever forces another person into sexual intercourse or another sexual act of a similar nature by using force or threatening that he or she will directly attack [the person’s] life or body or the life or body of a person close to her shall be sentenced to imprisonment for a term of one to ten years.”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Zakon o kaznenom postupku, Official Gazette nos. 110/1997, 27/1998, 58/1999, 112/1999, 58/2002, 143/2002, 63/2002, 62/2003 and 115/2006) provided:
“ ...
(4)  The prosecutor, the defendant or the defence counsel may be present at the questioning of a witness [during the investigation], when it is probable that the witness will not appear at the trial, if the investigating judge considers it expedient or if one of the parties so requests. The victim may be present during the questioning of a witness only when it is probable that the witness will not appear at the trial.
(5)  The investigating judge shall take the necessary measures to inform the prosecutor, defence counsel, the victim or the defendant about the time and place of any investigative action which they may attend, except where postponement [of the action] may pose a risk. If the defendant is represented, the investigating judge shall inform only his lawyer.
... ”
“(1)  If a properly summoned witness fails to appear without justified reason, ..., he or she may be brought before the court and fined up to 20,000 Croatian kunas.
... “
“(1)  A written record of the oral statement of a witness ... may be read out following a decision of the [trial] panel in the following circumstances:
1)  if the person is deceased, is mentally ill or untraceable, or if it is impossible or difficult for him or her to appear at the trial on account of old age, illness or other important reasons,
2)  if a witness or a medical expert refuses to testify at the hearing without a legally valid reason,
... “
“After the questioning of a witness or an expert witness or reading out the records and other submission, the president of the trial panel shall ask the parties and the victim whether they want to note something.”
The relevant provisions of the amended Code of Criminal Procedure (Zakon o kaznenom postupku, Official Gazette nos. 152/2008, 76/2009, 80/2011, 121/2011, 91/2012, 143/2012) provide:
Article 502
“...
(2)  The relevant provisions concerning the reopening of criminal proceedings shall be applicable in the case of a request for revision of any final court decision in connection with a final judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in which a violation of the rights and freedoms under the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms has been found in respect of the defendant.
(3)  A request for the reopening of proceedings in connection with a final judgment of the European Court of Human Rights may be lodged within a thirty-day time-limit starting from the date on which the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights becomes final.”
Article 574
“...
(2)  If prior to the entry into force of this Code a decision has been adopted against which a legal remedy is allowed pursuant to the provisions of the legislation relevant to the proceedings [in which the decision was adopted] ..., the provisions of that legislation shall be applicable [to the proceedings in respect of the remedy], unless otherwise provided under this Code.
(3)  Articles 497-508 of this Code shall be accordingly applicable to requests for the reopening of criminal proceedings made under the Code of Criminal Procedure (Official Gazette nos. 110/1997, 27/1998, 58/1999, 112/1999, 58/2002, 143/2002, 62/2003, and 115/2006).”
In its judgment no. I Kž-37/09-6 of 9 September 2009 the Supreme Court dealt with the problem of admitting in evidence the written record of an oral statement by a witness who had been questioned at the pre-trial stage without the defence being provided with the opportunity to be present during the questioning. The Supreme Court noted, in particular:
“The issue in this case is not whether it was impossible to ‘bring the victim to Croatia’, nor is it a problem of the direct questioning of the victim N.M. before the ‘Croatian criminal court’ – but the issue is in the fact that the victim N.M. was twice heard as a witness through international legal assistance in criminal matters by the Subotica Municipal Court [in Serbia] without informing the defendant D.B. or his defence counsel M.U. that such action (questioning of the victim) was being taken.
... [T]he Supreme Court, as the court of appeal, considers that in such circumstances the accused D.B. did not have an effective opportunity to challenge the witness statement, which was decisive evidence for his conviction, and therefore the Supreme Court concludes that he did not have a fair trial as required under Article 6 § 3 (d) of the Convention as regards his right to have a central witness (the victim M.M.) questioned and his right to be present during her questioning irrespective of whether he wished to exercise that right or not.”
Framework Decision of 15 March 2001 of the Council of the European Union on the standing of victims in criminal proceedings (2001/220/JHA) provided as follows:
“2.  Each Member State shall ensure that victims who are particularly vulnerable can benefit from specific treatment best suited to their circumstances.”
“Each Member State shall safeguard the possibility for victims to be heard during proceedings and to supply evidence.
Each Member State shall take appropriate measures to ensure that its authorities question victims only insofar as necessary for the purpose of criminal proceedings.”
“4.  Each Member State shall ensure that, where there is a need to protect victims - particularly those most vulnerable - from the effects of giving evidence in open court, victims may, by decision taken by the court, be entitled to testify in a manner which will enable this objective to be achieved, by any appropriate means compatible with its basic legal principles.”
Directive of 25 October 2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council (2012/29/EU) establishing minimum standards on the rights, support and protection of victims of crime, and replacing Council Framework Decision 2001/220/JHA provides as follows:
“(66)  This Directive respects fundamental rights and observes the principles recognised by the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. In particular, it seeks to promote the right to dignity, life, physical and mental integrity, liberty and security, respect for private and family life, the right to property, the principle of non-discrimination, the principle of equality between women and men, the rights of the child, the elderly and persons with disabilities, and the right to a fair trial.”
“Without prejudice to the rights of the defence and in accordance with rules of judicial discretion, Member States shall ensure that during criminal investigations:
...
(b)  the number of interviews of victims is kept to a minimum and interviews are carried out only where strictly necessary for the purposes of the criminal investigation;”
“1.  Member States shall ensure that victims receive a timely and individual assessment, in accordance with national procedures, to identify specific protection needs and to determine whether and to what extent they would benefit from special measures in the course of criminal proceedings, as provided for under Articles 23 and 24, due to their particular vulnerability to secondary and repeat victimisation, to intimidation and to retaliation ...
For the purposes of this Directive, child victims shall be presumed to have specific protection needs due to their vulnerability to secondary and repeat victimisation, to intimidation and to retaliation. To determine whether and to what extent they would benefit from special measures as provided for under Articles 23 and 24, child victims shall be subject to an individual assessment as provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article.”
“1.  Without prejudice to the rights of the defence and in accordance with rules of judicial discretion, Member States shall ensure that victims with specific protection needs who benefit from special measures identified as a result of an individual assessment provided for in Article 22(1), may benefit from the measures provided for in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article. A special measure envisaged following the individual assessment shall not be made available if operational or practical constraints make this impossible, or where there is a an urgent need to interview the victim and failure to do so could harm the victim or another person or could prejudice the course of the proceedings.
The following measures shall be available during criminal investigations to victims with specific protection needs identified in accordance with Article 22(1):
(a)  interviews with the victim being carried out in premises designed or adapted for that purpose;
(b)  interviews with the victim being carried out by or through professionals trained for that purpose;
(c)  all interviews with the victim being conducted by the same persons unless this is contrary to the good administration of justice;
(d)  all interviews with victims of sexual violence, gender-based violence or violence in close relationships, unless conducted by a prosecutor or a judge, being conducted by a person of the same sex as the victim, if the victim so wishes, provided that the course of the criminal proceedings will not be prejudiced.
The following measures shall be available for victims with specific protection needs identified in accordance with Article 22(1) during court proceedings:
(a)  measures to avoid visual contact between victims and offenders including during the giving of evidence, by appropriate means including the use of communication technology;
(b)  measures to ensure that the victim may be heard in the courtroom without being present, in particular through the use of appropriate communication technology;
(c)  measures to avoid unnecessary questioning concerning the victim’s private life not related to the criminal offence; and
(d)  measures allowing a hearing to take place without the presence of the public.”