The application concerns a decision to deprive the applicant of her parental responsibilities in respect of her daughter, who had been in foster care, and authorise the daughter’s adoption by her foster parents. The applicant complained that those measures had given rise to a violation of her right to respect for her family life under Article 8 of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1975 and lives in H. Before the Court she was represented by Ms R. Arnesen, a lawyer practising in Bergen.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr M. Emberland of the Attorney General’s Office (Civil Matters) as their Agent, assisted by Ms L.-M. Jünge, advocate at the same office.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant became pregnant while on holiday abroad in 2010. On 7 December 2010 the child welfare services received a notification of concern from the midwife who was attending the applicant. According to the notification the applicant had had a son from a previous relationship, born in 2000, and after giving birth to him she had suffered from postnatal depression, which had been treated at a hospital. The midwife moreover informed the authorities that the son lived with his father, and that the applicant had been subject to voluntary as well compulsory mental health care on a number of occasions.
The child welfare services contacted the applicant prior to the birth of her daughter, but she did not want their assistance. Accordingly, other public authorities were asked to notify the child welfare services in the event that they had any concerns. The hospital in which the applicant was to give birth was asked to inform the child welfare services as soon as the child had been born.
On 15 March 2011 the applicant’s general practitioner informed the child welfare services that the applicant had been diagnosed with emotionally unstable personality disorder (F60.3) and mild mental retardation (F70). In addition, on 8 April 2011, the municipal mental health services submitted information to the effect that the applicant lived in a home provided by those services, but that she refused assistance and aid from the staff. Reference was also made to medical assessments that had been made in connection with the applicant’s first pregnancy. It concluded that there was a high risk that the applicant would use violence in conflicts and that it was unrealistic that she should have the daily care of children.
The applicant gave birth to her daughter on 5 April 2011. She was informed by the child welfare services that her daughter would be subject to an emergency placement decision unless the applicant consented to a stay at a child and family centre (“the centre”), where her caring skills would be assessed and where it would be ensured that the daughter received appropriate care. The applicant and her daughter moved into the centre on 8 April 2011.
In a conversation between the staff at the centre and the child welfare services on 11 April 2011, the staff expressed concerns regarding the fact that they found it difficult to cooperate with the applicant, whom they perceived as paranoid. She was helpless and had major problems in taking care of the child’s practical needs in respect of matters such as hygiene, care and safety. No interplay between the applicant and the child had been observed, either. In another conversation between the same parties on 13 April 2011, the staff furthermore stated that they were unable to give guidance to the applicant, as she did not understand why she was at the centre. She was perceived as unpredictable and, according to the staff, she did not shield the child from her anger and aggression. She had little focus on her daughter, and had not bonded and did not interact with her. The centre’s staff proposed to discontinue the stay and advised that an emergency placement decision be adopted.
On the basis of the above, the child welfare services considered that assistance measures, although extensive, had been unsuccessful. It was not appropriate for the applicant’s stay at the centre to be continued or for her to be allowed to return home with the child. On 14 April 2011 an emergency placement decision was adopted, pursuant to section 4-6 of the Child Welfare Act (see paragraph 51 below), to the effect that the child was to be placed in public care. On the following day, the chair of the County Social Welfare Board (fylkesnemnda for barnevern og sosiale saker) approved that decision.
On 28 April 2011 the applicant lodged an appeal against the emergency placement decision. She argued that she had only been allowed a few days in the centre and that she had been in a vulnerable situation owing to her having only just given birth. The case had been wrongly presented and she requested that her caring skills be reassessed. As to her earlier rounds of treatment, she emphasised the fact that she had not been subject to treatment since 2006, and that her last treatment had been administered within the context of stress caused by her having undergone an abortion. She had recently moved in with her mother, who had asked to be approved as a foster parent; moreover, the applicant’s brother and sister could assist and support her and her mother.
On 2 May 2011 the Board, by its chair, held a meeting in order to hear the case. A representative from the child welfare services attended, as did the applicant and her mother and both gave testimony. It appears that the applicant on this occasion stated that she had not been subject to mental health treatment since 2008.
On 3 May 2011 the Board, in the person of its chairperson, decided to maintain the emergency decision. It took account of the applicant’s history of hospitalisation. In addition to the above-mentioned medical assessments the Board mentioned, inter alia, an evaluation made following treatment given in 2002, according to which the applicant easily lost control and had expressed aggression. She had asked her then boyfriend to kill a previous boyfriend of hers, and had at one occasion rammed a knife into a pillow next to that former boyfriend while he was sleeping. In 2006 the applicant had first been treated at a hospital after she had undergone an abortion. According to the summary of the medical assessments made at that time, she had destroyed items in the house and physically attacked her mother. At the hospital she had attributed her anger against her family to the fact that they had pressured her to abort her pregnancy. Later that same year, the applicant had again been hospitalised after having become aggressive towards her mother. On that occasion the applicant had stated that she would surely hit her mother again and that she had problems controlling her anger. According to medical observations recorded in 2007, the applicant had not been responsive to therapy and had not understood the necessity of taking medication in the manner prescribed. In 2008 she had been hospitalised after an episode in which, in the presence of her son, she had climbed out of a window and threatened to jump. Moreover, there had been incidents in which she had threatened to use a knife both on herself and on others.
The Board also reviewed a report prepared by staff at the centre. The report noted that the applicant did not secure her daughter, but instead left her alone, on the nappy-changing table. Moreover, the applicant had experienced certain problems in cleaning, dressing and undressing the child. The report also contained observations regarding the applicant’s emotional care of the daughter and concluded by remarking that the applicant had appeared unstable in her mental functioning throughout the entire period of her stay at the centre.
In the light of the way the applicant’s health had been described in medical assessments since 2001 and how she had functioned during her six day stay at the centre, the Board found that there had been a risk that the daughter could have suffered severe injury if she had moved home with the applicant. The nursing and emotional care of the girl would have been deficient, and the emotional development of the girl would have stagnated. This would have been very damaging to the girl, who was of an age at which continuous stimulation and “mirroring” (that is to say actions intended to assure the child having been heard and understood) was entirely decisive for her further development. The conditions for an emergency decision had thus been met on 14 April 2011, when the emergency decision had been adopted. The Board, moreover, considered that the conditions were also met as at the date of its own decision. As to the applicant’s moving in with her mother, it stated that there was still a risk of substantial damage being caused to the child because of the fact that major conflict regularly arose between the applicant and her family, from the effects of which the applicant would probably not be able to protect her daughter. In addition, the applicant’s mother had clearly expressed her opinion that her daughter would be capable of caring for the child without assistance, which indicated that deficiencies in the applicant’s care for her daughter would be overlooked and not reported to the child welfare services. The emergency decision was therefore upheld.
The child welfare services had granted the applicant contact rights entitling her to have contact with her daughter once every third week. The Board noted that this constituted a “restrictive decision”, as the case concerned an infant temporarily placed outside the home. It found nonetheless that it should be upheld, noting in that regard (i) strange remarks made by the applicant to the effect that the child must have been switched and (ii) the fact that the applicant had criticised the interim foster parents for feeding her daughter so much that she had been unable to recognise her. The Board stated, however, that there was a possibility of the applicant being awarded more extensive contact rights if the applicant were to visit a doctor and start taking appropriate medicines to stabilise her mental functioning. On essentially the same grounds, the Board held that she should not be informed of the whereabouts of her daughter, in accordance with section 4-19 of the Child Welfare Act (see paragraph 51 below).
On 26 May 2011 the child welfare services lodged an application with the County Social Welfare Board for a care order to be issued in respect of the applicant’s daughter, in accordance with section 4-12 of the Child Welfare Act (see paragraph 51 below). They also engaged a psychologist to assess the applicant’s caring skills.
The psychologist delivered her written report on 16 August 2011; the report concluded that the applicant’s mental functioning rendered her incapable of taking care of children.
The Board, which was composed of one jurist qualified to work as a professional judge, one psychologist and one lay person, heard the case on 1 and 2 September 2011. The parties and eight witnesses were heard.
In a decision dated 7 September 2011 the Board issued a care order in respect of the applicant’s daughter and decided that the daughter would be placed in a foster home.
It can be seen from the wording of the decision that the applicant had resumed taking her prescribed medication in May 2011, and had also resumed psychological therapy. After the emergency placement there had been seven contact sessions arranged between the applicant and her daughter. During the sessions, the applicant’s mother, a representative from the child welfare services and one external supervisor had been present. The interim foster mother had reported that the child had suffered reactions to the contact sessions in the form of vomiting, not making eye contact with anyone, “making new sounds” and feeling stiff. It had also been reported that she had experienced uneasiness, poor control over food intake, crying and a strong need for comfort and closeness.
The Board unanimously found that the applicant was capable of providing sufficient practical care. A majority of its members found, however, that the applicant was incapable of offering sufficient emotional care. The majority of the Board members noted that although the applicant had restarted medication that appeared to have a calming effect on her, it would not improve her fundamental deficiencies – namely, a lack of sensitivity towards the child and difficulties in seeing the child’s needs rather than her own. The majority also considered that further assistance measures would not remedy those deficiencies. It noted in that respect that the applicant’s lack of skills in providing appropriate care were rooted in the way that the applicant’s personality functioned, which was not something that could be improved. Referring to their conclusion that the applicant’s difficulties in providing emotional care were anchored in her personality traits, the majority of the Board members also noted their belief that the care order would be long-term. A minority of the Board (the lay member) considered that the applicant’s situation had improved and that she would be capable of taking care of her daughter, with assistance.
The majority Board members found that the applicant should be granted contact rights amounting to two hours, four times yearly. They referred in that regard to their above-mentioned conclusion that the care order would be long-term, which meant that the applicant’s daughter would grow up in her foster home. The minority lay member considered that the contact rights should be considerably more extensive. The Board unanimously saw no reasons why the applicant should not be informed of the address of the foster home.
The applicant appealed against the Board’s decision to the District Court (tingrett).
The District Court sitting as a bench composed of one professional judge, one psychologist and one lay person, held a hearing at which the parties and eight witnesses gave evidence. In its judgment of 31 January 2012, it stated that it essentially agreed with the Board’s analysis of the situation, and added that developments subsequent to the Board’s decision also supported the argument that that should be upheld. According to the evidence, the applicant had many positive caring skills and had, during contact sessions, demonstrated the ability to maintain intuitive, good interaction with the child. The problem was that that only lasted for a short while, before her behaviour changed into that was clearly incompatible with caring for children. It was likely that the placement would be long-term. Against that background, it delivered a decision that upheld that of the Board, except that it found that the applicant’s contact rights during 2012 should be limited to one hour for each visit.
On 11 April 2012, following an application lodged by the applicant’s lawyer, the High Court (lagmannsrett) refused the applicant leave to appeal against the District Court’s judgment.
On 11 May 2012 the Supreme Court’s Appeals Leave Committee (Høyesteretts ankeutvalg) dismissed an appeal lodged by the applicant against the High Court’s decision.
On 4 October 2012 the applicant lodged a request with the Board for the care order to be lifted and her daughter returned to her. She submitted that new information had emerged regarding life situation and the state of her health.
In January 2013 the child welfare services engaged a psychologist to examine the applicant’s caring skills and lodged an application with the Board for a decision on the question of whether the care order should be lifted. The psychologist delivered her written report on 14 March 2013 and the Board, which was again composed of a jurist qualified to be a professional judge, a psychologist and a lay person, held a hearing on 4 and 5 April 2013. The parties and eight witnesses were heard.
On 12 April 2013 the Board dismissed the applicant’s application for the lifting of the care order. Although the applicant had continued with her medication and psychological therapy – and the psychologist treating her had stated that she had matured and now functioned considerably better than two years previously – the opinion of the psychologist (appointed in January 2013) had largely been in line with that of the psychologist who had been appointed during the first set of proceedings (see paragraphs 17-18 above). The Board agreed with the psychologist’s opinion. The extent of the applicant’s contact rights in respect of her daughter remained unaltered. The Board held in that respect that the applicant’s daughter was to grow up in the foster home, either as a foster child or an adopted child, and stated that the contact rights had to reflect that state of affairs.
The applicant brought an action in the District Court, sitting as a bench composed of a different professional judge, psychologist and lay person. It heard the case on 16 and 17 June 2014.
The District Court delivered a judgment on 1 July 2014 in which it arrived at the same conclusions as had the Board, furthermore stating that it essentially agreed with the Board’s reasoning. It additionally noted, among other things, that the applicant’s primary argument was that the placement in public care of her daughter had been due to the fact that she herself had previously been wrongly diagnosed with mild mental retardation, whereas it had later been clarified that she had been suffering from attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and thus, at the time of the District Court’s judgment, finally had been receiving appropriate medication and therefore would function better than before, also when it came to providing care for her daughter. The District Court found that those circumstances had not, however, supported the conclusion that the applicant at the time had possessed normal care skills. It also pointed out that the applicant had not taken care of her daughter for three years, had had a small social network and had not properly arranged for her daughter to attend kindergarten or planned leisure activities for her. Similarly, she had similarly few or no plans in respect of her own education or work, and had been unemployed since 2000. She had recently started to have more contact with her son, but that had been at the son’s initiative. In the District Court’s view, that could not be viewed as an indication that the applicant had sufficient care skills. As regards the question of contact rights, the District Court stated that the placement in care of the applicant’s daughter would be long-term and that the purpose of contact was not, therefore, to make a reunification of the family possible by building an attachment between the applicant and her daughter.
On 5 May 2015 the child welfare services lodged an application with the County Social Welfare Board for (i) an order that the applicant be deprived of her parental responsibilities in respect of her daughter, which would then be transferred to the authorities, and (ii) authorisation for the subsequent adoption of the daughter by her foster parents, in accordance with section 4-21 of the Child Welfare Act (see paragraph 51 below).
The Board, again composed of one jurist qualified to work as a professional judge, one psychologist and one lay person, held a hearing on 4 and 5 June 2015. The applicant attended with her legal-aid lawyer and gave evidence. Nine witnesses were heard.
On 15 June 2015 the Board delivered a decision; it noted that the applicant’s daughter had been living at her foster home since she had been nine days old. She was four years when the Board had assessed the case. All her close attachment were to the foster home, and the foster parents acted in every way as her parents and primary caregivers. She had no close attachment to the applicant.
Additionally, the applicant’s daughter was, in the Board’s view, a very vulnerable child, having been diagnosed, inter alia, with an unspecified childhood emotional disorder (F93.9). In a summary report on an examination of the applicant’s daughter at the Children’s and Young People’s Psychiatric Out-Patient Clinic (barne- og ungdomspsykiatrisk poliklinikk), dated 5 November 2011, it was noted that she was vulnerable to stress and that she had “angst/freeze” reactions in stressful situations –particularly after visits from the applicant.
Lastly, the Board referred to testimony from a psychologist who had carried out an expert assessment in 2013; the psychologist had stated that it was likely that the applicant’s daughter would risk a “deviating development” if removed from the foster home, instead of the positive development that had at that time been experiencing.
In conclusion, the Board found it proven that removing the applicant’s daughter from the foster home would be liable to lead to serious problems for her. Although it was not necessary for the purpose of deciding the case, the Board noted that less than one year had passed since the District Court had found that the applicant was incapable of providing appropriate care for her daughter, and that new circumstances that might have led to a different evaluation of that question differently had not arisen.
Moreover, the Board found it to be in the best interests of the applicant’s daughter that the foster parents adopt her. The daughter was of an age at which she had still no conception of her being a foster child. An adoption at that time would make her a full-fledged member of that family without her ever having to formulate such a conception. It furthermore noted that during the four years since the first placement order had been made, there had been two sets of proceedings concerning the care of the daughter – each before both the Board and the District Court. After hearing the applicant’s statement during the hearing of 4-5 June 2015, the Board had been left with the impression that she did not understand the need for her daughter to remain in foster care; it noted that the applicant had stated that she was prepared to lodge further requests for her daughter to be returned to her. In the Board’s view, further proceedings would not be in the daughter’s best interests.
The Board concluded that the applicant was to be deprived of her parental responsibilities in respect of her daughter, and that the adoption of her daughter was to be authorised.
The applicant lodged an appeal against the Board’s decision with the District Court, which appointed a psychologist to examine the case. She delivered her written report on 30 November 2015.
The District Court, sitting as a bench again composed of one professional judge, one psychologist and one lay person, held a hearing on 14 and 15 December 2015. The applicant attended with her legal-aid lawyer; seven witnesses, in addition to the applicant herself and the courtappointed expert (see paragraph 41 above), were heard.
In its judgment of 22 December 2015, the District Court stated at the outset that it essentially agreed with the grounds provided by the Board. It found that the applicant would be unable to provide her daughter with the appropriate care. It took account of the applicant’s weak cognitive functioning (which had been indicated by the court-appointed expert). The court noted that the applicant had previously been diagnosed with mild intellectual disabilities, but that it had been found that there was no longer any reason to uphold that diagnosis. Instead she had been diagnosed with ADHD, for which she was receiving medication. The District Court did not deem those changes in diagnoses to be decisive. Instead, it referred to the examination by the expert that it had appointed; according to that examination, the applicant had problems with accepting and taking account of information that did not accord with her views. The applicant’s testimony and appearance during the hearing had borne out the assessments made by the expert.
Moreover, the District Court found that the applicant’s daughter had become so attached to the foster home that removing her now could lead to serious problems for her. She had lived in the foster home for four and half years (ever since she had been nine days old), and the foster parents were her “psychological parents”. She was, moreover, a sensitive and vulnerable child and displayed strong reactions to visits from the applicant. The court-appointed expert had concluded that returning the girl to the applicant would trigger a risk of her development being seriously arrested – both in the light of the applicant’s weak caring skills and because of the risk of moving such a vulnerable child from her current “care base”, to which she was strongly attached.
On the topic of whether adoption would be in the best interests of the applicant’s daughter, the District Court stated that it had to be determined whether it would be better for the applicant’s daughter to be adopted than to grow up as a foster child. The District Court was of the view that the daughter had a strong need for her care situation to be clarified. She understood the foster parents to be her parents and she was well integrated into their family, enjoying a good and close relationship with both her foster brothers and her extended foster family. As to the applicant, she did not seem to accept that she would never be able to assume the care of her daughter. There were therefore reasons to believe that there would be future proceedings seeking the reunification of the applicant with her daughter or extended contact rights, unless adoption was at that time authorised. While the biological principle should be given considerable weight, the attachment between the applicant and her daughter was nevertheless very limited. As the foster parents had not consented to post-adoption contact visits (under an “open adoption” arrangement), that issue could not be decided. The District Court assumed, however, that the foster parents would facilitate contact between the applicant and her daughter, should the daughter at a later point in time so wish.
On the basis of an overall assessment, the District Court concluded that the adoption should be authorised. It accordingly decided to deprive the applicant of her parental responsibilities in respect of her daughter and to authorise the adoption of the child by her foster parents.
On 8 March 2016 the High Court refused the applicant leave to appeal against the District Court’s judgment.
On 4 May 2016 the Supreme Court’s Appeals Leave Committee dismissed the applicant’s appeal against the High Court’s decision.
Articles 102 and 104 of the Norwegian Constitution of 17 May 1814 (Grunnloven), as revised in May 2014, read as follows:
Article 102
“Everyone has the right to the respect their privacy and family life, their home and their communication. Search of private homes shall not be made except in criminal cases. The authorities of the state shall ensure the protection of personal integrity.”
Article 104
“Children have the right to respect for their human dignity. They have the right to be heard in questions that concern them, and due weight shall be attached to their views in accordance with their age and development.
For actions and decisions that affect children, the best interests of the child shall be a fundamental consideration.
Children have the right to the protection of their personal integrity. The authorities of the State shall create conditions that facilitate a child’s development – including ensuring that that child is provided with the necessary economic, social and health-related security – preferably within their own family.”
It follows from the Supreme Court’s case-law – for instance, its judgment of 29 January 2015 (Norsk Retstidende (Rt-2015-93)), paragraphs 57 and 67) – that the above provisions are to be interpreted and applied in the light of relevant models derived from international law, such as the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, the European Convention on Human Rights and the case-law of this Court.
Furthermore, sections 2 and 3 of the Human Rights Act of 21 May 1999 (menneskerettsloven) read, in so far as relevant:
Section 2
“The following Conventions shall have the force of Norwegian law in so far as they are binding for Norway:
The Convention of 4 November 1950 for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, as amended by Protocol No. 11 of 11 May 1994 to the Convention, together with the following Protocols: ...
The Convention of 20 November 1989 on the Rights of the Child, together with the following protocols: ...”
Section 3
“The provisions of the Conventions and Protocols mentioned in section 2 shall take precedence over any other legislative provisions that conflict with them.”
The relevant sections of the Child Welfare Act of 17 July 1992 (barnevernloven) read:
Section 4-6. Interim orders in emergencies
“If a child is without care because the parents are ill or for other reasons, the child welfare services shall implement such assistance as is immediately required. Such measures shall not be maintained against the will of the parents.
If there is a risk that a child will suffer material harm by remaining at home, the head of the child welfare administration or the prosecuting authority may immediately make an interim care order without the consent of the parents.
In such a case the head of the child welfare administration may also make an interim order under section 4-19.
If an order has been made under the second paragraph, an application for measures as mentioned in section 7-11 shall be sent to the county social welfare board as soon as possible, and within six weeks at the latest, but within two weeks if it is a matter of measures under section 4-24.
If the matter has not been sent to the county social welfare board within the time-limits mentioned in the fourth paragraph, the order shall lapse.”
Section 4-12. Care orders
“A care order may be issued
(a)  if there are serious deficiencies in the daily care received by the child, or serious deficiencies in terms of the personal contact and security needed by a child of his or her age and development,
(b)  if the parents fail to ensure that a child who is ill, disabled or in special need of assistance receives the treatment and training required,
(c)  if the child is mistreated or subjected to other serious abuse at home, or
(d)  if it is highly probable that the child’s health or development may be seriously harmed because the parents are unable to take adequate responsibility for the child.
An order may only be made under the first paragraph when necessary due to the child’s current situation. Hence, such an order may not be made if satisfactory conditions can be created for the child by assistance measures under section 4-4 or by measures under section 4-10 or section 4-11.
An order under the first paragraph shall be made by the county social welfare board under the provisions of Chapter 7.”
Section 4-19. Contact rights. Secret address
“Unless otherwise provided, children and parents are entitled to have contact with each other.
When a care order has been made, the county social welfare board shall determine the extent of contact, but may, for the sake of the child, also decide that there should be no contact. The county social welfare board may also decide that the parents should not be entitled to know the child’s whereabouts. ...
The private parties cannot request that a case regarding contact be dealt with by the county social welfare board if the case has been dealt with by the county social welfare board or a court of law in the preceding twelve months. ...”
Section 4-21. Revocation of care orders
“The county social welfare board shall revoke a care order where it is highly probable that the parents will be able to provide the child with proper care. The decision shall nonetheless not be revoked if the child has become so attached to persons and the environment where he or she is living that, on the basis of an overall assessment, removing the child may lead to serious problems for him or her. Before a care order is revoked, the child’s foster parents shall be entitled to state their opinion.
The parties may not request that a case concerning revocation of a care order be dealt with by the county social welfare board if the case has been dealt with by the county social welfare board or a court of law in the preceding twelve months. If a request for revocation of the previous order or judgment was not upheld with reference to section 4-21, first paragraph, second sentence, new proceedings may only be requested where documentary evidence is provided to show that significant changes have taken place in the child’s situation.”
Other relevant material relating to domestic and international law is referred to in the Court’s judgment in the case of Strand Lobben and Others v. Norway [GC], no. 37283/13, §§ 122-139, 10 September 2019. Furthermore, on 27 March 2020, the Supreme Court, sitting in a Grand Chamber formation, delivered a judgment and decisions in three childcarerelated cases (HR-2020-661-S, HR-2020-662-S and HR2020 663-S) in order to formulate guidelines for the application of the Child Welfare Act in the light of judgments given by this Court in respect of the case of Strand Lobben and Others and other subsequent cases concerning childcare-related measures adopted in the respondent State.
One of the three cases before the Supreme Court (HR-2020-661-S) concerned an appeal against the High Court’s refusal to grant leave to appeal against a judgment depriving parents of parental responsibilities and authorising the adoption of the child in question. In the decision delivered in respect of that case, the Supreme Court carried out an in-depth examination of this Court’s case-law, and of domestic case-law and practice, in order to clarify the Convention requirements and identify and resolve possible inconsistencies with a view to ensuring compliance with the Convention.
As to cases involving the replacement of foster care by adoption, the Supreme Court concluded that the general legal conditions (as they were expressed in the Child Welfare Act and the Supreme Court’s case-law) were compliant with the Convention and the case-law of this Court and could thus be maintained, but that adjustments were still necessary in the application of these legal conditions in the practice of the child welfare authorities. Under the heading “Summarising remarks on reunification”, the Supreme Court judge who delivered the judgment stated the following:
“(142) On the basis of the presentation of the Child Welfare Act, as interpreted in the case-law and judgments of the European Court of Human Rights, the status of the law may in my opinion be summarised as follows:
(143) Under both Norwegian law and the European Convention on Human Rights, the overall goal [in each case] is to have a care order revoked and the family reunited. A care order is therefore always temporary as a starting point. The authorities have a positive duty to actively strive to maintain the relationship between the child and the parents and to facilitate reunification. This implies that the authorities must monitor the development closely. Contact rights and assistance measures are crucial here. As long as reunification is the goal, the contact must be arranged to make this possible. The authorities are to ensure, to the extent possible, that the contact sessions are of a good quality. If the sessions do not work well, one must try out adjustments or alternatives – for instance arranging them elsewhere, or under guidance.
(144) As long as family reunification is the goal, the purpose of access is not only to ensure that the child knows who his or her parents are, but also to preserve the possibility of reunification. This requires a thorough assessment of the frequency and quality of the contact sessions. And even when reunification is not possible, it has an intrinsic value to maintain family bonds as long as it does not harm the child.
(145) In my opinion, and depending on the situation, the child welfare services should in principle not be prevented early in the process – when choosing where to place a child (section 4-14 of the Child Welfare Act) and preparing a care plan (section 4-15) – from assuming that the placement will be long-term. If siblings are involved, an individual assessment must be made with regard to each child. However, the extent of contact must in any event be determined with a view to the future return of the child to his or her biological parents. This applies until a thorough and individual assessment at a later stage demonstrates that this goal should be given up, despite the authorities’ duty to facilitate reunification. At any rate, the frequency of the contact sessions cannot be determined according to a standard, and it must be borne in mind that a strict visiting regime may render reunification more difficult.
(146) It is crucial that the authorities do their utmost to facilitate family reunification. However, this goal may be abandoned if the biological parents have proved particularly unfit (see, for instance, Strand Lobben, paragraph 207). Such a situation may also affect which measures the child welfare authorities need to apply. The interests of the child are also in this assessment of paramount importance. However, this does not automatically preclude contact altogether while the child is in foster care. The parents may be competent in contact situations, but lack the caring skills necessary for reunification. Maintaining the family ties, even if the goal of reunification has been given up, still has a value in itself.
(147) Secondly, the parents cannot request measures that may harm the child’s health and development (see Strand Lobben, paragraph 207). Adoption may therefore take place if it can be established that continued placement will harm the child’s health or development. In addition, reunification may – without such damaging effects – be ruled out when a considerable amount of time has passed since the child was originally taken into care, so that the child’s need for stability overrides the interests of the parents (see Strand Lobben, paragraph 208). At any rate, the child welfare authorities and the courts must, before possibly deciding on adoption, make an individual assessment based on a solid factual basis and thorough proceedings.
(148) Accordingly, in these three situations, one must bear in mind the fact that it is in the very nature of adoption that no real prospects for family reunification exist and that it is instead in the child’s best interests to be placed permanently in a new family, (see Strand Lobben, paragraph 209).”
In this Grand Chamber decision, the Supreme Court also stated that judgments by this Court had demonstrated that the decision-making process, the balancing exercise or the reasoning had not always been adequate. In particular, this Court had found violations in respect of the authorities’ duty to work towards the reunification of the child and the parents. As to the dilemmas represented by the choice of perspective when making an assessment of possible errors or shortcomings, the Supreme Court stated the following:
“(114) When Norwegian courts, and ultimately the Supreme Court, review orders issued by the child welfare authorities, they apply the Child Welfare Act in line with the principle of the best interests of the child (see the second paragraph of Article 104 of the Constitution, Articles 3 and 9 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and section 4-1 of the Child Welfare Act, which I have already mentioned). At the same time, case-law must be in accordance with the European Convention on Human Rights, and the Supreme Court has adjusted its interpretation of the Child Welfare Act to reflect the Court’s case-law.
(115) If errors have been committed by the child welfare services or the County Social Welfare Board at an earlier stage of the proceedings, the court may, depending on the circumstances, seek to remedy such errors by setting aside a care order or an adoption order – for instance, owing to inadequate relief measures, or because the basis for the decision or its reasoning is unsatisfactory. In other cases, the court may change a previous decision – for example by extending the access granted. However, if no such options are available, the court will, depending on the situation, have to choose foster care or adoption if it is clear at the time of the judgment that this is in the best interests of the child, despite previous mistakes having been made during the consideration of the case. Accordingly, the extent to which not just the error, but also the final Norwegian ruling, must be regarded as a violation of Article 8 (if the Court finds a violation at a later stage) depends on how the Court’s judgment is interpreted.
(116) Moreover, to prevent the occurrence of such a situation at the review-stage instances, it is important that the child welfare services and the County Social Welfare Board – in their work towards finding the measures that best serve the child – from the very outset consider all relevant requirements laid down in the second paragraph of Article 104 of the Constitution, Article 8 of the Convention, the Convention on the Rights of the Child and chapter 4 of the Child Welfare Act.”
The Supreme Court delivered a further decision on 11 June 2020 (HR-2020-1229-U) in which it also stressed the temporariness of care orders and the aim of reunification in the light of the case-law of this Court. Furthermore, on 15 September 2020 it decided on two cases that concerned the conditions necessary under domestic law for the lifting of care orders (HR-2020-1788-A and HR-2020-1788-A). With reference to its decisions of 27 March 2020, it reiterated on 15 September 2020 that the general conditions set out in the Child Welfare Act and the relevant domestic caselaw – including the “threshold” for issuing care orders – could be maintained, but that the practice in respect of its application to actual cases needed some adjustments in the light of the relevant judgments of this Court.