The case originated in an application (no. 25448/06) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Viktor Petrovich Zvezdin (“the applicant”), on 25 May 2006.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant complained about the continued non-enforcement of the judgment in his favour and its subsequent quashing by way of supervisory review.
On 4 September 2006 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1937 and lives in , a town in the Rostov Region. He is a retired military officer.
In August 2004 the applicant brought proceedings against the Military Service Commission of Novocherkassk (Военный комиссариат г. Новочеркасска – “the Commission”) seeking to recover his pension arrears from January 1995 to March 1998 to take account of the increase of the minimum monthly wage.
On 15 September 2004 the Novocherkassk Town Court of the Rostov Region granted the applicant's claim and awarded him 252,510.91 roubles (RUR) in arrears. The court held that the judgment should be enforced immediately. The Commission missed the statutory time-limit for lodging an ordinary appeal against the judgment, and it became final on 25 September 2004.
The Novocherkassk Town Court of the Rostov Region issued the applicant with a warrant of execution which the applicant submitted to the Commission on 11 October 2004. The Commission, however, did not comply with the judgment of 15 September 2004 and instead filed an application for review of the judgment due to what it considered to be newly discovered circumstances.
On 10 February 2005 the Novocherkassk Town Court of the Rostov Region dismissed the Commission's request.
In July 2005 the applicant brought proceedings against the Commission in the Oktyabrskiy District Court of Rostov-on-Don seeking to recover his pension arrears from January 1995 to March 1998 relating to a long-service bonus and inflation.
On 18 July 2005 the Oktyabrskiy District Court of Rostov-on-Don granted the applicant's claim and obliged the Commission to recalculate the applicant's pension from January 1995 to March 1998 in view of the 25% increase of the salary and the variation of the consumer price index in the Rostov Region between 1 February 1995 and 31 December 2004.
On 24 October 2005 the amount of RUR 14,038.44 was paid into the applicant's bank account following the judgment of 18 July 2005.
On 19 September 2005 the Commission filed an application for supervisory review of the judgment of Novocherkassk Town Court of 15 September 2004, referring to the lack of grounds in domestic law for increasing the applicant's pension, and asked for the stay of enforcement.
On 5 October 2005 the  examined the above application and decided to obtain the case file. The enforcement proceedings were suspended. The  remitted the supervisory review application for examination on its merits by the Presidium.
On 12 January 2006 the Presidium of the  held a supervisory review hearing. It concluded that the first-instance court had erroneously applied the substantive law and that the matter should have been examined by a district court rather than a town court. On these grounds it quashed the judgment of 15 September 2004 and remitted the matter to the Oktyabrskiy District Court of Rostov-on-Don for a fresh examination.
On 15 February 2006 the Oktyabrskiy District Court of Rostov-on-Don discontinued the proceedings having considered the dispute at issue to be the same as the one examined by it on 18 July 2005.
Article 209. Entry into force of judicial decisions
“1.  A judicial decision becomes legally binding upon expiry of the time-limit for lodging an appeal against it if no such appeal had been lodged.”
Article 210. Enforcement of judicial decisions
“A judicial decision is to be enforced after it becomes legally binding, unless it provides for immediate enforcement...”
Article 362. Grounds for quashing or altering judicial decisions by appeal courts
“1.  The grounds for quashing or altering judicial decisions by appeal courts are:
...
(4)  a violation or incorrect application of substantive or procedural law.”
Article 376. Right to apply to a court exercising supervisory review
“1.  Judicial decisions that have become legally binding, with the exception for judicial decisions by the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation, may be appealed against ... to a court exercising supervisory review, by parties to the case and by other persons whose rights or legal interests have been adversely affected by these judicial decisions.
Judicial decisions may be appealed against to a court exercising supervisory review within one year after they became legally binding...”
Article 387. Grounds for quashing or altering judicial decisions
by way of supervisory review
“Judicial decisions of lower courts may be quashed or altered by way of supervisory review on the grounds of substantial violations of substantive or procedural legal provisions.”
Article 390. Competence of the supervisory review court
“1.  Having examined the case by way of supervisory review, the court may...
(2)  quash the judicial decision issued by a court of first, second or supervisory review instance in whole or in part and remit the matter for a fresh examination...
(5)  quash or alter the judicial decision issued by a court of first, second or supervisory review instance and issue a new judicial decision, without remitting the matter for a fresh examination, if the substantive law has been erroneously applied or interpreted.”
Enforcement Proceedings Act (Law of 21 July 1997)
Collection of funds from the recipients of the federal budget is carried out through the local branches of the Federal Treasury upon submission of warrants of execution and court orders (Section 133 and Section 109 respectively).
Pensions to the retired military servicemen are paid by the specialized territorial services of the Ministry of Defence (Section 56).
The local branches of the Savings Bank (the Sberbank) distribute the funds allocated by the federal budget for payment of pensions to the retired military servicemen to the specialized territorial services of the Ministry of Defence (Section 2.2.2).