The case originated in an application (no. 71872/12) against the Republic of Slovenia, lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Slovenian national, Ms Zlatka Aždajić (“the applicant”), on 5 November 2012.
The applicant was represented by Ms B. Marčič, a lawyer practising in Maribor. The Slovenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs B. Jovin Hrastnik, State Attorney.
The applicant complained that she could not effectively enjoy the rights guaranteed by Article 6 of the Convention since she had been unaware of proceedings which had been instituted against her.
On 27 August 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1949 and lives in Ruše.
On 11 November 2006 K.R. sent a letter to the applicant by registered mail. In the letter, she asked the applicant to repay a loan which she had given to her in 2004 within thirty days of receipt of the letter, and stated that she would institute court proceedings if the applicant failed to pay.
Following the applicant’s refusal on 13 November 2006 to accept the letter and sign the notice of receipt, K.R. resent it by ordinary mail.
On 20 November 2006 the applicant replied to K.R. with a letter, the relevant parts of which read:
“I do not owe you anything!
It is true that you gave me some money as a gift. I did not want to take it, but you literally forced me, saying that you did not have anyone to whom you could give it and that I had helped you a lot... Those were your words, remember!
For the time being, I do not have any money. I have a loan that I have not yet repaid; therefore, for now, I cannot return your gift.
...
When I have it, I will gladly return your gift!”
On 13 December 2006 K.R. brought an action against the applicant, claiming repayment of the loan (totalling 14,000 euros (EUR)) which she had allegedly given to her in July and August 2004, on the basis of oral agreements. In order to prove that the loan existed, K.R. attached to her claim the letter written by the applicant on 20 November 2006 (see paragraph 8 above), as the only evidence in support of her claim.
On 22 January 2007 the applicant, allegedly unaware of the claim which had been brought against her, travelled to Vienna in order to obtain a visa for a trip to Namibia. She stayed in Vienna until 26 January 2007, when she obtained a visa, and flew to Namibia on the same day.
On 24 January 2007 the Maribor District Court forwarded K.R.’s claim to the applicant, advising her that she had thirty days to file her observations. Referring to section 277 of the Civil Procedure Act, the District Court warned the applicant that, in the event that she failed to reply within the given time-limit, it would grant the claim by default judgment.
On 25 January 2007 the postman tried (unsuccessfully) to serve the applicant with the court documents, including the claim, at her home address. He left in her mailbox a standard official delivery slip used in registered mail deliveries, which was printed on a thin piece of paper measuring 7.3 cm by 10 cm. The slip informed her that he would return the following day.
The following day, having not located the applicant at her address, the postman left another delivery slip of identical dimensions in her mailbox, informing her that she could collect the relevant correspondence at the post office within the next fifteen days. The delivery slip included a reference to sections 140 and 141 of the Civil Procedure Act (see paragraph 26 below).
As the applicant did not collect the mail from the post office within fifteen days, the letter in question was returned to the Maribor District Court by the post office, with a note indicating that the correspondence had not been collected, and that a delivery slip had been left in the applicant’s mailbox. Service was deemed to have been effected on 26 January 2007, when the delivery slip was left in her mailbox; therefore, the deadline for her to file any observations expired on 26 February 2007.
The applicant claims that, upon her return from Namibia on 24 March 2007, she did not find either of the two delivery slips allegedly left by the postman in her mailbox, and that she was entirely unaware of the proceedings which were pending.
On 14 September 2007 the Maribor District Court issued a default judgment, allowing K.R.’s claim and ordering the applicant to pay her EUR 14,000 with default interest within fifteen days. The relevant reasoning of the District Court was as follows:
“The court had to establish from the facts which were submitted with the claim whether or not the claim was well-founded, and whether or not the facts on which the claim was based contradicted the evidence submitted by the plaintiff herself, or facts which are generally known.
The plaintiff submitted with the claim a letter from the defendant dated 20 November 2006 (A3), from which it appears that she received ‘some money’ as a gift.
The submissions of the defendant in the letter dated 20 November 2006 – that she received some money as a gift – do not, of themselves, negate the plaintiff’s submissions that the plaintiff gave the money as a loan, yet the defendant was given the opportunity and the right to defend her position in the proceedings before the court by submitting a response to the claim [and] has failed to do so.
In addition, the submissions of the defendant in the letter dated 20 November 2006 that she would return the money which had been given to her (‘When I have it, I will gladly return your gift!’) cannot be ignored either.”
The default judgment was served on the applicant on 19 September 2007.
On 28 September 2007 the applicant lodged an appeal against the District Court’s default judgment and an application to reinstate the proceedings. She explained that she had failed to respond to the claim owing to her absence from Slovenia, submitted that she had not received the delivery slips allegedly left in her mailbox, and asked the court to set aside the decision and order the reservice of K.R.’s claim. As proof of her absence, she attached to both the appeal and the application to reinstate the proceedings a document issued by a travel company, L., confirming that she had been issued with a plane ticket for a flight from Munich to Windhoek on 26 January 2007 and a return ticket for 24 March 2007. She also attached copies of pages from her passport which contained a valid tourist visa for Namibia for the period between 26 January 2007 and 21 April 2007, and Namibian border control stamps confirming her entry to Namibia on 27 January 2007 and her departure on 24 March 2007.
On 13 December 2007 the Maribor District Court rejected the applicant’s application to reinstate the proceedings, on the basis that the application had been lodged outside the three-month time-limit. It held that the applicant should have found the delivery slips left in her mailbox by the end of March at the latest after she had returned from Namibia. Therefore, she should have lodged an application to reinstate the proceedings within three months of her return. The applicant appealed.
On 9 September 2008 the Maribor Higher Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal against the 14 September 2007 and 13 December 2007 decisions of the District Court. It held that it could not accept the applicant’s submissions that there had been no delivery slips in her mailbox, as it had been noted on the notice of delivery that they had been left there. It further dismissed the applicant’s submissions that the evidence used by the plaintiff (namely the letter of 20 November 2006) contradicted the facts alleged.
On 4 November 2008 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law.
On 11 November 2010 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law. It held that the conditions for issuing a default judgment had been fulfilled. In respect of the issue of whether or not the evidence used by the plaintiff contradicted the submissions set out in the claim, the Supreme Court held as follows:
“It appears from the evidence that the plaintiff attached to the claim [the applicant’s letter of 20 November 2006 – see paragraph 8 above] that the letter referred to a gift as well as to the return of a gift. It should be stressed that, for the purpose of issuing a default judgment, it is not important that the evidence submitted confirms the plaintiff’s allegations (in the present case, allegations concerning a loan). It is only important that the allegations contained in the claim do not contradict either the evidence which has been submitted or generally known facts. Since it cannot be concluded from the letter that [the money] was not a loan but a gift, the issuing of the default judgment was correct.”
On 17 January 2011 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint.
On 22 May 2012 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s constitutional complaint by referring to section 55(b) of the Constitutional Court Act (see paragraph 30 below).
On an unknown date after the decision of 14 September 2007 became final, K.R. instituted enforcement proceedings against the applicant. She later withdrew the application for enforcement after the applicant paid her the sum of EUR 4,000.
The relevant provisions of the Civil Procedure Act in force at the relevant time (consolidated version published in the Official Gazette no. 36/2004) regarding the service of court documents read:
“If the intended recipient is not located at his place of residence, service shall be effected by delivering the court documents to an adult member of his household, who shall be obliged to accept them. If adult members of the intended recipient’s household also cannot be reached, the court documents may be left with a housekeeper or neighbour if they are willing to accept them.
...”
“If court documents cannot be served in the manner prescribed in the preceding section, service on a natural person shall be effected by delivering the court documents to the court which has ordered service or, in case of service by mail, to the post office nearest to the intended recipient’s permanent residence, and by leaving on the door or in the accessible mailbox of the intended recipient’s permanent residence a notice indicating the place where the documents have been left, including a reference to the fifteen-day time-limit within which they are to be collected. The person attempting to effect service shall state on the notice and on the documents to be served the reasons for such service and the day on which the notice was left for the intended recipient, and shall put his signature thereon.
If the intended recipient fails to collect the documents within fifteen days, service shall be deemed to have been effected on the day that the notice was left on his door or in his accessible mailbox, and he shall be advised thereof in the notice.
...”
“Claims, court decisions against which a special appeal or an extraordinary legal remedy is allowed, and warning notices regarding payment of court fees in respect of a claim shall be personally served on a party, ...
...
If the intended recipient of a document which is to be personally served is not located at the address for service, the person attempting to effect service shall enquire as to when and where the intended recipient can be located, and shall leave with an adult member of the household or with any other person indicated in [section 140], and in accordance with the conditions laid down in that section, a written notice requesting the intended recipient to be present at a certain time and date at either his place of residence or place of work in order to receive the document.
If service of the notice mentioned in the preceding subsection is not possible in the manner prescribed above, the person attempting to effect service shall leave the notice in the main mailbox for the building, in the accessible mailbox or on the door.
If, afterwards, the person attempting to effect service still cannot trace the intended recipient, he should act in accordance with section 140 or 141 of this Act, and service shall be deemed to have been effected.
...”
“If it is established that the intended recipient is absent and that the persons indicated in [section 140] cannot deliver the document to him in time, the document shall be returned to the court with an indication of the whereabouts of the intended recipient.”
The relevant provisions of the Civil Procedure Act in force at the relevant time regarding default judgments read:
“The defendant shall file his defence within 30 days of the claim being served on him, unless otherwise provided for by the present Act.
The defendant shall be instructed by the court that, in the event of his failure to file a defence within the time-limit set down in the first paragraph of this section... the court shall give a judgment allowing the claim (default judgment).”
“If the defendant has failed to file a defence within the time-limit provided for in section 277 of the present Act, the court shall give a judgment allowing the claim (default judgment), provided that:
the claim has been duly served upon the defendant in order to allow him to file his defence;
the claim does not contain any element which the parties may not dispose of;
the claim is founded upon the facts stated in the action; and
the facts upon which the claim is based do not contradict the evidence adduced by the plaintiff or judicial knowledge.
The issuing of a default judgment shall be postponed if prior enquiries need to be made with regard to the circumstances referred to in the preceding subsection.
If the facts stated in the action do not substantiate the claim to a sufficient extent, the court shall deliver a judgment dismissing the claim.”
“The written judgment shall contain an introductory part, an operative part, reasoning, and a legal notice as to any appeal.
...
In a default judgment ... the reasoning shall contain only an indication of the reasons for issuing the judgment concerned.
...”
“A judgment may be challenged on the following grounds:
a serious violation of civil procedure provisions;
erroneous or incomplete determination of the facts;
a violation of substantive law.
A default judgment may not be challenged on the grounds of the erroneous or incomplete determination of the facts.
...”
Two types of legal remedies are envisaged in situations where a default judgment has been issued and the defendant was unaware of an action having been brought against him. If the defendant argues that service of the action has not been effected in accordance with the law, he may file an appeal against the default judgment on the grounds that the conditions for giving a default judgment have not been fulfilled owing to a serious violation of procedural rules (see section 338 cited above). If, on the contrary, service has been effected in accordance with the law, but the defendant claims that, for justified reasons, he was unaware of service, he may lodge an application to reinstate the proceedings, as provided for by section 116 of the Civil Procedure Act. Such an application can be lodged within fifteen days of the date on which the reasons for the defendant’s failure to respond to the claim ceased to exist, but no later than three months after the expiry of the deadline for responding to the action.
According to the case-law of the Supreme Court (for example, decisions no. II Ips 242/2008 of 23 October 2008; no. II Ips 344/2009 of 17 September 2009; no. II Ips 170/2008 of 11 November 2010; and no. VIII Ips 236/2009 of 7 June 2011), section 143 of the Civil Procedure Act (see paragraph 26 above) applies solely to situations where the absence of the addressee is such as to prevent him from acquainting himself with the court documents in time, and the person attempting to effect service is aware that the addressee’s absence is of that nature. Therefore, if the person attempting to effect service is aware that the intended recipient will not receive the documents in time, but nonetheless attempts to effect service in that way, such service will constitute a violation of the rules on civil procedure. If, on the other hand, the person attempting to effect service is unaware of the fact that the intended recipient will not be able to receive the court documents in time, that assumed service will not constitute a violation of the procedural rules, notwithstanding the fact that the intended recipient was not able to acquaint himself with the correspondence in time to respond to the court documents within the prescribed time-limit.
The relevant parts of section 55b of the Constitutional Court Act (consolidated version published in the Official Gazette no. 64/2007) read:
“(1) A constitutional appeal shall be rejected:
- if it does not concern an individual act by which a state authority, local authority, or a holder of public power determined the rights, obligations or legal interests of the complainant;
- if the complainant does not have a legal interest in the decision on the constitutional appeal;
- if it is not admissible, except in the instance referred to in the third subsection of the preceding section;
- if it was not lodged in time;
...
(2) A constitutional appeal shall be considered:
- if there has been a violation of human rights or fundamental freedoms which has had significant consequences for the complainant; or
- if it concerns an important constitutional question which goes beyond the importance of the actual case.
...”