The case originated in an application (no. 35142/15) against the Slovak Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by fifty-one Slovak nationals, whose details are set out in the appendix (“the applicants”), on 9 July 2015.
The applicants were represented by Ms O. Szabó, a lawyer practising in Patince. The Government of the Slovak Republic (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that their restitution claim, which had been examined in administrative and thereafter judicial proceedings, had not been decided on within a reasonable time and that they had had no effective remedy at their disposal in that respect, in violation of their rights under Article 6 § 1 and Article 13 of the Convention.
On 17 May 2016 the above complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
On 23 December 2004 the applicants and 126 others lodged a claim with the Komárno Land Office, an authority that is now part of the Komárno District Office (“the Land Office”), for restitution of land under the Restoration of Land Ownership Act (Law no. 503/2003 Coll., as amended).
On 27 May 2010 the Land Office dismissed the claim on the grounds that all the claimants lacked standing to bring it.
On 21 November 2011 the Nitra Regional Court upheld that decision following an administrative-law appeal by the claimants, lodged on their behalf by four individuals.
However, following an appeal lodged by the claimants with the Supreme Court, on 29 January 2014 that court quashed the Regional Court’s judgment and remitted the case to it on the grounds that the latter had failed to establish the representatives’ authority to act on behalf of all the claimants. The proceedings before the Regional Court had been conducted merely in the presence of the designated representatives and the court had failed to summon the claimants in person and to have its judgment served on them. It had thereby breached the claimants’ right of access to a court.
Accordingly, it became incumbent on the Regional Court to determine anew the claimants’ administrative-law appeal against the decision of the Land Office of 27 May 2010. In those proceedings, the court invited the claimants to clarify issues concerning their legal representation with a view to ensuring that they would be represented by a common representative.
In a decision of 4 December 2014 the Regional Court issued several rulings. In so far as relevant for the present application, it ruled that the claimants would all be jointly represented by a lawyer who had up until then represented only some of them.
On 25 May 2016 the Supreme Court upheld the decision of 4 December 2014 following an appeal lodged by the claimants.
The proceedings are still pending before the Regional Court.
Meanwhile, on 21 January 2015 the Constitutional Court had rejected a complaint lodged by the applicants about the length of the proceedings in their claim, in so far as they had taken place before the Land Office and the Regional Court. The Constitutional Court held that the length of the administrative proceedings before the Land Office and of the judicialreview proceedings held before the Regional Court could not be considered together.
Having split the complaint into those two segments, the Constitutional Court rejected the complaint concerning the administrative proceedings on the grounds of non-exhaustion of ordinary remedies. In particular, it noted that the applicants had failed to challenge the alleged inactivity of the Land Office under Article 250t § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure (CCP) (see paragraphs 19 et seq. in “Relevant domestic law and practice” below).
As regards the judicial-review proceedings, the Constitutional Court dismissed the complaint as manifestly ill-founded. It noted that those proceedings as a whole had lasted some four and a half years. However, the case had been pending on appeal before the Supreme Court for about two years of that period. Although the length of the appellate proceedings had been unsatisfactory, as such it had not been complained of by the applicants, who had limited their compliant to the proceedings before the Regional Court. In addition, the Constitutional Court observed that the proceedings had been procedurally complex on account of the number of claimants. In sum, despite the fact that its judgment had been quashed as flawed, the length of the proceedings before the Regional Court had not been excessive.
The relevant part of Article 48 § 2 provides:
“Everyone shall have the right to have his matter ... heard without undue delay ...”
Article 127 reads as follows:
“1.  The Constitutional Court shall decide on complaints by natural or legal persons alleging a violation of their fundamental rights or freedoms ... unless the protection of such rights and freedoms falls within the jurisdiction of a different court.
If the Constitutional Court finds a complaint justified, it shall deliver a decision stating that a person’s rights or freedoms as set out in paragraph 1 have been violated by a final decision, specific measure or other act and shall quash such decision, measure or act. If the violation that has been found is the result of a failure to act, the Constitutional Court may order [the authority] which has violated the rights or freedoms to take the necessary action. At the same time it may remit the case to the authority concerned for further proceedings, order such authority to refrain from violating the fundamental rights and freedoms ... or, where appropriate, order those who have violated the rights or freedoms set out in paragraph 1 to restore the situation to that existing prior to the violation.
In its decision on a complaint the Constitutional Court may award appropriate financial compensation to the person whose rights under paragraph 1 have been violated.”
The relevant part of section 53 reads:
“1.  A[n] [individual] complaint [under Article 127 of the Constitution] is not admissible if the complainant has not exhausted legal remedies or other legal means, which a statute effectively provides to [the complainant] with a view to protecting [the complainant’s] fundamental rights or freedoms, and which the complainant is entitled to use under special statute.
The Constitutional Court shall not declare a[n] [individual] complaint inadmissible even if the condition under subsection 1 has not been fulfilled, if the complainant establishes that [he or she] has not fulfilled this condition for reasons worthy of particular consideration.”
On 15 June 2016 the Vice-President of the Constitutional Court issued a written statement in response to a request by the Government Agent concerning the admissibility and merits of the present case. He stated that he leaned towards the Constitutional Court’s decision in the present case. In particular, he noted that jurisdiction to deal with alleged delays in administrative proceedings was vested in administrative tribunals under Article 250t of the CCP. This excluded the jurisdiction of the Constitutional Court in relation to the length of administrative proceedings as such. However, if an administrative tribunal’s decision concerning the length of administrative proceedings was considered to be arbitrary, the Constitutional Court could still review it under Article 127 of the Constitution for compliance with the requirement of fairness. Moreover, as an action under Article 250t of the CCP had no compensatory effect, it could have been complemented by compensation claims under the State Liability Act.
At the relevant time, the rules of procedure for the administrative judiciary were embodied in the 1963 Code of Civil Procedure (Law no. 99/1963 Coll., as amended), in particular its Chapter (Časť) 5. Under those rules, by virtue of an amendment that entered into force on 1 January 2003, administrative tribunals had jurisdiction, inter alia, to examine complaints concerning the inactivity of public administrative authorities (Section (Hlava) 4 – konanie proti nečinnosti orgánu verejnej správy).
Under Article 250t § 1, any natural or legal person alleging that a public administrative authority was not dealing with a matter in a timely fashion, in breach of the law and without a weighty reason, could apply to an administrative tribunal for an order instructing the authority concerned to proceed with the matter and to decide on it. However, such a remedy could be pursued only after the exhaustion of all ordinary remedies available, in accordance with the relevant legislation.
If an action under Article 250t § 1 was allowed, under paragraph 4 of that Article the administrative tribunal would define an appropriate timelimit, not longer than three months, within which the defendant authority had to take a decision. This time-limit could be extended at the request of the authority concerned.
In the event of failure by the authority in question to abide by the time-limit, subject to a repeated request by the party concerned, the administrative tribunal had the power to impose, even repeatedly, a fine of up to 3,280 euros (EUR) on that authority (Article 250u).
In a case that gave rise to an order of the Bratislava Regional Court of 11 April 2013 (file no. 1S 38/13), the underlying administrative proceedings concerned a restitution claim lodged in 1992.
The claimant brought an action before the Regional Court under Article 250t § 1 of the CCP, complaining of unjustified delays in the administrative proceedings.
On 11 April 2013 the Regional Court allowed the action and ordered the administrative authority dealing with the restitution claim to decide on the matter within sixty days.
On 21 August 2014 the claimant lodged a fresh action under Article 250t § 1 of the CCP arguing that the administrative authority had failed to abide by the order of 11 April 2013.
On 27 May 2015 the Regional Court issued a fresh order to the administrative authority to proceed with the matter and to decide on it within three months. At the same time, it imposed a fine on that authority of EUR 1,000.
On 11 September 2015 the administrative authority dismissed part of the restitution claim.
On 19 October 2015 it stayed its examination of the remainder of the claim, inviting a number of institutions to submit relevant documentation, which they did by the end of 2015.
As of November 2016 the examination of the remainder of the claim was on-going.
State liability for damage is regulated by the State Liability Act (Law no. 514/2003 Coll., as amended). Its section 3(1)(d) provides that the State is liable for damage which has been caused by maladministration (nesprávny úradný postup).
Section 9, which deals with compensation for damage caused by maladministration, provides:
“1.  The State shall be liable for damage caused by maladministration. Maladministration includes a public authority’s failure to take action or issue a decision within the statutory time-limit, general inactivity in the exercise of public authority, unjustified delays in proceedings, or other unlawful interference with the rights and legally recognised interests of individuals and legal entities.
The right to compensation for damage caused by maladministration is vested in the person who sustained the damage.”
Section 17 defines the manner and extent of compensation for damage. It provides in its relevant part:
“1.  Damage and lost profit shall be compensated for, unless special legislation provides otherwise.
In the event that the finding of a violation of a right alone is not adequate compensation in view of the loss caused by the unlawful official action or wrongful official conduct, monetary compensation shall also be awarded for non-pecuniary damage, if it is not possible to compensate for it otherwise.”
In a judgment of 12 November 2013 the Bratislava Regional Court examined appeal no. 5Co 152/2013 in a case, at the heart of which was the length of administrative proceedings for the issuance of a construction permit.
Following an action brought on 19 March 2004 under Article 250t § 1 of the CCP by the person seeking the permit (“the builder”), the Žilina Regional Court issued a decision on 24 January 2008 finding that there had been unjustified delays in the administrative proceedings and ordering the planning authority to proceed and decide on the matter within thirty days.
Relying on that judgment, the builder argued that the unjustified delays in the administrative proceedings amounted to maladministration within the meaning of section 9 of the State Liability Act. At the same time, he pointed out that it had taken more than three years and ten months for his action under Article 250t § 1 of the CCP to be determined, and argued that the length of the proceedings on that action alone had amounted to maladministration.
In the aforementioned judgment of 12 November 2013 the Bratislava Regional Court upheld the first-instance judgment dismissing those claims. In doing so, it fully endorsed the conclusions of the first-instance court, including that:
-  in view of all the circumstances, including the judgment 24 January 2008, there had been maladministration on the part of the planning authority;
-  no financial compensation in respect of non-pecuniary damage caused by that maladministration was called for, since the proceedings in respect of the construction permit were still pending and the planning authority could still redress any non-pecuniary damage sustained by the builder by issuing the construction permit he was seeking;
-  although the proceedings in the action under Article 250t § 1 of the CCP had lasted nearly four years, there were no statutory time-limits for their completion. Accordingly, there could not have been any maladministration on account of their length. Moreover, the builder could have challenged their length by way of a complaint under Article 127 of the Constitution, which excluded jurisdiction of the ordinary courts in the matter under the State Liability Act;
-  furthermore, as the administrative tribunal dealing with the builder’s action under Article 250t § 1 of the CCP had no power to deal with the merits of his request for a construction permit, and as he had failed to seek judicial enforcement of the decision of 24 January 2008, the State was not liable for any non-pecuniary damage allegedly caused by the length of the proceedings in the action under Article 250t § 1 of the CCP.