The case originated in an application (no. 23341/06) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Armenian national, Mr Vahagn Martirosyan (“the applicant”), on 12 May 2006.
The applicant was represented by Ms L. Sahakyan, a lawyer practising in , and Mr A. Ghazaryan, a non-practising lawyer. The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his pre-trial detention was lengthy and unjustified, and that that his conviction was based on unforeseeable application of criminal law.
On 2 December 2008 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1969 and lives in the town of Vanadzor, Lori Region of .
The applicant worked as the Lori Regional Branch Manager of the Credit Service Bank (hereafter, the Bank).
On 19 March 2002 criminal proceedings were instituted on account of abuse of official capacity by the former management of the Bank through embezzlement of funds entrusted to it by another company.
On 8 April 2002 the  issued a judicial warrant authorising the search of the premises of the Bank’s Lori Regional Branch with the aim of seizing relevant accounting documents.
On 22 April 2002 the applicant was questioned as a witness and was asked various questions about the Bank’s activities in dealing with the funds entrusted to it. According to the applicant, during the following year he was questioned as a witness on seven other occasions.
On 29 November 2002 the prosecutor’s office ordered an expert examination of the Bank’s financial records.
On 1 April 2003 the applicant was arrested.
On 2 April 2003 the applicant was formally charged under paragraph 4 of Article 90, paragraph 4 of Article 90 in conjunction with Article 17, and Article 187 of the former Criminal Code (hereafter, the former CC) with embezzlement through abuse of his official capacity and official falsification through preparation and use of false accounting documents. It appears that ten other persons, including A.D., were also charged with involvement in the above crimes and later stood trial with the applicant.
On the same date the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan granted the investigator’s motion seeking to have the applicant placed in pre-trial detention for a period of two months. In doing so, the District Court referred to the nature and degree of dangerousness of the acts of which the applicant was accused, as well as all the grounds envisaged by Article 135 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (hereafter the CCP).
On 16 April 2003 the applicant, who had a defence lawyer, lodged an appeal against this decision.
On 2 May 2003 the Criminal and Military Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal.
On 23 May 2003 the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan decided to grant the investigator’s motion seeking to have the applicant’s detention extended for two months, referring to the need to carry out further investigative measures. The applicant did not lodge an appeal against that decision.
On 23 July 2003 the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan decided to grant the investigator’s motion seeking to have the applicant’s detention extended for one more month, namely until 1 September 2003, on the same ground. The applicant did not appeal against that decision.
On 1 August 2003 a new Criminal Code (hereafter, the new CC) entered into force in .
On 11 August 2003 the charges against the applicant were adapted to the new CC and on 12 August 2003 he was formally charged under Article 179 § 3 (1), Article 179 § 3 (1) in conjunction with Article 38 and 325 § 2 of the new CC.
On 26 August 2003 the applicant was informed of the conclusion of the investigation and was granted access to the case file which apparently consisted of 34 volumes of written materials. It appears that the applicant finished familiarising himself with the materials of the case on 10 November 2003.
On 11 November 2003 the applicant complained to the prosecutor that, inter alia, he had been kept in detention since 1 September 2003 without a court decision and requested to be released.
On 13 November 2003 the prosecutor dismissed the applicant’s complaint as unfounded.
On 14 November 2003 the prosecutor approved the indictment and the case was transmitted to the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan for examination.
On 17 November 2003 Judge A. of the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan decided to admit the case to his proceedings.
On 1 December 2003 Judge A. decided to set the case down for trial, fixing the date of the first hearing for 8 December 2003 and finding, inter alia, that there were no grounds to change or cancel the applicant’s detention.
Between 8 December 2003 and 13 September 2005 the District Court held 57 hearings at varying intervals, ten of which were apparently adjourned. At the trial the indictment was maintained by prosecutors T. and A.
As it appears from the handwritten court transcripts, at the hearing of 15 December 2004 the applicant filed a motion seeking to be released from detention. Upon a request of a representative of the victim, Judge A. postponed the examination of the applicant’s motion until the next court hearing due to take place on 27 December 2004. At the hearing of 27 December 2004 the applicant requested the trial court not to examine his motion lodged at the previous hearing, and Judge A. left it without examination.
According to the applicant, during the hearing of 27 December 2004 two of his co-defendants lodged two other motions with the trial court. At the time those motions were made, his written motion to be released, lodged at the previous court hearing, was still lying on the judge’s desk. As the judge retired to the deliberation room in order to decide on the two motions of the co-defendants, he expected the judge to examine his motion too. However, as the judge came back and pronounced his decision on the two co-defendants’ motions only, he realised that his motion to be released had not been examined. The judge’s behaviour caused considerable stress to him and his family members, who were present in the court room. As a result, a dispute broke out between him and the judge, which grew into a polemic involving all the co-defendants, their defence lawyers and the court audience. The court room became very noisy and the judge announced that he was going to adjourn the hearing. It was at that moment that he gave in to his emotions and announced that if the judge continued subjecting him and his family to psychological anguish, he would better never examine the motion. Immediately thereafter, the judge adjourned the hearing and left the court room. The judge apparently took his emotional announcement as an explicit request to withdraw the motion as he then decided to leave it without examination. In substantiation of his account of the events, the applicant attached written statements made to that effect by one of the co-accused, A.D. and his mother.
On 14 November 2005 the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan delivered its judgment. The District Court found the applicant guilty under Article 179 § 2 (3) in conjunction with Article 38, and Article 325 § 1 of the new CC of abetting one of the co-defendants to embezzle funds, and of falsification and use of documents such as various credit agreements concluded between the Bank and a third person. The District Court sentenced the applicant to two years and six months’ imprisonment under Article 179 § 2 in conjunction with Article 38, and discontinued the proceedings under Article 325 § 1 by applying a statute of limitations. The applicant was immediately released from detention since he had already served the term of his sentence.
On 29 November 2005 the applicant lodged an appeal. It appears that during the examination of the appeal by the Criminal Court of Appeal the applicant submitted that he could not have been considered as a perpetrator of an offence under Article 325 § 1.
On 10 April 2006 the Criminal Court of Appeal upheld the judgment of the District Court finding, inter alia, that any person who had reached the age of 16 and had a legal capacity, including a private employer, could be considered as a perpetrator under Article 325 § 1.
On 20 April 2006 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law. In his appeal he argued, inter alia, that Article 325 of the new CC should not have been applied to his case as documents of a private bank could not be considered as official and, consequently, their falsification fell outside its scope.
On 1 June 2006 the Court of Cassation dismissed the applicant’s appeal. The Court of Cassation found, inter alia, that:
“Documents to which public authorities give legal significance are considered official. Official documents may be issued both by public authorities, their officials and bodies of local self-government, and by legal entities, commercial and other types of organisations. Such documents as credit or other financial documents drawn up by commercial banks can also be considered as [official documents], since they also have legal significance...”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, as in force at the material time, read as follows:
Article 65: The rights and obligations of the accused
“2.  The accused, in accordance with the procedure prescribed by this Code, is entitled: ... (12) to file motions...”
Article 134: The concept and types of preventive measures
“1.  Preventive measures are measures of compulsion imposed on an arrestee or the accused in order to prevent their inappropriate behaviour in the course of the criminal proceedings and to ensure the enforcement of the judgment.
Preventive measures include: (1) detention; (2) bail; ...
Detention and bail can be imposed only on the accused...”
Article 135: Grounds for imposing a preventive measure
“1.  The court, the prosecutor, the investigator or the body of inquiry can impose a preventive measure only when the materials obtained in the criminal case provide sufficient grounds to believe that the suspect or the accused may: (1) abscond from the authority dealing with the case; (2) hinder the examination of the case during the pre-trial or court proceedings by exerting unlawful influence on persons involved in the criminal proceedings, by concealing or falsifying materials significant for the case, by failing to appear upon the summons of the authority dealing with the case without valid reasons or by other means; (3) commit an act prohibited by criminal law; (4) avoid criminal liability and serving the imposed sentence; and (5) hinder the execution of the judgment.
Detention and its alternative preventive measure can be imposed on the accused only if the highest punishment prescribed for the [committed] crime is imprisonment for a term exceeding one year or if there are sufficient grounds to believe that the suspect or the accused could commit any of the actions referred to in the first paragraph of this article.
When deciding on the necessity of imposing a preventive measure or choosing the type of preventive measure to be imposed on the suspect or the accused, the following should be taken into account: (1) the nature and degree of danger of the imputed offence; (2) the personality of the suspect or the accused; (3) age and state of health; (4) sex; (5) occupation; (6) family status and dependants, if any; (7) property situation; (8) whether he has a permanent residence; and (9) other important circumstances.”
Article 136: Imposition of a preventive measure
“2.  Detention and bail shall be imposed only by a court decision upon the investigator’s or the prosecutor’s motion or of the court’s own motion during the court examination of the criminal case. The court can replace the detention with bail also upon the motion of the defence.”
Article 137: Detention
“1.  Detention is the keeping of a person detained in places and conditions prescribed by law.
...
When deciding on detention, the court shall simultaneously determine the issue of the accused’s possible release from detention on bail and, accepting the possibility of such release, shall set the amount of bail...
The court’s decision to choose detention as a preventive measure can be contested before a higher court.”
Article 138: Detention period
“1.  The accused’s detention period shall be calculated from the moment of his being taken into custody at the time of the arrest or, if he was not arrested, from the moment of enforcement of the court decision imposing detention.
...
During the pre-trial proceedings of a criminal case the detention period cannot exceed two months, except for cases prescribed by this Code ... The running of the detention period in the pre-trial proceedings of a criminal case shall be suspended when the prosecutor transmits the criminal case to the court or when the accused or his lawyer are familiarising themselves with the case file...
During the pre-trial proceedings of a criminal case the accused’s detention period can be prolonged by a court for up to one year in view of the particular complexity of the case.
During the pre-trial proceedings of a criminal case the accused’s detention period may not exceed ... one year...
There is no maximum detention period during the trial.”
Article 139: Extension of the detention period
“1.  If it is necessary to extend the accused’s detention period, the investigator or the prosecutor must submit a well-grounded motion to the court not later than ten days before the expiry of the detention period. The court, agreeing with the necessity of extending the detention period, shall adopt an appropriate decision not later than five days before the expiry of the detention period.
When deciding on the extension of the detention period, the court is entitled to accept the possibility of releasing the accused on bail and to set the amount of bail.
When deciding on the extension of the accused’s detention period, the court shall extend the detention period within the limits prescribed by this Code, on each occasion for a period not exceeding two months.”
Article 150: Appeal against preventive measures
“2.  A court decision on application of a preventive measure may be appealed against to the court of appeal.”
Article 288: Judicial control of lawfulness and reasons for imposing or not imposing detention as a preventive measure
“1.  The judicial control of lawfulness and reasons for imposing or not imposing detention as a preventive measure, as well as for extending or refusing to extend a detention period, shall be performed by the appeal court.”
Article 292: Decisions to be adopted when preparing a case for trial
“The judge who has taken over a case shall examine the materials of the case and within fifteen days from the date of taking over the case shall adopt one of the following decisions: (1) to set the case down for trial...”
Article 293: The decision to set the case down for trial
“1.  The court shall decide to set the case down for trial, if the materials of the case do not contain circumstances allowing termination of the proceedings and if there were no substantial violations of procedural law during the pre-trial proceedings.
The decision setting the case down for trial shall contain ... a decision cancelling, modifying or imposing a preventive measure...”
Article 300: A decision on preventive measures
“When adopting decisions [during the preparation of the case for trial] ... the court is obliged to decide whether or not to impose on the accused a preventive measure and whether or not the preventive measure, if such has been imposed, is justified.”
Article 312: Deciding on a preventive measure
“The court, in the course of the court proceedings, having heard the defendant’s explanation and the opinion of the parties, is entitled to impose, modify or cancel a preventive measure in respect of the defendant.”
The relevant provisions of the Code, as in force at the material time, read as follows:
Article 17: Complicity
“Complicity is the pre-meditated joint participation in the commission of an offence of two or more persons...”
Article 90: Embezzlement of property through appropriation, dissipation or abuse of official capacity
“[1.]  Appropriation or dissipation of property entrusted to a person or placed under his management, as well as embezzlement committed by an official through abuse of his official capacity, shall be punishable by imprisonment for a period not exceeding three years or by a fine in the amount between forty and sixty times the fixed minimum wage, with or without deprivation of the right to occupy certain posts or to carry out certain activities.
...
[4.]  The same act, if committed on a particularly large scale, shall be punishable by six to twelve years’ imprisonment with confiscation of personal property.”
Article 187: Official falsification
“Official forgery, namely the entering of obviously untrue data into official documents, falsification, scratching off [the date] or entering a [false] date, the preparation and provision of obviously false documents, or the entering of obviously false records into the registers, committed by a public official for selfish ends or other personal motives, shall be punishable by imprisonment for a period not exceeding two years or correctional labour for the same period or removal.”
Article 213: Falsification of documents and the preparation, use or sale of false documents, stamps, seals, forms or licence plates of vehicles
“1.  Falsification of a State or societal enterprise-, institution- or organisation-issued certificate or other document conferring an entitlement or absolving from liability for the purpose of using or selling such a document, as well as the preparation or sale of false stamps, seals or forms of State or societal enterprises, institutions or organisations or licence plates of vehicles for the same purposes shall be punishable by imprisonment for a period not exceeding three years or correctional labour for a period not exceeding two years. ...”
The relevant provisions of the Code, as in force at the material time, read as follows:
Article 38: Types of accomplice
“1.  The executor together with the organiser, the abettor and the aider are considered accomplices.
...
The person who has aided the offence with advice, instructions, provision of information, means or instruments, or elimination of obstacles, as well as the person who has promised in advance to conceal the offender, the means and instruments of the crime, the traces of the crime or the objects acquired by criminal means, as well as the person who has promised in advance to acquire or realise such objects, is considered the abettor.”
Article 179: Appropriation or dissipation
“2.  [Appropriation or dissipation, namely the embezzlement of considerable amounts of somebody else’s property entrusted to the offender] ... if committed ... on a large scale ... shall be punishable by a fine in the amount between four hundred and seven hundred times the minimum wage or by two to four years’ imprisonment or by deprivation of the right to occupy certain posts or to carry out certain activities or without such deprivation.
[The same act] ... if committed ... on a particularly large scale ... shall be punishable by four to eight years’ imprisonment with or without confiscation of property.”
Article 325: Falsification, sale or use of documents, stamps, seals, forms or licence plates of vehicles
“1.  Falsification of a certificate or other official document conferring an entitlement or absolving from liability to be used or to be sold by the falsifier himself or another person, or the sale of such a document, or the preparation or sale of false seals, stamps, forms or licence plates of vehicles for the same purposes, as well as the use of an obviously false document shall be punishable by a fine in the amount between two hundred and four hundred times the minimum wage, or by correctional labour for a period not exceeding one year, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding two years.
The acts envisaged by the first paragraph of this Article, if committed by a group of persons by conspiracy, shall be punishable by correctional labour for a period not exceeding two years or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding four years.”
By a judgment of 22 May 2001 the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan found an individual guilty under Article 213 of the former CC for drawing up false accounting documents of a private enterprise.
By a judgment of 20 January 2003 the Malatia-Sebastia District Court of Yerevan found individuals guilty under, inter alia, Article 213 of the former CC for falsification of Spanish residence permit.