The case originated in an application (no. 62257/15) against the Republic of Malta lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a British national, Mr Francesco Saverio Mifsud (“the applicant”), on 15 December 2015.
The applicant was represented by Dr V. Galea a lawyer practising in Birkirkara. The Maltese Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Dr P. Grech, Attorney General.
The applicant alleged that the fact that Maltese law made it mandatory to provide a genetic sample in paternity proceedings, contrary to his will, resulted in a breach of Article 8 of the Convention.
On 20 September 2017 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The Government of the United Kingdom, who had been notified by the Registrar of their right to intervene in the proceedings (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44), did not indicate that they intended to do so.
On 3 December 2017 the applicant passed away. By letters of 6 April 2018 and 9 July 2018 the Court was informed that his wife and universal heir, Ms Margaret Mifsud, an Irish national, wished to continue with the proceedings.
The applicant was born in 1925 and at the time of the introduction of the application lived in Dublin.
On 20 December 2012 X (who was around 55 years old) instituted an action before the Civil Court (Family Section) requesting the court to declare the applicant to be her biological father and to order this to be reflected on her birth certificate.
On 11 February 2013 the Director of the Public Registry (also defendant in the proceedings) requested the court to order that the parties undergo the genetic testing provided for by Article 100A of the Civil Code, and for the applicant to submit his details, which would be required to make the relevant changes to X’s birth certificate if the court had to find in X’s favour.
On 11 February 2013 the applicant filed written submissions in reply, denying that he had been involved in the applicant’s conception and raising the plea of exceptio plurium concubentium (defence of several lovers) on the basis that X’s mother had had various partners.
On 7 May 2013 X filed her written statement confirmed on oath (affidavit), as well as that of her mother. In her affidavit X claimed that she had been born in London of a relationship between her mother (Y.) and the applicant, and that from an early age she had always been told that the applicant was her father. After her sixteenth birthday she had sent a letter to him, which remained unanswered. She claimed that in 1978, learning that the applicant was going to be in Malta, she went to meet him at the airport – on that day she had seen him arrive with his family, and noted the resemblance between herself and one of the applicant’s daughters. On that occasion she had not approached him, but they met some time later before a lawyer. She stated that the applicant greeted her warmly and that, after that, they met various times. She also met the applicant’s wife. According to X the applicant had told her that he would not inform his children about her in order not to disrupt their schooling and she agreed. X stated that the applicant started visiting Malta regularly on his own, and when she had become pregnant he had offered her one of his properties to live in, and in this way they lived there together on his visits to the island. On the birth of X’s daughter in 1979, the applicant had been the latter’s godparent as shown by relevant certification. She claimed that at the applicant’s suggestion she moved to the UK, only to return sixteen months later because she missed Malta. At that stage the applicant had given her the keys to another property for her to live in. She remained in close contact with him until 1985. In 1998 she was evicted from the property and thereafter their relationship deteriorated. X explained that during the eviction proceedings the applicant had promised her a sum of money to leave the premises peacefully and that she had accepted the deal, but he never paid up. Subsequently, she successfully issued proceedings against him to recover the sum in question (the relevant court judgments were also submitted).
According to Y’s affidavit, Y. had had a relationship with the applicant, for whom she worked, and had become pregnant. She claimed that the applicant had wanted to interrupt the pregnancy and brought a person home to give her an injection. She later miscarried. The applicant had bought her a place to stay, and they used to meet there, since he was married. Y claimed that she had always been faithful to him as she feared him, given that he was a powerful man involved in criminal activities. Y stated that she later gave birth to a child she had with him (X) and thereafter their relationship had deteriorated, to the extent that he had also wanted her to prostitute herself. She finally plucked up courage, left him, and returned to Malta with X
On 13 May 2013, relying on Article 100A of the Civil Code (see Relevant Domestic Law), X requested the court to order that genetic tests be undertaken by her and the applicant. Apart from her own affidavit and that of her mother, she declared that she had no further evidence to adduce. On 4 June 2013 the applicant cross-examined Y. The crossexamination was to continue at a later date. It is unclear whether this happened.
On 22 May 2013 the applicant objected to the tests on the basis that such an order would breach his human rights. In particular, he argued that Article 100A of the Civil Code (which referred back to Article 70A of the same code) breached his rights under Article 8 of the Convention, and requested that the court refer the matter to the constitutional jurisdictions. He further questioned why the request had been lodged fiftythree years after X’s birth and noted his advanced age, arguing that any intervention could have negative medical implications for him.
After hearing submissions from the parties on the matter, on 23 October 2013 the court referred the applicant’s claim to the constitutional jurisdictions.
In his submissions before the constitutional jurisdictions the applicant claimed that none of the aims mentioned in subparagraph two of Article 8 applied in his case, and that the law in force did not allow for a fair balance of the competing interests at play. It also imposed an excessive burden in so far as it impeded his ability to contest a claim. Moreover, everyone was entitled to institute such proceedings without a shred of evidence, and an alleged father would be bound to submit to the test, with all its consequences, even though he was sure that he was not the father. He claimed that a positive result of the test would disrupt and create havoc in his life after so many years of silence [he was 88 years old]. He requested that the court balance X’s right (if any) to know who was her father against his right to respect for his private and family life.
By a judgment of 30 October 2014 the Civil Court (First Hall), in its constitutional competence, found that there would be no violation of Article 8 if the Civil Court (in its ordinary competence) were to order the applicant to undergo a genetic test, for the specific purposes of that suit.
The court considered that the enactment of the impugned provisions reflected the State’s action in accordance with its positive obligations in respect of the right of individuals’ to know their parentage in the context of a judicial procedure. Citing Pascaud v. France (no. 19535/08, § 64, 16 June 2011), the court reiterated that “the interest of a presumed father was not, alone, a sufficient argument to deprive the applicant [a person seeking to establish paternity] of her Article 8 rights”. According to the court, disproportionality would result if the person seeking paternity had acted negligently, by not requesting the test or not availing him or herself of an available remedy, or had renounced such right, but this was not the situation in the case in hand. Referring to the ECtHR caselaw the court noted that while it was true that the absence of an obligatory test did not necessarily entail a violation, it could not be said that making it obligatory was in violation of Article 8 because it was not proportionate.
Furthermore, X’s age was irrelevant to her quest to discover her genetic parent. This was even more so given that she had been trying to establish paternity for years and that the applicant had been part of her life for a period of time. In that light the applicant could not claim that his family life would now be in havoc.
Lastly, referring to Jäggi v. Switzerland (no. 58757/00, ECHR 2006X) which concerned the same circumstances save that the putative father in that case was deceased – the court confirmed that a particularly rigorous scrutiny was necessary in weighing competing interests in cases of ascertaining parentage, and that a person’s right to ascertain parentage was a vital interest protected by the Convention.
On 10 November 2014 the applicant appealed. He argued, in particular, that by assessing the case in the light of positive obligations, the firstinstance court had failed to assess proportionality. Nor had it looked at the lawfulness of the measure and the legitimate aim – in this connection he contended that since the requirement to order the test was mandatory (unless it concerned a minor), it deprived the judge making such order of any possibility of balancing all the interests at stake and deciding according to his or her discretion. Furthermore, the impugned law breached the equality-of-arms principle and was contrary to procedural rules (specifically Article 562 of the Civil Code – see Relevant Domestic Law).
By judgment of 26 June 2015, the Constitutional Court rejected the appeal and confirmed the firstinstance judgment.
The Constitutional Court considered that, as was clear from the firstinstance judgment, the court in question had looked into the proportionality of the measure. While it had focused mostly on the legal aspects of the case, that did not mean that it had not considered the factual elements pertinent to the case, and indeed its conclusions had specifically referred to the case at issue and were not general.
As had been noted by the first-instance court, the Constitutional Court referred to the fact that X for a number of years had been hoping to discover the truth about an important aspect of her personal identity; she also wished to amend her birth certificate, which read “unknown father” (and was thus, in her view, incorrect), in order to avoid the humiliation which she experienced every time she had to present such certification. She also wanted to establish a claim over the applicant’s property after his death, according to law. Thus, her compelling interest in determining paternity was clear. On the other hand, save for his old age, the humiliation of undergoing the test (a buccal swab), and the havoc the confirmation of such paternity would cause, the applicant had not referred to any other negative effects.
The Constitutional Court recognised X’s right to have her paternity established for the reasons which she had adduced, namely moral and patrimonial interests. On the other hand, the applicant had not put forward any sufficiently cogent reasons to consider that the application in his case of Article 100A would breach his rights under Article 8. Reiterating the findings in Pascaud (cited above), the Constitutional Court emphasised that the interest of a presumed father was not, alone, a sufficient argument to deprive the applicant (a person seeking to establish paternity) of her Article 8 rights. Indeed, Article 8 paragraph 2 expressly allowed for a legitimate interference with a person’s private life where such interference was “for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others”. This was precisely the situation in the case in hand. Thus, the application of the relevant law to the applicant’s case would be justified given that the aim was precisely to establish X’s identity and to safeguard her patrimonial interest, if it were to emerge that she was the applicant’s daughter.
In that light, and bearing in mind the applicant’s submissions that Article 70A(2) of the Civil Code excluded any exercise of discretion by the court ordering the test, the Constitutional Court considered that while it could not be ruled out that there might be cases where the necessary application (applikazzjoni tassativa) of Article 70A(2) of the Civil Code resulted in a breach of Article 8, namely where a fair balance has not been reached between the interests at play, in the present case that was not so, given its factual circumstances. In the Constitutional Court’s view the applicant would not have suffered any humiliation in having to undergo a buccal swab, which was not an invasive action, and any turbulence which could be caused to his private and family life did not outweigh X’s interests.
Lastly, the complaint about equality of arms was frivolous in so far as the test was available to both parties, and also because the fact that a piece of evidence amounted to conclusive evidence in favour of one party did not mean that it should be discarded.
Following the abovementioned Constitutional Court judgment, on 18 October 2015 the Civil Court (Family Section) ordered that the proceedings be continued and that the applicant undergo the genetic test. It appointed an expert to conduct that examination and invited her to submit a report by 28 January 2016.
On 24 May 2016 counsel for the applicant informed the court that inquiries were to be made with the applicant concerning the possibility of his tendering evidence by video conferencing given that he was residing abroad. On 6 October 2016 counsel informed the court that it was likely that the applicant would file an affidavit with his own evidence. However, no such written testimony was submitted.
The applicant underwent the test, and according to a report issued by the expert on 21 February 2017 (submitted to the ECtHR) the probability of paternity, namely of the applicant being X’s father, was 99.9998%.
From the minutes of the hearing of 6 April 2017, it appears that the expert could not attend that hearing, so the court granted her leave to submit the report, and confirm it on oath, at the court’s registry; the court also solicited the applicant’s details. The case was adjourned for judgment. On the same day a note was filed by the applicant indicating his personal details.
On 21 June 2017 Civil Court (Family Section) declared that X was the biological child of the applicant and ordered the Director for Public Registry to make the necessary changes in the act of birth of X so as to include the applicant’s details. The court judgment referred to the sworn statements of X and Y as well as to the DNA report, and the failure of the applicant to make submissions, opting to limit himself to submitting his personal details. The court noted that X and Y’s testimony had not been rebutted as the applicant had failed to submit his testimony, and the applicant’s initial objection had been contradicted by the result of the DNA test, which corroborated the witness testimony, particularly that of Y.
At the relevant time, the articles of the Civil Code, Chapter 16 of the Laws of Malta, pertinent to this case, read as follows:
“(1) Whenever the clarification of natural parentage of a child is required -
(a) the father may require the mother and the child;
(b) the mother may require the father and the child;
(c) the child may require both parents; and
(d) the alleged natural father may require the husband, the mother and the son,
to consent to a genetic paternity test and to acquiesce in the taking of a genetic sample appropriate for the test, which sample must be taken according to the then current provisions of the law.
(2) On the application of a person entitled to clarify, the Civil Court (Family Section) must substitute consent that has not been given and order acquiescence in the taking of a sample.
(3) The Civil Court (Family Section) shall dismiss the application if and as long as the clarification of the natural parentage would result in a considerable adverse effect on the best interests of the minor child, which would be unreasonable for the child, even taking into account the concerns of the person entitled to clarify.
(4) A person, who has consented to a genetic paternity test and has given a genetic sample, may require the person entitled to clarify who has had a paternity test made, to permit inspection of the genetic paternity test report or to provide a copy. The Civil Court (Family Section) shall decide disputes arising from the claim under subarticle (1).
(5) The applications mentioned in this article shall be decided by virtue of decrees, which decrees may be appealed according to the procedure contemplated in article 229(2) of the Code of Organization and Civil Procedure.”
“(1) The mother of a child conceived or born out of wedlock who is not acknowledged by the father, and that same child, may at all times make a judicial demand to establish the paternity of the child and for the court to order the registration of such paternity in the relative acts of civil status.
(2) The judicial demand referred to in subarticle (1) may also be sought by the heirs or the descendants of the child if the same circumstances as those which are referred to in article 85 will exist.”
“A judicial demand for a declarator of paternity or maternity may also be contested by any party interested.”
“In causes to which this Sub-Title makes reference, the court may, without prejudice to any evidence that may be produced by the parties according to law, require the parties to submit to examinations as referred to in article 70A, and in the same manner and in the same circumstances.”
According to Article 229 (2) of the Code of Organisation and Civil Procedure, Chapter 12 of the Laws of Malta, an appeal from a decree in causes of natural parentage may be entered before the definitive judgment subject to the procedure laid down in sub-article (4) and (5) of the same Article 229 which read as follows:
“(4) In the case of any decree under sub-articles (2) and (3), provided that any application for an appeal has not been filed, the aggrieved party may file an application within six days from the date on which the decree is read out in open court, requested [recte requesting] the court which delivered the decree to reconsider its decision. The application is [to] contain full and detailed reasons in support of the request and is to be served on the other party who shall have the right to file an answer thereto within six days from the date of service.
(5) The court shall decide, as expeditiously as possible by decree to be read out in open court, the application for special leave to appeal in terms of sub-article (3) or the application to reconsider its decision in terms of sub-article (4), expounding fully therein the reasons for the decision.”
Article 562 of the Code of Organisation and Civil Procedure reads as follows:
“Saving any other provision of the law, the burden of proving a fact shall, in all cases, rest on the party alleging it.”