The case originated in an application (no. 39438/13) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Anatoliy Sergeyevich Nazarenko (“the applicant”), on 15 May 2013.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the termination of his parental status had deprived him of the right to contact his daughter or to lodge civil actions in defence of her rights and that he had not been informed of the date of an appeal hearing.
On 15 October 2013 notice of the above complaints was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible. The Court also decided to apply Rule 41 of the Rules of Court and grant priority treatment to the application.
The applicant was born in 1965 and lives in Ulan-Ude.
In 2007 the applicant’s wife, N., gave birth to a daughter, A.
In 2010 the applicant and N. divorced.
On 18 January 2011 the Oktyabrskiy District childcare and guardianship authority (“the childcare authority”) determined that A. would reside with the applicant during even weeks and with her mother, N., during odd weeks. In January, June, July and August, A. was to live with the applicant for one week of his choice per month.
On 22 March 2011 the applicant discovered several bruises on A.’s body. Suspecting that she had been beaten and sexually abused by N.’s new partner, he refused to return A. to N.
During the following year, A. lived with the applicant and her paternal grandmother. On several occasions the applicant allowed N. to visit A. in his presence.
On 25 March 2011 the applicant complained to the police and to the Oktyabrskiy District investigation committee that his daughter had been beaten and sexually abused by N.’s partner. The investigation committee opened a pre-investigation inquiry.
The applicant and N. both applied to the Oktyabrskiy District Court of Ulan-Ude for a residence order in respect of A.
On 25 April 2011 A. was questioned by an investigator in the presence of a psychologist as part of the pre-investigation inquiry. A. stated that she wanted to live with the applicant because he was nice, whereas her mother and her mother’s new partner had treated her badly. She was again questioned by the investigator in the presence of a psychologist on 27 June and 3 August 2011, and confirmed her previous statements.
On 19 May 2011 the Oktyabrskiy District Court granted N.’s application for a residence order and refused the applicant’s similar application. The court found that both parents had taken an equal share in A.’s upbringing. They both had sufficient financial means and their standard of living was equally satisfactory. However, taking into account A.’s gender and age, it was preferable for her to be brought up by her mother. A child under the age of twelve could be separated from the mother only in exceptional circumstances. No such circumstances had been established in the present case. N. was employed and had sufficient income. There was no evidence of negligence or mistreatment on her part. A.’s bruises could have been sustained as a result of a fall or in the course of a game, and were insufficient to prove mistreatment. A criminal inquiry into the allegations of mistreatment was still pending. The court-appointed expert psychologist’s finding that A. was emotionally closer to her father and paternal grandmother than to her mother could not be taken into account in the absence of established evidence of mistreatment by the mother. The court concluded that it was therefore in A.’s best interests to live with her mother.
On 20 May 2011 the childcare authority noted that A. wished to live with her father. An inspection of the applicant’s flat had revealed that he had created all the appropriate conditions for A.’s normal development. The childcare authority therefore found that A. should reside with the applicant.
On 22 June 2011 the Supreme Court of the Republic of Buryatiya upheld the judgment of 19 May 2011 on appeal. It found that the Oktyabrskiy District Court had failed to consider the childcare authority’s findings and opinion and had therefore committed a serious breach of the procedure prescribed by law. However, given that the childcare authority’s opinion was advisory rather than binding on the court, the failure to consider that opinion did not warrant reconsideration of the judgment, which was correct in substance.
On 30 June 2011 the Oktyabrskiy District investigation committee opened criminal proceedings into the alleged mistreatment and sexual abuse of A.
As the applicant continued to retain A., N. applied to the Oktyabrskiy District Court for an injunction requiring the applicant to return A. to her.
On 29 November 2011 the Oktyabrskiy District Court allowed N.’s application. It found that the applicant had refused to comply with the judgment of 19 May 2011, upheld on appeal. It ordered that, in compliance with that judgment, the applicant should return A. to N. On 30 January 2012 the Supreme Court of the Republic of Buryatiya upheld that judgment on appeal.
.  On an unspecified date the applicant applied for a second time to the Oktyabrskiy District Court for a residence order in respect of A. At the same time he applied for a restriction of N.’s parental authority over A.
On 23 January 2012 the Oktyabrskiy District Court dismissed the application and confirmed its previous order to the effect that A. should live with her mother, citing the same reasons as in the judgment of 19 May 2011. The court found no reason to restrict N.’s parental authority over A. On 2 April 2012 the Supreme Court of the Republic of Buryatiya upheld that judgment on appeal.
On 13 March 2012 N. kidnapped A. from the applicant. She has since prevented the applicant from seeing his daughter.
On 20 March 2012 A. was again questioned by the investigator in the presence of a psychologist. She said that she liked living with her mother and that her mother was treating her well.
On 23 April 2012 A. was examined by a panel of psychologists appointed by the investigator as part of the criminal proceedings. They found that A. was not suffering from any learning difficulties or disorders. However, owing to her age, level of development and susceptibility to external influence, she was unable to give reliable evidence about her relationships with her mother, her father or her mother’s new partner.
On 30 April 2013 the Oktyabrskiy District investigation committee discontinued the criminal proceedings, finding that there was no evidence of mistreatment or sexual abuse and that the bruises could have been caused by a fall. According to the experts, A.’s statements that her mother’s partner had treated her badly were unreliable. The witnesses had been unable to provide any information confirming the applicant’s allegations of child abuse.
The applicant applied for a third time to the Oktyabrskiy District Court for a residence order in respect of A. He also asked that N. be deprived of parental authority over A.
While those proceedings were pending, N. lodged an application with the Oktyabrskiy District Court, contesting the applicant’s paternity of A. She requested that his name be deleted from A.’s birth certificate and that A.’s family name and patronymic be changed.
.  On 23 July 2012 a DNA paternity test established that the applicant was not A.’s biological father.
.  On 18 September 2012 the Oktyabrskiy District Court allowed N.’s claims. It found that the applicant was not A.’s biological father and terminated his parental status in respect of her. It ordered that the applicant’s name be deleted from A.’s birth certificate and that A.’s family name and patronymic be changed to a family name and a patronymic not connected with the applicant. On 19 November 2012 the Supreme Court of the Republic of Buryatiya upheld that judgment on appeal.
On 16 January 2013 the Oktyabrskiy District Court discontinued the proceedings concerning the applicant’s application for a residence order and an order to deprive N. of parental authority over A. The court reasoned that as the applicant was not A.’s biological father, he had no standing under domestic law to lodge civil actions concerning parental authority over A. or A.’s residence arrangements. The applicant was absent from the hearing because he was ill.
On 27 February 2013 the Supreme Court of the Republic of Buryatiya upheld that decision on appeal. According to the applicant, he had not been informed of the date of the hearing. Nor was he informed about the appeal decision until 12 March 2013.
On 31 May 2013 a judge of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Buryatiya refused to refer a cassation appeal lodged by the applicant to the presidium of that court for examination, finding that no significant violations of substantive or procedural law had influenced the outcome of the proceedings. It noted, in particular, that there was proof in the case file that a letter had been sent to the applicant on 7 February 2013 informing him of the date of the appeal hearing. Information regarding the hearing date had also been published on the court’s official website. The applicant had therefore been duly informed of the date of the appeal hearing.
The Family Code provides that parents act on behalf of their child and defend the child’s rights and interests in any relations with other persons or legal entities. They act ex officio as the child’s legal representative in court proceedings (Article 64 § 1).
In the event of the parents’ separation, the child’s residence arrangements are fixed by an agreement between the parents. If no such agreement can be reached, the child’s residence arrangements are fixed by a court order, having regard to the child’s best interests and his or her opinion on the matter. In particular, the court must take into account the child’s attachment to each of the parents and the siblings, the relationship between the child and each of the parents, the child’s age, the parents’ moral and other personal qualities, and the possibilities each of them have for creating appropriate conditions for the child’s upbringing and development, such as their occupation, employment schedule, and financial and family situation (Article 65 § 3).
The parent residing separately from the child is entitled to maintain contact with the child and to participate in his or her upbringing and education. The parent with whom the child resides may not hinder the child’s contact with the other parent, unless such contact undermines the child’s physical or psychological health or moral development (Article 66 § 1).
A child is entitled to maintain contact with his or her parents, grandparents, brothers, sisters and other relatives. The parents’ divorce or separation, or the annulment of their marriage, has no bearing on the child’s rights. In particular, where the parents reside separately from each other, the child is entitled to maintain contact with both of them (Article 55 § 1).
Grandparents, brothers, sisters and other relatives are entitled to maintain contact with the child. If the parents, or one of them, prevent close relatives from seeing the child, the childcare authority may order that contact be maintained between the child and the relative in question. If the parents do not comply with the childcare authority’s order, the relative concerned or the childcare authority may apply to a court for a contact order. The court must take a decision in the child’s best interests and must take the child’s opinion into account. If the parents do not comply with the contact order issued by a court, they may be held liable in accordance with the law (Article 67).
A court may deprive a parent of parental authority at the request of the other parent, a guardian, a prosecutor or social services if, among other reasons, the parent mistreats the child by resorting to physical or psychological violence or sexual abuse (Articles 69 and 70 § 1).
A court may restrict a parent’s parental authority and remove the child from the parent’s care in the interests of the child at the request of a close relative, social services, an educational institution or a prosecutor. Parental authority may be restricted in cases where the parent represents a danger to the child (Article 73).
The maternity or paternity of a child may be contested before a court by the person who is recorded in the child’s birth certificate as his or her mother or father, by the child’s biological mother or father, by the child once he or she attains the age of majority, by the child’s guardian or, if the child’s parent is legally incapable, by the parent’s guardian (Article 52 § 1).
Article 3 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, adopted in 1989 by the UN General Assembly and ratified by Russia in 1990, provides as follows.
“1.  In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private social welfare institutions, courts of law, administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.
States Parties undertake to ensure the child such protection and care as is necessary for his or her well-being, taking into account the rights and duties of his or her parents, legal guardians, or other individuals legally responsible for him or her, and, to this end, shall take all appropriate legislative and administrative measures.
...”
.  Article 9 provides, in so far as relevant, as follows.
“1.  States Parties shall ensure that a child shall not be separated from his or her parents against their will, except when competent authorities subject to judicial review determine, in accordance with applicable law and procedures, that such separation is necessary for the best interests of the child. Such determination may be necessary in a particular case such as one involving abuse or neglect of the child by the parents, or one where the parents are living separately and a decision must be made as to the child’s place of residence.
...
States Parties shall respect the right of the child who is separated from one or both parents to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, except if it is contrary to the child’s best interests.
...”
.  In its General Comment No. 14 (2013) on the right of the child to have his or her best interests taken as a primary consideration (Article 3, paragraph 1), adopted on 29 May 2013 (CRC/C/GC/14), the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child stated, in particular:
“13.  Each State party must respect and implement the right of the child to have his or her best interests assessed and taken as a primary consideration, and is under the obligation to take all necessary, deliberate and concrete measures for the full implementation of this right.
Article 3, paragraph 1, establishes a framework with three different types of obligations for States parties:
(a)  The obligation to ensure that the child’s best interests are appropriately integrated and consistently applied in every action taken by a public institution, especially in all implementation measures, administrative and judicial proceedings which directly or indirectly impact on children;
(b)  The obligation to ensure that all judicial and administrative decisions as well as policies and legislation concerning children demonstrate that the child’s best interests have been a primary consideration. This includes describing how the best interests have been examined and assessed, and what weight has been ascribed to them in the decision.
...
To ensure compliance, States parties should undertake a number of implementation measures in accordance with articles 4, 42 and 44, paragraph 6, of the Convention, and ensure that the best interests of the child are a primary consideration in all actions, including:
(a)  Reviewing and, where necessary, amending domestic legislation and other sources of law so as to incorporate article 3, paragraph 1, and ensure that the requirement to consider the child’s best interests is reflected and implemented in all national laws and regulations, provincial or territorial legislation, rules governing the operation of private or public institutions providing services or impacting on children, and judicial and administrative proceedings at any level, both as a substantive right and as a rule of procedure;
...
(c)  Establishing mechanisms and procedures for complaints, remedy or redress in order to fully realize the right of the child to have his or her best interests appropriately integrated and consistently applied in all implementation measures, administrative and judicial proceedings relevant to and with an impact on him or her;
...
In civil cases, the child may be defending his or her interests directly or through a representative, in the case of paternity, child abuse or neglect, family reunification, accommodation, etc. The child may be affected by the trial, for example in procedures concerning adoption or divorce, decisions regarding custody, residence, contact or other issues which have an important impact on the life and development of the child, as well as child abuse or neglect proceedings. The courts must provide for the best interests of the child to be considered in all such situations and decisions, whether of a procedural or substantive nature, and must demonstrate that they have effectively done so.
...
The best interests of a child shall be a primary consideration in the adoption of all measures of implementation. The words ‘shall be’ place a strong legal obligation on States and mean that States may not exercise discretion as to whether children’s best interests are to be assessed and ascribed the proper weight as a primary consideration in any action undertaken.
...
Preventing family separation and preserving family unity are important components of the child protection system, and are based on the right provided for in article 9, paragraph 1, which requires ‘that a child shall not be separated from his or her parents against their will, except when [...] such separation is necessary for the best interests of the child’. Furthermore, the child who is separated from one or both parents is entitled ‘to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, except if it is contrary to the child’s best interests’ (art. 9, para. 3). This also extends to any person holding custody rights, legal or customary primary caregivers, foster parents and persons with whom the child has a strong personal relationship.
...”
.  Article 371-4 of the French Civil Code provides that if the interests of the child so require, the family-affairs judge fixes the arrangements concerning the relationship between the child and any other person, whether a relative or not, who has resided in a stable manner with the child and one of his or her parents, has participated in the child’s education, everyday care or accommodation and has developed lasting emotional bonds with him or her.
.  Article 1685 of the German Civil Code provides that any persons with whom the child has close ties may claim contact rights if they have or have had actual responsibility for the child (a social and family relationship) and if this serves the best interests of the child. It is in general to be assumed that “actual responsibility” has been taken on if the person has been living for a long period in “domestic community” with the child.
Section 10 of the Children Act 1989 of the United Kingdom provides that contact rights may be claimed, in particular, by “any party to a marriage (whether or not subsisting) in relation to whom the child is a child of the family”, by a foster parent or any relative with whom the child has lived for a period of at least one year immediately preceding the application; or by any person with whom the child has lived for a period of at least three years.