The case originated in an application (no. 11578/08) against the Republic of Armenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Armenian national, Ms Rehan Tovmasyan (“the applicant”), on 13 February 2008.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr A. Vareljyan and Ms M. Hakobyan, lawyers practising in Yerevan. The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, Representative of the Republic of Armenia at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged that her right to a fair trial guaranteed by Article 6 of the Convention had been violated.
On 30 September 2010 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1 of the Convention).
The applicant was born in 1948 and lives in Yerevan. She is unemployed and receives state welfare benefit.
On 10 October 1991 the Republic of Armenia Executive Committee of the Mashtots District Council of People’s Deputies decided to allocate a flat to the applicant in a building in Yerevan, which was to be constructed by Kanaz Aluminium Factory (hereafter - the Factory).
It appears that the foundation of the future building was laid but, as the Soviet Union collapsed, the construction of the building was stopped.
On an unspecified date the Factory went bankrupt and a liquidation commission (hereafter - the commission) was set up.
It appears that on 8 May 2007 the applicant lodged a request with the commission seeking to be allocated a flat or to receive money equivalent to its value.
On 10 May 2007 the head of the commission rejected the applicant’s request on the ground that the building, of which one flat was to be allocated to the applicant, had not been constructed due to the lack of financial means. He stated that the Factory had carried out construction activities with direct financial support from the Soviet Government and that after the Soviet Union collapsed it had to stop construction projects for lack of financial means.
On 13 June 2007 the applicant, who was not represented by a lawyer, lodged a claim with the Arabkir and Kanaker-Zeytun District Court of Yerevan seeking to oblige the Factory to allocate a flat to her or provide her compensation equivalent to its value.
On 19 July 2007 the District Court dismissed the applicant’s claim on the same grounds as those relied on by the head of the commission. It also found that the Factory had been declared bankrupt and had no legal successor as such.
On 23 July 2007 the applicant, still unrepresented, lodged an appeal against this judgment.
On 15 October 2007 the Civil Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the judgment of the District Court.
The applicant did not lodge an appeal on points of law with the Court of Cassation. She alleges that she was unable to do so as she could not afford to hire an advocate authorised to act before that court, whose services were costly. She further claims that she applied to many lawyers with a request to provide her with free legal services as regards her application to the Court of Cassation. However, her requests were turned down on the ground that the issue concerned an apartment and legal aid was not available for this type of a dispute.
For a summary of the relevant domestic provisions see the judgment in the case of Shamoyan v. Armenia (no. 18499/08, §§ 14-18, 7 July 2015).
In addition to the relevant parts of the Constitutional Court’s decision of 8 October 2008 already cited in the Shamoyan judgment referred to above, this decision also stated that according to information received from the Chamber of Advocates of Armenia, two out of the four public defenders licensed to act before the Court of Cassation had drafted sixteen appeals on points of law free of charge. The Constitutional Court noted that, considering the high number of criminal and civil cases examined in the Armenian courts, free legal assistance provided by licensed advocates was negligible given the absence of a clear definition of such cases and procedures in the law which made it dependent on the “good will” of the office of the public defender.