The case originated in an application (no. 33681/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Mr Ivan Yordanov Idakiev (“the applicant”), on 30 August 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Kashamov and Ms D. Mihaylova, lawyers practising in . The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Ms M. Dimova and Ms M. Kotseva, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant complained, in particular, that the  had failed to examine a decisive argument of his. He also complained that he had been deprived of his property and that the restitution proceedings to which he, and before him his father, had been a party had been too lengthy and had been marred by frequent legislative changes and uncertainty.
On 15 September 2009 the President of the Fifth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government.
Following the recomposition of the Court’s sections on 1 February 2011, the application was transferred to the Fourth Section of the Court.
The applicant was born in 1952 and lives in Pernik.
Agricultural lands owned by the applicant’s father and grandfather were collectivised after 1945.
Following the entry into force of the Agricultural Land Act (see paragraph 26 below), on 22 February 1992 the applicant’s father sought to recover fifteen plots formerly owned by him in the area of the village of Kasilag totalling 39,650 square metres. In two decisions adopted on 16 May 1996 the Radomir Agricultural Land Commission (“the land commission”) restored to him several plots totalling 21,755 square metres, some in their old boundaries and the remainder through a land redistribution plan which was to be adopted later.
On 28 February 1992, acting on behalf of the applicant’s grandfather’s heirs, the applicant’s father sought to recover another thirtyseven plots formerly owned by the applicant’s grandfather, also in the area of Kasilag, totalling 175,000 square metres. The applicant’s father was entitled to one-seventh of the applicant’s grandfather’s property. In two decisions also dated 16 May 1996 the land commission restored to the heirs a number of plots totalling 107,500 square metres, some in their old boundaries and the remainder through the land redistribution plan.
The land redistribution plan for the area of Kasilag was published on 18 June 1996. Under that plan the applicant’s father and the heirs of the applicant’s grandfather received most of the plots detailed in the abovementioned decisions of 16 May 1996.
On 26 November 1997 the applicant’s father, acting on his own behalf and on behalf of the applicant’s grandfather’s heirs, challenged the plan, arguing that they could have been given additional plots, including some of the plots in respect of which the land commission had refused restitution, and that the land that had been allocated to them was not of good quality. In two decisions of 19 January 1998 the land commission refused to amend the plan. On 29 July 1998 the applicant’s father sought judicial review.
Despite the pending judicial review proceedings, on 27 March 2000 the land commission adopted two decisions whereby it decided that the applicant’s father was to receive municipally-owned land or bonds as compensation in lieu of restitution for 11,888 square metres of land. In addition, the heirs of the applicant’s grandfather were to receive compensation for 16,425 square metres of land.
On 5 July 2002 the  gave a judgment in the judicial review proceedings. It found that the decisions of 19 January 1998 were null and void because they had not been issued in accordance with the relevant procedure, and it remitted the case to the land commission for reexamination.
Upon an appeal by the applicant, on 13 December 2002 the  quashed that judgment in so far as the case had been remitted to the land commission, and instructed the  to examine the merits of the applicant’s father’s objections to the land redistribution plan.
In a new judgment of 5 July 2004 the  found that the land redistribution plan for Kasilag could be amended so that the applicant’s father’s objections could be satisfied. Accordingly, the court amended the plan and allotted to the applicant’s father a plot of 14,888 square metres, and to the heirs of the applicant’s grandfather another plot of 37,779 square metres.
On 12 July 2004 that judgment was served on the Radomir Agriculture and Forestry Department (formerly the Radomir Agricultural Land Commission) and the Radomir municipality. It was served on the applicant’s father on 21 July 2004. The parties were informed that they could appeal against it within fourteen days of the dates of the respective notifications. No appeals were filed within the relevant timelimits.
As the  had failed to award costs, on 29 July 2004 the applicant’s father requested that the judgment of 5 July 2004 be supplemented to take account of this, as provided for in Article 192 of the 1952 Code of Civil Procedure (see paragraph 34 below).
The applicant’s father passed away on 7 August 2004. His heirs – the applicant and the latter’s mother and sister – continued the proceedings in his stead. Later, it transpired that the applicant’s father had left a will bequeathing all his property to the applicant.
On 12 August 2004 the  examined and allowed the applicant’s father’s request concerning costs and awarded to his heirs 322 Bulgarian levs (BGN).
On 19 August 2004 that decision was served on the Radomir Agriculture and Forestry Department.
On 20 August 2004 the Radomir Agriculture and Forestry Department filed with the  an appeal in which it challenged both the ’s decision concerning costs and the decision on the merits given on 5 July 2004.
The applicant and his mother and sister also appealed against the decision of 12 August 2004, claiming a higher award for costs.
The  held a hearing on 14 February 2005. According to the record of the hearing, the applicant’s representative said:
“It was not indicated in the [Agriculture and Forestry Department’s] appeal that any other decision of the Regional Court, apart from the one concerning costs, was being challenged. The judgment has become final. I maintain my clients’ appeal in respect of the award for costs and therefore ask [the ] to allow it and award us the remainder.”
In a judgment of 2 March 2005 the  allowed the Agriculture and Forestry Department’s appeal, without commenting on its admissibility or the objection raised by the applicant’s representative, and quashed the ’s judgment of 5 July 2004. Deciding on the merits of the case, it found that there were no grounds to amend the land redistribution plan and allocate new plots to the applicant’s father and the heirs of the applicant’s grandfather.
It is unclear what the developments in the restitution procedure were after the abovementioned judgment, and in particular whether the applicant and the remaining heirs of his grandfather received any compensation, as per the land commission’s decisions of 27 March 2000 (see paragraph 12 above) or any subsequent decisions.
The Agricultural Land Act (Закон за собствеността и ползването на земеделските земи), adopted in 1991, provides, inter alia, that persons, or their heirs, whose land has been collectivised may request restoration of their ownership rights under certain conditions. On the basis of certain statutory criteria, such as whether or not the old borders of the plot of land once owned by the claimant or his or her ancestors can be determined, restitution may be “in actual boundaries” (“реални граници”) or through a land redistribution plan (“план за земеразделяне”).
The administrative bodies competent to decide on the restitution of agricultural land were, in the beginning, the respective land commissions, which were replaced in 2002 by Agriculture and Forestry Departments, after 2008 renamed Agricultural Departments. Their members are appointed by the Minister of Agriculture.
Where restitution is impossible the former owners of agricultural land are to be compensated with municipal land or with compensation bonds, which can be used in privatisation tenders or for the purchase of State-owned land.
After its adoption in 1991 the Agricultural Land Act underwent numerous amendments, mostly of a technical nature, which did not significantly alter the substantive rights accorded to former owners of agricultural land.
The remaining provisions of that Act concerning the restitution of agricultural land have been summarised in the Court’s judgments in Lyubomir Popov v. Bulgaria (no. 69855/01, §§ 8387 and 92, 7 January 2010) and Mutishev and Others v. Bulgaria (no. 18967/03, §§ 61, 6874, 82 and 8990, 3 December 2009).
At the relevant time most of the procedural rules applicable to judicial review proceedings were contained in the Administrative Procedure Act of 1979 and the Supreme Administrative Court Act of 1997. The Code of Civil Procedure of 1952 was also applicable, on a subsidiary basis.
Section 33 of the Supreme Administrative Court Act provided that an appeal against the judgment of a lower court was to be lodged within fourteen days of the notification of that judgment. By section 37 of the Act, the  was to discontinue proceedings where that time-limit had not been complied with. In addition, Article 40 of the Code of Civil Procedure stipulated that the courts were to disregard any procedural steps taken by the parties after the expiry of the applicable time-limits.
Article 219 of the Code provided that judgments which had not been appealed against within the relevant time-limits became final. By Article 220 any final judgment was binding on the parties, the court which had given it, and all other courts and public bodies.
Article 192 of the Code provided that after being pronounced, a judgment could not be revoked or amended by the court which had given it except where it contained an obvious error or the court had failed to make an award in respect of costs. In the latter case, the new decision concerning costs was independently subject to appeal before a higher court.
Article 189 § 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure obliged the courts to give reasoned decisions.
In respect of the grounds justifying the reopening of judicial proceedings, section 41 of the Supreme Administrative Court Act referred to Article 231 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure, which, in subparagraph (d), stated that reopening was permissible where
“there has been another conflicting decision concerning the same parties, the same claim and the same cause of action”.
The Supreme Court of Cassation has held that this provision does not concern conflicting findings reached following an appeal by a higher court in the framework of the same proceedings and concerning the same dispute (see, for example, Judgment of the Supreme Court of Cassation no. 428 of 4 November 1998, case no. 29/1998).
After 12 July 2006 the grounds for reopening judicial proceedings were provided for in the new Code of Administrative Procedure, which in Article 239 § 6 provides that an interested party may request the reopening of the proceedings in the event that
“a judgment of the European Court of Human Rights has found a violation of the [Convention]”.