The case originated in an application (no. 32702/13) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Yuriy Anatolyevich Kuzhil (“the applicant”), on 7 April and 1 September 2013.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and Mr A. Fedorov, Head of the Office of the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 19 October 2017 notice of the complaint concerning the applicant’s access to legal assistance was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1976 and is serving a prison sentence in Solikamsk.
At 1.20 a.m. on 9 December 2009 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of sexually abusing two boys, M. and U., and taken to a temporary detention facility.
On the same date the investigator, F., questioned him as a suspect. According to the official record, the questioning took place in the temporary detention facility from 9.05 to 9.30 p.m. and the applicant confessed to both charges in the presence of State-appointed counsel, S. According to the applicant, the lawyer was not present. According to the official record, the investigator questioned the applicant as a defendant from 9.40 to 9.55 p.m. in the presence of the lawyer. According to the applicant, the lawyer did not attend.
On 23 December 2009 the investigator questioned the applicant in the presence of State-appointed counsel. The applicant refused to answer any questions.
On 27 December 2010 the Babushkinskiy District Court of Moscow found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced him to eight and a half years’ imprisonment.
On 4 May 2011 the Moscow City Court upheld the applicant’s conviction on appeal.
On 17 February 2012 the Presidium of the City Court quashed the applicant’s conviction for the offence committed against U. in supervisory review proceedings and remitted the matter to the trial court for fresh consideration.
On 25 October 2012, following a further supervisory review, the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation quashed (i) the judgment of 17 February 2012 and (ii) the judgments of 27 December 2010 and 4 May 2011 as regards the applicant’s conviction for the sexual abuse of U. and remitted the matter to the trial court for fresh consideration. As regards the applicant’s conviction for the sexual abuse of M., the Supreme Court upheld the lower courts’ findings and sentenced him to eight years and three months’ imprisonment.
During the new trial the applicant maintained his innocence. He claimed that he had written a confession statement in exchange for a promise by the investigator that U. would not be subjected to any unlawful treatment. The applicant also claimed that the lawyer had not been present during the questioning on 9 December 2009. When questioned in court, U. retracted his earlier statements that the applicant had sexually abused him.
On an unspecified date the acting head of the temporary detention facility provided the District Court with the following information:
“In response to your query... please be advised that ... on 9 December 2009 [the applicant] was visited twice by [the investigator] F. from 12.20 to 12.40 p.m., and from 9.20 to 10.45 p.m. (as per the inmate movement register ...).
I would also inform you that on 9 December 2009 counsel S. was at the temporary detention facility. However, according to the inmate movement register, he visited another inmate from 5.25 to 5.50 p.m.”
On 20 May 2013 the District Court found the applicant guilty of child sexual abuse. The court took into account his earlier conviction and sentenced him cumulatively to eight and a half years’ imprisonment. The court relied on (i) statements made by U. when questioned by the investigator, (ii) statements made by the police chief (D.), social worker (Ye.), psychologist (Sok.) and school teacher (B.), who had all been present during U.’s questioning; (iii) a statement made by the head of the children’s shelter (P.), whom U. had told about the sexual abuse; (iv) a statement made by the investigator, who claimed that the applicant had written a confession statement voluntarily and that on 9 December 2009 S. had been present during his questioning; (v) a statement made by another investigator (As.), who had questioned U. on several occasions; (vi) statements made by the applicant’s former wife and his father, who had had no knowledge of the events leading to the charges; and (vii) the applicant’s confession statement of 9 December 2009. The court also took into account forensic evidence as to the psychological and physical condition of the applicant and U.
As regards the statements made by U., the court accepted as truthful those which he had made when questioned by the investigator and disregarded his later testimony given in court. The court considered that U. had retracted his earlier statements out of gratitude to the applicant, who had been his appointed guardian from 2006 to 2009.
The court dismissed as unsubstantiated the applicant’s allegation that on 9 December 2009 he had been questioned in the absence of a lawyer and that the information to the contrary in the interview record had been falsified by the investigator. The court relied on the investigator’s statement.
The applicant appealed alleging, inter alia, that on 9 December 2009 he had been questioned and had made a confession statement in the absence of a lawyer.
On 6 November 2013 the City Court upheld the applicant’s conviction on appeal.