The case originated in an application (no. 2308/06) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Sergey Ivanovich Saranchov (“the applicant”), on 12 December 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr T. Kalmykov, a lawyer practising in Kharkiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented, most recently, by their Acting Agent, Ms O. Davydchuk, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had not had a fair trial ‒ because he had not been provided with a legal aid lawyer at any stage of the criminal proceedings ‒ and that the trial court which convicted him had lacked impartiality to the extent that a substantial part of the trial had been conducted in the absence of a prosecutor.
On 22 June 2012 the above complaints were communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1968 and lives in Komsomolskoye village in the Kharkiv Region.
In May 1999 the Pavlograd Police placed the applicant on the wanted list in connection with their criminal investigation into a violent burglary in Pavlograd and the infliction of grave bodily injuries on B.’s daughter P., who was a minor.
On 28 January 2000 the applicant was arrested in Russia on suspicion of having committed an unrelated crime in that country, for which he was subsequently convicted by a Russian court to a term of imprisonment that was due to end on 27 July 2004.
On 1 June 2004 a Russian court ordered the applicant’s retention in custody pending his extradition to Ukraine.
On 1 December 2004 the applicant was extradited to Ukraine and placed in a pre-trial detention facility.
At 5.20 p.m. on 16 January 2005 the applicant was presented with an arrest report stating that he had been arrested on suspicion of having committed aggravated burglary. He was informed of his right to have access to a lawyer as from the first interrogation. The applicant signed this report, stating that he generally disagreed with its content and that he wished to have a lawyer as from the first interrogation.
At the same time on the same day the applicant also signed a record confirming that he had been informed about his rights as a suspect, in particular the right to remain silent and to consult a lawyer. The applicant signed the report and added by hand in the relevant field provided on the pre-printed form that he had “refused the assistance of a defence counsel and would defend himself, not for financial reasons” (свои права буду защищать самостоятельно, не по материальным причинам). The applicant alleged that he had been compelled to sign this and subsequent waivers because the police had told him that they would not provide him with a lawyer, as he had initially requested.
On 17 January 2005 the applicant signed another record confirming that he had been informed about his rights as a suspect and stating ‒ using the same wording ‒ that he would defend himself.
On the same day he was questioned twice. He denied any involvement in the alleged offence.
On 25 January 2005 the applicant was formally charged with aggravated burglary. On the same day he signed a record confirming that he had been informed about his rights as an accused person and stated ‒ using the same wording ‒ that he would defend himself.
On 27 January 2005 he signed another such record using the same wording. On the same day the investigator announced to the applicant that the pre-trial investigation was complete and gave him the criminal case file to study.
On 29 January 2005 the Pavlograd Prosecutor signed the final bill of indictment, charging the applicant with aggravated burglary. The indictment contained a request that the victims, B. and P., and two other witnesses be called at the trial.
On 1 March 2005 the applicant stood trial before the Pavlograd Court sitting in a single judge formation, assisted by a clerk. According to the trial record, the trial unfolded as follows:
(a)  Only the applicant and B. were present at the opening of the trial, the prosecutor, P. and the witnesses being absent. The judge asked the applicant and B. whether they objected to proceeding in the others’ absence. None having objected, the judge ruled to proceed.
(b)  The judge explained to the applicant his rights as a defendant, including the right to have a defence counsel or to defend oneself, and to testify or to remain silent.
(c)  Responding that he understood those rights, the applicant asked to be allowed to represent himself. The judge granted the request.
(d)  The judge read out the indictment and asked the applicant whether he understood the charges and how he wished to plead.
(e)  The applicant responded that he understood the charges, pleaded guilty and refused to testify.
(f)  B. asked the court to question her first and then allow her to leave and proceed with the trial in her absence. The applicant expressed no objection, and the court granted the victim’s request.
(g)  B. was questioned and left.
(h)  A prosecutor arrived.
(i)  The judge explained to the applicant that he had the right to challenge the prosecutor. The applicant responded that he did not wish to challenge the prosecutor. He again pleaded guilty and stated that he did not wish to testify. He stated that the evidence of his guilt was “admissible and sufficient,” asked the court not to call the absent witnesses since he was ashamed of his actions, and asked the court to dispense with the examination of evidence, pursuant to Article 299 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 30 below).
(j)  The court ruled that the examination of the evidence be dispensed with and proceeded to read out some of the written evidence in the case file.
(k)  The prosecutor asked the court to sentence the applicant to six and a half years’ imprisonment.
According to the applicant, this record of the trial was inaccurate. In particular, the applicant did not initially plead guilty. It was only after B. had departed that the judge persuaded him to plead guilty and to agree to abbreviated proceedings in exchange for a lenient sentence.
At the close of the trial on the same day, the court delivered its judgment. It convicted the applicant as charged and sentenced him to six and a half years’ imprisonment, to be counted from 28 January 2000, the date of his arrest in Russia, with one year and about five months therefore remaining to be served. The court relied on his guilty plea in the course of the trial and his consent to dispensing with the examination of evidence. It also stated that the applicant’s guilt was proven by a number of documents in the file. In particular it referred to the identification reports, according to which P. and another eyewitness had identified the applicant as the person who had attacked P.
On 4 March 2005 B. appealed, maintaining that the sentence was too lenient. She argued that the term of imprisonment should be calculated from the date of the applicant’s arrest in Ukraine rather than from the date of his arrest in Russia for an unrelated crime. She also maintained that the prosecutor had not been present at the trial and that the applicant had never repented or admitted his guilt and had behaved defiantly at the trial.
The applicant replied to the appeal, submitting that his guilty plea and remorse for the crime had been genuine and that the sentence imposed by the trial court had been correct and justified.
On 20 May 2005 the Dnipropetrovsk Regional Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”) held a hearing in the presence of a prosecutor, B. and the applicant. At the hearing the applicant reaffirmed his initial submissions, said that he regretted the offence he had committed, and requested that the trial court’s verdict be left in force. According to the applicant, he had requested the presence of a lawyer at this hearing but his request had not been granted.
On the same date the Court of Appeal quashed the sentence of the Pavlograd Court as unduly lenient, taking into account the seriousness of the offence and the applicant’s personality. It also found that the trial court had misinterpreted the law regulating the calculation of sentences with regard to the time served in prison in Russia. In particular, it had failed to take into account the fact that Ukraine had made a reservation to the Protocol to the Minsk Convention on Legal Assistance and Legal Relations in Civil, Family and Criminal Matters 1993 concerning the effect given to sentences rendered in other States Parties to the Protocol. Accordingly, the Court of Appeal sentenced the applicant to twelve years’ imprisonment to be calculated from 16 January 2005, the date of his arrest in Ukraine.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law, arguing that he was in fact innocent. He alleged that at the trial he had initially denied his guilt and pointed out what he believed to be gaps and inconsistencies in the prosecution’s case. However, he had then pleaded guilty because of pressure from the trial judge and because he had wished to be released sooner and had no funds to pay for a lawyer. No prosecutor had been present at his trial and in these circumstances he had not been convinced of the judge’s impartiality or that there had been a fair examination of evidence. When the judge had assured him that he would receive a lenient sentence if he pleaded guilty, he had followed the judge’s instructions. The applicant also alleged that the Court of Appeal had erred in failing to take into account the time he had served in prison in Russia.
On 30 August 2005 the Supreme Court rejected the applicant’s appeal and found that, taking due account of the adequacy of the written evidence collected by the prosecution, the applicant’s conviction had a sufficient factual and evidentiary basis. It furthermore found that the Court of Appeal had been correct in its calculation of the applicant’s prison term from 16 January 2005, but reduced the sentence to nine years.
On 10 March 2009, at the request of the prosecutors’ office, the Court of Appeal ordered that the term of the applicant’s imprisonment be calculated from 1 June 2004 (the date of the decision to remand him in custody pending consideration of the extradition request).
On 30 September 2011 the applicant was released.
The relevant provisions of Articles 59 and 63 of the Constitution of Ukraine concerning the right to legal assistance and the right not to incriminate oneself can be found in the judgment of 19 February 2009 in the case of Shabelnik v. Ukraine (no. 16404/03, § 25, 19 February 2009).
Article 142 § 3 of the Code which was in force on the date of the offence provided that violent burglary was punishable by imprisonment for a period of between six and fifteen years, with confiscation of property.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure as worded at the material time read as follows:
“Any suspect, accused or defendant may at any stage of the proceedings waive his or her right to counsel. Such a waiver is permissible only on the suspect’s, accused’s or defendant’s initiative and shall not deprive him or her of the right to seek the services of the same or another counsel at a later stage of the proceedings.
...”
“A defence counsel shall be engaged by the suspect, accused, defendant or convicted person or by their representatives with their consent. The officer conducting the inquiry, the investigator and the court shall facilitate contact between the arrested or detained person and a defence counsel or with persons who can engage one.
...
A defence representative shall be appointed [by the officer conducting the inquiry, the investigator or the court] in the event:
...
(2)  that ... the defendant wishes to engage a defence representative but, lacking funds or due to other objective circumstances, is unable to do so.
...”
“...
The court may, if the parties to the trial have no objection, find that the examination of evidence is unnecessary in respect of circumstances of the case... In so doing, the court shall ascertain that the defendant and other parties to the trial correctly understand the substance of those circumstances, that there are no doubts regarding the voluntary and true nature of their position, and explain to them that in such a case they will waive the right to challenge, by means of appeal, these circumstances and the amount claimed.
...
Unless the defendant refuses to testify, his/her questioning is obligatory.”