The case originated in an application (no. 48101/07) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Zvonko Vusić (“the applicant”), on 14 September 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mrs B. Čamovski, an advocate practising in Varaždin. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs Š. Stažnik.
On 3 September 2008 the President of the First Section decided to communicate the complaint concerning the right to a fair hearing to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1962 and lives in Varaždin.
On 30 March 1988 the applicant brought a civil action in the Varaždin Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Varaždinu) against a certain J.V., seeking to recover possession of a house in Varaždin, claiming that the house had been donated to him. In his statement of claim (tužba) he indicated 1,000,000 former Yugoslav dinars (YUD) as the value of the subject matter of the dispute.
In his submission to the court of 1 March 2001 the applicant indicated that the value of the subject matter of the dispute was 101,000 Croatian kunas (HRK) and explained that he had adjusted the value in line with inflation, the change of currency (see paragraphs 20-22 below) and the increase of his claim.
On 25 September 2001 the applicant amended his claim, seeking also to register ownership of the house in his name in the land register.
On 5 July 2002 the Municipal Court ruled against the applicant. On 26 November 2002 the  (Županijski sud u Varaždinu) dismissed an appeal (žalba protiv presude) by the applicant and upheld the first-instance judgment.
On 6 March 2003 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law (revizija protiv presude) against the second-instance judgment. On 26 March 2003 the Varaždin Municipal Court declared his appeal on points of law inadmissible ratione valoris because it considered that the value of the subject matter of the dispute was below the statutory threshold of HRK 100,000. It found that the value of the subject matter of the dispute indicated by the applicant in his statement of claim had been YUD 1,000,000, which, when converted into kunas, was HRK 1 (one kuna).
The applicant appealed against that decision (žalba protiv rješenja), arguing, inter alia, that in his submission of 1 March 2001 he had adjusted the value of the subject matter of the dispute and that the new value exceeded the statutory threshold of HRK 100,000. On 20 May 2003 the  dismissed his appeal. It held that, pursuant to the Civil Procedure Act, the relevant value of the subject matter of the dispute was the one indicated by the plaintiff in the statement of claim and that subsequent changes were of no relevance. It also corrected the calculation of the first-instance court, stating that, when converted into kunas, the value of the subject matter of the dispute which the applicant had indicated in his statement of claim in fact amounted to only HRK 0.10 (ten lipas).
The applicant then lodged with the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske) a procedural appeal on points of law (revizija protiv rješenja) against that decision. On 25 February 2004 the Supreme Court, sitting as a panel composed of judges B.G., V.P.R., I.M., P.M. and G.G., quashed the lower-instances' decisions of 26 March and 20 May 2003. It held that, while it was true that the relevant value of the subject matter of a dispute was the one indicated by the plaintiff in the statement of claim, that rule did not apply if the plaintiff subsequently amended his or her claim. Because, in the present case, the applicant did amend his claim in his submission of 25 September 2001, in which he also demanded costs corresponding to the new value of the subject matter of the dispute indicated in his previous submission of 1 March 2001, the Supreme Court concluded that the applicant's appeal on points of law of 6 March 2003 was admissible. The Supreme Court returned the case to the first-instance court in order to serve the applicant's appeal on points of law of 6 March 2003 to the respondent party for reply (section 390(1) of the Civil Procedure Act). The relevant part of the Supreme Court's decision read as follows:
“I  The plaintiff's appeal on points of law is well founded. Therefore, the decision of the , no. Gž-569/03 of 20 May 2003 and the decision of the Varaždin Municipal Court, no. P-274/92 of 26 March 2003 are hereby quashed and the case is remitted to the first-instance court for fresh proceedings.
II  The costs of the proceedings [incurred] in respect of this appeal on points of law shall be decided in a final decision.
Reasons
...
The appeal on points of law is well-founded.
...
A decision on whether the appeal on points of law is well-founded depends on the resolution of the procedural question which value of the subject matter of the dispute is relevant.
Section 40(2) of the Civil Procedure Act provides that when an action does not concern a sum of money, the relevant value shall be the value of the subject matter of the dispute indicated by the plaintiff in the statement of claim.
Once the value of the subject matter of the dispute has been indicated in this way, the plaintiff is not allowed to change it in the subsequent course of the proceedings, except in a case in which the action has been amended, in which case instead of the value of the subject matter of the dispute indicated in the statement of claim, [the plaintiff] is authorised to indicate a new value of the subject matter of the dispute.
In the case at issue, the following facts are important for determining the relevant value of the subject matter of the dispute and the admissibility of the appeal on points of law:
By the action of 13 May 1998 the plaintiff sought that a certain immovable property be handed over into his possession, and indicated 1,000,000 [former Yugoslav] dinars as the value of the subject matter of the dispute, [the amount of] which today equals 0,10 [Croatian] kunas;
In the submission of 1 March 2001 the plaintiff indicated a new value of the subject matter of the dispute in the amount of 101,000 [Croatian] kunas;
By the submission of 25 September 2001 the plaintiff amended the action by adding to the existing claim that a certain immovable property be handed over into his possession the claim for issuance of the permission to register the property (clausula intabulandi), in order to record the ownership of that immovable property in the land register. In that submission, he specified the claim for costs of the proceedings in accordance with the value of the subject matter of the dispute of 101,000 [Croatian] kunas.
Having regard to such a procedural situation in respect of the value of the subject matter of the dispute, this court finds that in the case at issue the amount of 101,000 [Croatian] kunas has to be considered as the relevant value of the subject matter of the dispute, [that is,] the amount the plaintiff indicated in his submission of 1 March 2001 which [submission] preceded the amendment of the action. This is so because in the instant case it cannot be argued that the plaintiff has agreed that, even after the amendment of the action, the relevant value of the subject matter of the dispute should remain the one indicated in the statement of claim.
Namely, from the circumstances of the present case it may be rightly concluded that in his submission of 25 September 2001 the plaintiff failed to indicate the value of the subject matter of the dispute in the amount of 101,000 [Croatian] kunas, considering that he had already done so in the submission of 1 March 2001. This is especially so if one takes into account the fact that in the submission of 25 September 2001 he specified his claim for costs of the proceedings in accordance with the newly indicated value of the subject matter of the dispute.
Finding for these reasons that the value of the subject matter of the dispute of 101,000 [Croatian] kunas is [the] relevant [value] for determining the admissibility of the appeal on points of law, it cannot but be concluded, in accordance with section 382(3) of the Civil Procedure Act and section 10(3) of the 1999 Amendments to the Civil Procedure Act, that the appeal on points of law is admissible.
For these reasons the first and the second-instance decisions had to be quashed pursuant to section 394(1) taken in conjunction with section 400 of the Civil Procedure Act, and the case remitted to the first-instance court for fresh proceedings so that it can proceed with the appeal on points of law in accordance with section 390 of the Civil Procedure Act.”
In the resumed proceedings, the Varaždin Municipal Court, in discharging its duties under section 390(3) of the Civil Procedure Act, forwarded the case file to the Supreme Court for a decision on the applicant's appeal on points of law of 6 March 2003.
On 23 February 2005 the Supreme Court, sitting as a panel composed of judges P.M., I.M., V.P.R., G.G. and B.H., declared the applicant's appeal on points of law of 6 March 2003 inadmissible ratione valoris, finding that the value of the subject matter of the dispute was below the statutory threshold of HRK 100,000. This time the court held that the relevant value of the subject matter of the dispute was the one indicated by the plaintiff in the statement of claim and that, in the present case, that value was YUD 1,000,000, which, when converted into kunas, amounted to HRK 0.10. The relevant part of the Supreme Court's decision reads as follows:
“The plaintiff's appeal on points of law against the judgment of the Varaždin County Court, no. Gž-1046/02 of 26 November 2002 is hereby declared inadmissible.
Reasons
...
The appeal on points of law is inadmissible.
Pursuant to section 382(2) of the Civil Procedure Act, an appeal on points of law is inadmissible in pecuniary disputes where ... the value of the subject matter of the dispute of the contested part of the final judgment does not exceed 100,000 [Croatian] kunas.
Pursuant to section 40(2) of the Civil Procedure Act, in a case where an action does not concern a sum of money, the relevant value shall be the value of the subject matter of the dispute indicated by the plaintiff in the statement of claim.
Pursuant to section 10(3) of the 1999 Amendments to the Civil Procedure Act, this provision applies to all proceedings in which a final decision of a second-instance court was rendered after the entry into force of the 1999 Amendments, [that is, after] 6 November 1999.
The case at issue concerns a pecuniary dispute where the claim is directed at the handover of (immovable) property, issuance of a land register document, so that, in accordance with the cited legislation, the relevant value of the subject matter of the dispute is the one indicated by the plaintiff in the statement of claim.
The value of the subject matter of the dispute indicated in the statement of claim is 1,000,000 [former Yugoslav] dinars, [the amount of] which after the denomination equals 0,1 [Croatian] kunas.
Given that the second-instance judgment of the , no. Gž-1046/02 was rendered on 26 November 2002, it follows that the appeal on points of law is inadmissible.”
On 3 October 2005 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint against that Supreme Court decision of 23 February 2005, alleging a violation of his constitutional right to a fair hearing by pointing out the discrepancy between that decision and the one of 25 February 2004. On 8 February 2007 the  (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske) dismissed the applicant's complaint and, on 15 March 2007, served its decision on his representative. It took note of the applicant's argument concerning conflicting decisions of the Supreme Court, but held that the contested decision was in line with the relevant provisions of the Civil Procedure Act and that the proceedings before the ordinary courts had not been contrary to his constitutional right to a fair hearing.
The relevant part of the 1999 Constitutional Act on the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Croatia (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia no. 99/1999 of 29 September 1999 – “the Constitutional Court Act”), as amended by the 2002 Amendments (Ustavni zakon o izmjenama i dopunama Ustavnog zakona o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia no. 29/2002 of 22 March 2002), which entered into force on 15 March 2002, reads as follows:
Section 62
“1. Anyone may lodge a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court if he or she deems that the decision of a state authority, local or regional self-government, or a legal person invested with public authority, on his or her rights or obligations, or as regards suspicion or accusation of a criminal offence, has violated his or her human rights or fundamental freedoms, or right to local or regional self-government, guaranteed by the Constitution (“constitutional right”)...
If another legal remedy is available in respect of the violation of the constitutional rights [complained of], the constitutional complaint may be lodged only after this remedy has been exhausted.
In matters in which an administrative action or, in civil and non-contentious proceedings, an appeal on points of law [revizija] are available, remedies shall be considered exhausted only after the decision on these legal remedies has been given.”
Section 63
“(1) The Constitutional Court shall examine a constitutional complaint whether or not all legal remedies have been exhausted if the competent court fails to decide a claim concerning the individual's rights and obligations or a criminal charge against him or her within a reasonable time ...
(2) If a constitutional complaint ... under paragraph 1 of this section is upheld, the  shall set a time-limit within which the competent court must decide the case on the merits...
(3) In a decision issued under paragraph 2 of this section, the  shall assess appropriate compensation for the applicant for the violation of his or her constitutional rights ... The compensation shall be paid out of the State budget within three months from the date a request for payment is lodged.”
The relevant part of the Civil Procedure Act (Zakon o parničnom postupku, Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia nos. 4/1977, 36/1977 (corrigendum), 36/1980, 69/1982, 58/1984, 74/1987, 57/1989, 20/1990, 27/1990 and 35/1991, and Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia nos. 53/1991, 91/1992, 58/1993, 112/1999, 88/2001, 117/2003, 88/2005, 2/2007, 84/2008 and 123/2008), as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
C h a p t e r t w o
JURISDICTION AND COMPOSITION OF THE COURT
S u b j e c t m a t t e r j u r i s d i c t i o n
Determining the value of the subject matter of the dispute
Section 40
“(2) ... when an action does not concern a sum of money, the relevant value shall be the value of the subject matter of the dispute indicated by the plaintiff in the statement of claim (u tužbi).
(3) If, in the case referred to in paragraph 2 of this section, it is obvious that the value of the subject matter of the dispute indicated by the plaintiff is too high or too low, so that the question of ... the right to lodge an appeal on points of law arises, the court shall, at the latest at the preparatory hearing or, if no preparatory hearing was held, at the main hearing before the examination of the merits, quickly and in an appropriate manner verify the accuracy of the indicated value.
C h a p t e r f o u r t e e n
ACTION
Content of an action
Section 186 (2)
“When the jurisdiction of the court or its composition, or the right to lodge an appeal on points of law, depends on the value of the subject matter of the dispute, and the object of an action is not the sum of money, the plaintiff shall in the statement of claim (u tužbi) indicate the value of the subject matter of the dispute.”
C h a p t e r t w e n t y t h r e e
JUDGMENT
Res judicata
Section 334
“(1) The court shall be bound by its judgment (presuda) as soon as it has been pronounced, and if the judgment has not been pronounced, as soon as it has been dispatched.
(2) A judgment shall not take effect on the parties until the day it is served on them.”
C h a p t e r t w e n t y f o u r
[PROCEDURAL] DECISION
Section 343 (3) and (4)
“(3) The court shall be bound by its [procedural] decisions (rješenja) unless they concern the conduct of the proceedings or this Act provides otherwise.
 (4) When a [procedural] decision is not going to be served in writing, it shall take effect on the parties as soon as it has been pronounced.”
Section 347
“Provisions of .... section 334 paragraph 2 ... of this Act shall also apply, mutatis mutandis, to [procedural] decisions (rješenja).
C h a p t e r t w e n t y s i x
	EXTRAORDINARY REMEDIES
Appeal on points of law
Section 382(1) provides that the parties may lodge an appeal on points of law (revizija protiv presude) against the second-instance judgment if the value of the subject matter of the dispute of the contested part of the judgment exceeds a certain amount of money (statutory threshold). The statutory threshold in civil (that is, non-commercial) cases was changed as follows:
Section 388
“An appeal on points of law (revizija protiv presude) shall be lodged with the court which gave the first-instance judgment ....”
Section 389
“A belated, incomplete or [otherwise] inadmissible appeal on points of law (revizija protiv presude), shall be declared inadmissible by a decision of a single judge or the president of a panel, without holding a hearing.”
Section 390(1) and (3)
“(1) A single judge or the president of a panel of the first-instance court shall forward a copy of a timely, complete and admissible appeal on points of law to the opposing party, who may, within fifteen days of the service of the appeal on points of law, submit a reply to the appeal on points of law to the same court.
(3) After having received the reply to the appeal on points of law or after the expiry of the time-limit for replying to the appeal on points of law, a single judge or the president of a panel of the first-instance court shall forward directly to [the Supreme Court] the appeal on points of law and the reply to the appeal on points of law, if submitted, together with the case file.”
Section 400 (3)
“A [procedural] appeal on points of law (revizija protiv rješenja) shall always lie against the decision of the second-instance court upholding the decision of the first-instance court declaring the appeal on points of law inadmissible (revizija protiv presude).”
a.  Reopening of proceedings following a final judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in  finding a violation of a fundamental human right or freedom
Section 428a
“(1) When the European Court of Human Rights has found a violation of a human right or fundamental freedom guaranteed by the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms or additional protocols thereto ratified by the Republic of Croatia, a party may, within thirty days of the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights becoming final, file a petition with the court in the Republic of Croatia which adjudicated in the first instance in the proceedings in which the decision violating the human right or fundamental freedom was rendered, to set aside the decision by which the human right or fundamental freedom was violated.
(2) The proceedings referred to in paragraph 1 of this section shall be conducted by applying, mutatis mutandis, the provisions on the reopening of proceedings.
(3) In the reopened proceedings the courts are required to respect the legal opinions expressed in the final judgment of the European Court of Human Rights finding a violation of a fundamental human right or freedom.”
In its case no. Rev 885-05-2 of 9 November 2005 the Supreme Court held that the plaintiff was not authorised to subsequently change the value of the subject matter of the dispute indicated in his statement of claim unless he also amended the action (by increasing, supplementing or replacing the initial claim).
“The court is in principle bound by its decisions rendered in the course of the proceedings. The court cannot itself alter its own binding decision because this can be done only by the court competent to decide on legal remedies against that decision. ...
The court is always bound by decisions rendered in the form of a judgment. If a judgment is to be pronounced, the court is bound by it as soon as it has been pronounced, and if the judgment is not to be pronounced, as soon as it has been dispatched.
The court is bound by decisions rendered in the form of a [procedural] decision unless they concern the conduct of the proceedings or the law provides otherwise.
The court may re-examine and decide again issues decided by a non-binding [procedural] decision whenever the need to do so arises.”
The 1999 Amendments to the Civil Procedure Act
The Act on the Change of the Value of the Dinar (Zakon o promjeni vrijednosti dinara, Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia no. 83/89), which entered into force on 1 January 1990, established the new value of the Yugoslav dinar (YUD) so that one new dinar corresponded to 10,000 old dinars.
By the Decision on the Introduction of the Croatian Dinar as the Currency on the Territory of the Republic of Croatia (Odluka o uvođenju hrvatskog dinara kao sredstva plaćanja na teritoriju Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia no. 71/1991), which entered into force on 23 December 1991, the Republic of Croatia introduced its own currency, the Croatian dinar (HRD). The Yugoslav dinar (YUD) was replaced by the Croatian dinar at an exchange rate of YUD 1 to HRD 1.
On 13 May 1994 the Decision on the Termination of the Validity of the Decision on the Introduction of the Croatian Dinar as the Currency on the Territory of the Republic of Croatia and on the Manner and Time of Calculation of Sums Expressed in Croatian Dinars into Kunas and Lipas (Odluka o prestanku važenja Odluke o uvođenju hrvatskog dinara kao sredstva plaćanja na teritoriju Republike Hrvatske, te o načinu i vremenu preračunavanja iznosa izraženih u hrvatskim dinarima u kune i lipe, Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia no. 37/1994) entered into force, introducing the Croatian kuna (HRK) as the currency of the Republic of Croatia. It provided that the Croatian dinar should be replaced by the Croatian kuna at an exchange rate of 1,000 dinars to one kuna.
In decision no. U-III-2646/2007 of 18 June 2008 (Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia no. 104/2008 of 12 September 2008), in a case where the plaintiff, who had brought his action in 1978, had sought payment of 48,600 German marks, the Constitutional Court found violations of the complainant's constitutional rights to equality before the courts and to a fair hearing and quashed the Supreme Court's decision declaring the appeal on points of law inadmissible ratione valoris. The  held, inter alia:
“When the civil proceedings for payment of a relatively high amount of foreign currency have lasted thirty years, and the value of the subject matter of the dispute in [those proceedings] (which had at the time the action was brought greatly exceeded the amount prescribed for admissibility of an appeal on points of law) is being determined according to the nominal amount of the domestic currency (which had become worthless due to denomination) and not according to the real value of the amount sought, then such a long lapse of time always benefits one party. The outcome in its favour is due solely to the protracted nature of the proceedings, which upsets the other party's equal status before the law.”
In decision no. U-III-4361/2008 of 10 June 2009 (Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia no. 87/2009 of 21 July 2009) in a similar case, the  confirmed the above jurisprudence.