The case originated in an application (no. 13898/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Macedonian national, Mr Trajko Dumanovski (“the applicant”), on 27 February 2002.
The Macedonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs R.Lazareska-Gerovska.
On 10 March 2004 the Court decided to communicate the complaint concerning the length of the proceedings. Applying Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time.
The applicant was born in 1944 and lives in Kumanovo.
On 4 August 1995 the Kumanovo Employment Bureau (“the Bureau”) (Републичкиот завод за вработување - Биро за вработување Куманово) granted the applicant, who had been laid off, a monthly unemployment compensation, the amount of which equalled the minimum salary reduced by 20%.
6  On 28 August 1995 the applicant appealed the decision before the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy (“the Ministry”) (Министерство за труд и социјална политика), alleging that his compensation had been miscalculated. He claimed that the amount of compensation should be based on the average of his last three monthly salaries reduced by 50%.
As the Ministry remained inactive, the applicant instituted administrative contentious proceedings before the Supreme Court (Врховен суд на Република Македонија).
On 24 April 1997 the Supreme Court rejected his appeal as he had failed to re-introduce his complaint with the Ministry before instituting the administrative contentious proceedings.
On 21 July 1997 the applicant re-introduced his complaint with the Ministry.
On 27 August 1997 the Bureau, which transmits administrative complaints to the Ministry, rejected his complaint finding that he had already appealed the first-instance decision and that the Supreme Court’s decision of 24 April 1997 had not provided instructions for further remedies.
On 15 December 1997 the applicant filed a new appeal with the Supreme Court, complaining about the Ministry’s inactivity and the rejection of his prior complaint. The Ministry did not reply to the applicant’s pleadings nor did it provide the Supreme Court with the requested documents.
On 28 April 1999 the Supreme Court granted the applicant’s appeal and ordered the Ministry to decide upon his complaint of 28 August 1995 within 30 days from the serving of its decision. The Supreme Court also held that the Bureau had unjustifiably rejected the applicant’s appeal instead of transmitting it to the Ministry for consideration.
As the Ministry remained inactive, the applicant took another action before the Supreme Court to decide on the merits.
On 6 October 1999 the Supreme Court annulled the Bureau’s decision from 1995 and remitted the case for re-examination.
On 26 November 1999 the Bureau dismissed the applicant’s claims.
On 2 December 1999 the applicant appealed to the Ministry.
As it remained inactive, on 7 February 2000 the applicant re-introduced his claim before the Ministry.
It appears that the applicant instituted administrative contentious proceedings before the Supreme Court on account of the inactivity of the Ministry.
In the meantime, on an unspecified date prior to 15 August 2000, the Ministry upheld the Bureau’s decision of 26 November 1999. This decision was allegedly served on the applicant on 18 August 2000.
On 27 June 2001 the Supreme Court upheld the Ministry’s decision, finding that the applicant’s unemployment benefit had been calculated in accordance with the law.
The decision was served on the applicant on 17 September 2001.
The relevant provisions of the Law on Administrative Disputes (Закон за управните спорови), provide as follows:
Section 7, paragraph 1, provides that administrative contentious proceedings can be initiated [before the Supreme Court] against an administrative decision adopted by a second instance administrative body.
Section 26, paragraph 1, provides that if the second instance administrative body does not decide within 60 days (or in a shorter period, should that be provided by a special regulation) upon an appeal lodged against the first-instance administrative decision, and still does not do so within the following seven days after the appeal has been re-introduced, the party concerned can initiate administrative contentious proceedings [before the Supreme Court] as if the appeal had been rejected.
Section 42, paragraph 1, provides that the [Supreme] Court shall settle the dispute by a judgment.
Section 42, paragraph 2, provides that a complaint may be upheld or dismissed as ill-founded. If the complaint is upheld, the Court shall annul the disputed administrative act.
Section 42, paragraph 3, provides that if the Court finds that the disputed administrative act should be annulled and the very nature of the subject-matter at issue and the factual information available are sufficient to allow the Court to reach a final decision on its own, the Court can settle the administrative dispute by a judgment. Such a judgment shall replace the disputed act.
Paragraph 4 of Section 42 prescribes that in case of sufficient information, the Court by the decision to annul the disputed administrative act, shall also decide upon the complainant’s request to refer the case back for re-examination or for damages. Otherwise, the Court shall instruct the complainant to pursue his claim in civil proceedings.
Paragraph 5 of Section 42 provides that if a complaint is lodged under Section 26 of this law, and if the Court finds it well-founded, the Court shall uphold the complaint by a judgment and provide the relevant administrative body with instructions.
Section 62 provides that when the Court sets aside an administrative decision against which administrative contentious proceedings were instituted, the matter shall be restored to the state of affairs that existed prior to that decision. If the very nature of the subject-matter at issue in these proceedings requires a new decision to be made to replace the decision which has been set aside, the administrative body shall render such a decision without delay or within 30 days of the delivery of the judgment at the latest. The administrative body is thus bound by the legal reasoning of the Court and its instructions in respect of the proceedings.
Section 63 governs situations where the administrative body, whose decision has been set aside, renders a decision contrary to the legal reasoning of the Court or to the instructions given by the Court in respect of the proceedings. If the party concerned lodges a further complaint, the Court shall quash the challenged decision and shall resolve the subject-matter itself by rendering a judgment to that effect. Such a judgment shall replace the decision of the relevant administrative body. The Court shall notify the relevant supervisory body accordingly.
Section 64 provides that if the administrative body whose decision was set aside does not give promptly or within 30 days a new administrative decision or a decision by which the Court judgment is to be enforced, the party concerned may request such a decision in his or her submission before it. If the administrative body remains inactive for seven days from the date of receipt of the party’s submission, it may apply to the Court that delivered judgment at first instance.
Paragraph 2 of Section 64 imposes an obligation on the Court to demand an explanation of the reasons why the administrative body remained silent. The relevant administrative body is required to furnish the Court with its justification within seven days. If no explanation whatever is provided, or if, in the Court’s opinion, the reasons provided do not justify non-enforcement of the judgment, the Court shall render a decision entirely replacing the decision of the administrative body.