The case concerns legislative amendments removing the applicant’s usufruct lease rights over agricultural land. The applicant relied on Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
The applicant is a Hungarian joint stock company seated in Szajk. It was represented by Mr A. Cech, a lawyer practising in Budapest.
The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Z. Tallódi, of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
Between 2004 and 2012, the applicant acquired usufruct lease rights (haszonbérlet) over Hungarian agricultural lands by concluding contracts with the usufruct holders (haszonélvező). Under these contracts, the applicant was entitled to use the agricultural lands for long periods of time.
The rights were formally registered in the land register.
Up until 31 December 2001, domestic natural and legal persons, as well as foreign natural and legal persons, were able to contract usufruct rights on agricultural land without any legal limitation. After this date, no foreign person could establish such rights over agricultural lands in Hungary. According to the Government, this legislative change resulted in an increase in the number of concealed contracts by means of which foreign natural and legal persons obtained usufruct rights in Hungary. As of 1 January 2013, new contracts between domestic natural persons for the pro futuro establishment of usufruct rights over agricultural lands were statutorily declared null and void by the implementation of an amendment contained in section 7 of Act no. CCXIII of 2012 on the Amendment of Certain Acts on Agriculture with the exception of those concluded by and between close relatives.
With a view to terminating these usufruct rights over agricultural lands obtained through concealed contracts, Parliament enacted Act no. CCXII of 2013 on Certain Provisions and Transitional Rules related to Act no. CXXII of 2013 on Transactions in Agricultural and Forestry Land (hereafter “the Transition Act”) which was promulgated on 12 December 2013 and came into effect on 14 December 2013.
Section 108 of the Transition Act terminated ipso iure all usufruct rights over agricultural lands as of 1 May 2014, except for rights established between close relatives (subsection (1)), as well as any related usufruct lease rights, as of 1 September 2014 (subsection (3)).
Deregistration of the rights concerned was implemented under the then effective rules of Act no. CXLI of 1997 on the Land Registry (hereafter “the Land Registry Act”). Section 94 of the Land Registry Act obliged the authority to request a declaration from natural persons affected by the measures in order to verify whether they were close relatives of the owner of the land. The usufruct rights were struck out of the land register as a matter of course in cases where the affected natural persons failed to submit a declaration demonstrating close relationship with the owner of the land or where the usufruct right holder was a legal person.
The usufruct rights of the applicant’s contractual partners were struck out of the land register by decisions of declarative effect given by the competent administrative authorities in accordance with the Transition Act, because they were not close relatives of the landowners.
The applicant’s deriving usufruct lease rights ceased to exist ex lege on 1 September 2014; and were progressively deregistered between 29 October 2014 and 15 April 2015.
Meanwhile, in February 2014 constitutional complaints were lodged by various complainants with the Constitutional Court against the provisions of the Transition Act, arguing that the ex lege termination of lawfully acquired usufruct rights without any indemnification or transitory period violated the constitutional protection of property rights.
The Constitutional Court analysed the alleged unconstitutionality of section 108 of the Transition Act. On 21 July 2015 it found, in decision no. 25/2015. (VII.21.) AB, that the legislator had failed to enact extraordinary rules to compensate the contracting parties for the financial disadvantages deriving from the ex lege termination of the usufruct and use contracts regulated by the Transition Act. It emphasised that, given the diversity of the concerned legal relationships, the general settlement rules applicable under civil law were not capable of resolving all possible claims between the parties concerned. Therefore, as a result of the failure of the legislator to enact a statutory settlement regime, an unconstitutional omission was found. The Constitutional Court called the legislator to put an end to it by 1 December 2015 at the latest.
At the date of the latest information available to the Court provided by the applicant on 14 June 2019, the Government had not yet created the compensation scheme prescribed by the Constitutional Court.
The relevant legal framework is outlined in C.A. Zrt and T.R. v. Hungary ([Committee], nos. 11599/14 and 11602/14 (joined), § 14, 1 September 2020).