The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission") on 12 November 1990, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 para. 1 and Article 47 (art. 32-1, art. 47) of the Convention. It originated in an application (no. 12843/87) against the Kingdom of the  lodged with the Commission under Article 25 (art. 25) by a  national, Mr Jacobus Petrus Koster, on 31 March 1987.
The Commission’s request referred to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48) and to the declaration whereby the  recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46) (art. 46). The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 5 para. 3 (art. 5-3).
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 para. 3 (d) of the Rules of Court, the applicant stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings and designated the lawyer who would represent him (Rule 30).
The Chamber to be constituted included ex officio Mr S.K. Martens, the elected judge of Netherlands nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr R. Ryssdal, the President of the Court (Rule 21 para. 3 (b)). On 22 November 1990, in the presence of the Registrar, the President drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr Thór Vilhjálmsson, Mrs D. Bindschedler-Robert, Mr F. Gölcüklü, Mr L.-E. Pettiti, Mr J. De Meyer, Mrs E. Palm and Mr A.N. Loizou (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 para. 4) (art. 43).
Mr Ryssdal assumed the office of President of the Chamber (Rule 21 para. 5) and, through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Netherlands Government ("the Government"), the Delegate of the Commission and the applicant’s representative on the need for a written procedure (Rule 37 para. 1).
On 5 and 10 April 1991 Mr Koster’s lawyer and then the Government informed the Registrar that they would not be submitting memorials. On 4 July the Registrar received the applicant’s claims under Article 50 (art. 50) of the Convention.
On 22 August the Commission communicated to the Registrar various documents which he had requested from it on the instructions of the Court.
Having consulted, through the Registrar, those who would be appearing before the Court, the President had directed on 11 February 1991 that the oral proceedings should open on 23 September (Rule 38).
The hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, , on the appointed day; Mr Ryssdal, who was unable to attend, was replaced as President by Mr J. Cremona, the Vice President of the Court (Rule 21 para. 5, second sub-paragraph). The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:
- for the Government
- for the Commission
- for the applicant
The Court heard addresses by Mr de Vey Mestdagh for the Government, by Mr Schermers for the Commission and by Mr Hummels for the applicant.
Mr Jacobus Koster, a  national, currently resides at  ().
On 11 March 1987, while completing his compulsory military service, despite being warned he repeatedly refused to obey an order that he should take receipt of a weapon and a uniform.
Accordingly he was arrested on the same day at 3.45 p.m. and then kept in custody, the measure being confirmed by the officer commanding his unit at 4.30 p.m. He was questioned by the military police (Koninklijke marechaussee) at 7 p.m.
On Friday 13 March the applicant, assisted by a lawyer appointed to act for him, appeared before the investigating officer (officier-commissaris) assigned to the case.
Before the , which sat in private on Monday 16 March, Mr Koster’s lawyer pleaded that the length of his detention had exceeded the four-day limit which, he argued, derived from Article 5 para. 3 (art. 5-3) of the Convention. He added that the  did not have the necessary independence and impartiality to rule on questions of this nature.
However, the  confirmed the earlier detention and extended it by thirty days, in order, so it stated, to maintain military discipline. In its opinion, Article 5 para. 3 (art. 5-3) did not lay down specific time-limits. The court had moreover sat as soon as possible, regard being had to the fact that its military members had been participating in two-yearly major manoeuvres at the time; moreover, the fourth day following the arrest had been a Sunday. In addition, the European Commission had recognised, in its opinion on the applications in the cases of van der Sluijs (no. 9362/81), Zuiderveld (no. 9363/81) and Klappe (no. 9387/81), that the Military Courts were competent to rule on such questions.
On 9 September 1987 the Supreme Military Court sentenced the applicant to a term of one year’s imprisonment, from which was deducted the time which he had already spent in detention.
At the material time, criminal procedure for army and air force personnel, including in particular the matter of arrest and detention on remand, was governed by the Army and Air Force Code of Procedure (Rechtspleging bij de Land- en Luchtmacht - "the Military Code"), as last amended on 24 November 1978. It was repealed with effect from 1 January 1991.
Every officer and non-commissioned officer was empowered to arrest military personnel of lower rank suspected of a serious offence, provided the circumstances required immediate deprivation of liberty (Article 4 of the Military Code). The resulting detention was not to exceed twenty-four hours, unless it was extended by the commanding officer in accordance with Article 7 (Article 5).
The commanding officer had to deal with the matter without delay. He could order that the suspect be placed or kept in detention on remand, in particular if this proved necessary to maintain military discipline. He was to report to the commanding General any cases of detention exceeding four days (Article 7, first, second and sixth paragraphs).
The General ordered that the accused be brought for trial before the , if this was necessary (Article 11, first paragraph). That order was to be formulated in writing and indicate whether or not it was appropriate to release the accused, the grounds for keeping him in custody laid down in Article 7 being applicable by analogy (Article 14, first and second paragraphs).
Detention ordered or continued in the decision referring the serviceman for trial was not to exceed fourteen days unless extended, by terms of thirty days, by the  at the request of the auditeur-militair (Article 31). Every accused detained under the referral decision had to be heard by the officier-commissaris as speedily as possible and in any event within four days of referral; for this purpose, he could be assisted by an adviser (Article 33, first paragraph). Before extending the detention, the  was to give the accused and his adviser the opportunity to put forward their views (Article 33, second paragraph).
A directive of 21 March 1983 governed the bringing before a judicial authority of military personnel in custody. It provided as follows:
"In accordance with Article 5 para. 3 (art. 5-3) of the European Convention on Human Rights, where a serviceman is placed in custody, care is to be taken to ensure that, within four days of his arrest, his case is brought before the Military Court, sitting in private, for confirmation or extension of the detention.
To this end, the following rules should be observed:
Every officer or non-commissioned officer who arrests a member of the military personnel suspected of an offence shall inform the officer commanding the serviceman’s unit as soon as possible.
If, after having questioned the accused, the officer commanding considers that the detention should be continued or extended, he shall inform the prosecuting officer (auditeur- militair/fiscaal) by telephone not later than two days after the arrest, either in person, or through a person delegated by him (for example the officer commanding the relevant detachment of military police).
If the accused appears before the auditeur-militair, the latter shall fix, with the officer commanding or in his name, the time and place so as to ensure that under normal circumstances, within four days of the arrest:
The different armed services shall adapt their regulations accordingly (VS27-1 and VVKM 142)."
By a ministerial decree of 19 December 1983 this directive had been incorporated in the Regulation on the application of military criminal and disciplinary law (Voorschrift Toepassing Militair straf- en tuchtrecht KL/Flu).
In his application of 31 March 1987 to the Commission (no. 12843/87), Mr Koster complained that he had not been brought "promptly" before the , as was required under Article 5 para. 3 (art. 5-3).
The Commission declared the application admissible on 6 September 1989. In its report of 3 September 1990 (Article 31) (art. 31), it expressed the unanimous opinion that there had been a violation of the above-mentioned provision. The full text of the Commission’s opinion is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.