The case originated in an application (no. 19886/09) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Georgian national, Mr Tamaz Kardava (“the applicant”), on 27 March 2009.
After the applicant’s death on 7 April 2010, his sister, Ms Manana Kardava, expressed her wish to pursue the application. She is represented before the Court by Mr O. Veremiyenko, a lawyer practising in Kyiv and Ms A. Mukanova, a lawyer practising in Kharkiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
The applicant complained under Article 3 of the Convention that he had been ill-treated by the police and that the authorities had failed to investigate the matter. He also complained under Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention that the authorities had failed to provide him with adequate medical assistance during his detention, placing his health and life in danger. On 30 August 2010 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The Georgian Government were informed of their right to intervene in the proceedings (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 of the Rules of Court). They did not provide any reply.
The applicant was a Georgian national who was born in Sokhumi in 1967 and lived in Kyiv from 1993 until his death on 7 April 2010.
On 7 August 2008 the applicant was arrested in Kyiv by the police on suspicion of robbery. Narcotic drugs were found on him. The applicant was taken to the Shevchenkivskyy District police station of Kyiv. The applicant’s arrest was documented under the Code of Administrative Offences, for a violation of the rules on the circulation of drugs, which constituted an administrative offence.
On 10 August 2008, under Article 115 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, an investigator decided to place the applicant in custody on suspicion of robbery and the possession of drugs.
On 12 August 2008 the Shevchenkivskyy District Court of Kyiv remanded the applicant in custody, in view of the ongoing criminal investigations against him. The court noted that the applicant had a criminal record and, having regard to the gravity of the alleged crimes, concluded that if he remained at liberty then he might seek to evade investigation and trial, which would obstruct the establishment of the truth in the case.
Subsequently, the Shevchenkivskyy District Court and the Kyiv Court of Appeal extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention.
On 27 July 2009 the applicant’s case was referred to the Shevchenkiskyy District Court for trial, along with the bill of indictment.
In October 2009 the applicant asked the court to release him from detention, mainly because of his health problems (see below). By a decision of 22 October 2009, the court refused the applicant’s application, finding that there was no evidence to conclude that he would not seek to evade investigation and trial or obstruct the establishment of the truth in the case.
In the course of a hearing on 30 March 2010 the applicant’s lawyer requested the applicant’s release for similar reasons. The application was refused by the court, on the same grounds as those stated in its decision of 22 October 2009. The court also stated that the lawyer’s reference to the applicant’s poor state of health did not constitute sufficient grounds for changing the preventive measure.
According to the applicant, in the course of his arrest on 7 August 2008 he was beaten by police officers. The beatings continued on the police premises. On 11 August 2008 the police officers beat the applicant on a number of occasions and abused him with the aim of obtaining a confession from him to the crimes of which he was suspected.
When the applicant was placed in police custody on 11 August 2008 a medical assistant noted that he had sustained haematomas on the right shoulder and left thigh, and that he had a closed injury on the chest.
From 14 August 2008 onwards the applicant, his family members and his lawyer submitted a number of complaints to the authorities, including the courts, prosecutors, and the Ombudsman, alleging that he had been ill-treated by the police and that his arrest and detention were unlawful.
On 15 August 2008 the applicant’s state of health deteriorated significantly and he was taken to a hospital, where he was examined by doctors who noted that he had a closed head injury, multiple blunt internal injuries, including contusion to the kidneys, and a broken rib. The applicant was also found to be suffering from chronic internal haemorrhoids, discirculatory encephalopathy and chronic persistent hepatitis C.
On 22 December 2008 forensic medical experts issued a report stating that, at the time of their assessment, the applicant had been suffering from discirculatory encephalopathy and chronic persistent hepatitis C; the other diagnoses had not been confirmed.
By decisions of 8 September and 9 December 2008, and 9 April, 8 October and 10 December 2009, the Shevchenkivskyy District prosecutor’s office, having conducted pre-investigation inquiries, refused to open criminal proceedings, finding that the applicant’s allegations of illtreatment by the police were unfounded.
Following an appeal by the applicant, the above-mentioned decisions were quashed by the higher prosecutors or by courts on the grounds that the inquiries had fallen short of the requirements of a full and objective examination of the circumstances of the case. In particular, on 30 March 2010 the Shevchenkivskyy District Court found that the experts’ report of 22 December 2008 had not included an analysis of the medical records on the applicant’s treatment between August and October 2008. It had been necessary to obtain and verify the relevant medical information concerning his injuries, and question the applicant and the doctors who had examined him.
On 24 June 2010, referring to the experts’ report of 22 December 2008, the Shevchenkivskyy District prosecutor’s office once again refused to open criminal proceedings regarding the alleged ill-treatment, considering that the available evidence did not indicate that police officers had been involved in any crime.
During his pre-trial detention the applicant was predominantly held in Kyiv pre-trial detention centre (“the SIZO”).
Between 15 August and 2 October 2008 the applicant was treated in a public hospital in relation to his physical injuries and illnesses. According to the hospital doctors, the treatment resulted in an improvement in his state of health, so much so that he could be discharged from hospital. However, the doctors recommended that the applicant continue inpatient treatment at a neurological centre.
On 21 January 2009 the applicant was examined by a neurologist in the SIZO, who noted that he was suffering from the after-effects of a head injury. On 16 April 2009 the applicant was examined by a chief SIZO doctor, who was of the opinion that the applicant had the remote effects of a head injury, chronic hepatitis C, and chronic gastroduodentitis. The doctors examining the applicant concluded that he was fit to remain in custody, and that he could obtain the necessary treatment in the SIZO.
By a letter of 22 October 2009, the SIZO governor informed the applicant’s lawyer that during his stay in the SIZO the applicant had made a number of requests for medical assistance, and following those requests he had been examined by a general practitioner, a neurologist, a cardiologist, and an ophthalmologist. According to their conclusions, the applicant was suffering from coronary heart disease, atherosclerotic cardiosclerosis, hypertension, circulatory deficiency, circulatory encephalopathy, the remote effects of a head injury, cervical osteochondrosis, myopia, chronic hepatitis C, and chronic gastritis.
On 25 November 2009 the applicant was placed in a medical unit of the SIZO because of the deterioration in his state of health, in particular because he had developed cirrhosis of the liver and portal hypertension. The SIZO doctors found no grounds for urgently hospitalising the applicant outside the SIZO, despite his requests in this regard. However, the doctors noted that such a measure might be “advisable”, noting that the applicant’s state of health continued to deteriorate.
On 8 February 2010 the applicant was taken by ambulance doctors to a hospital in Kyiv, where he was diagnosed with the active phase of cirrhosis of the liver, hepatocellular failure and hepatorenal syndrome, portal hypertension, ascites, splenomegaly, chronic pyelonephritis, chronic pancreatitis, chronic choletistitis, and symptomatic hypertension. The doctors prescribed the applicant a number of drugs, in view of his health problems.
On 1 March 2010 the applicant was transferred back to the SIZO medical unit, where, according to a letter from the SIZO governor of the same date, he was placed under “intense observation” by the medical staff. The applicant was given medication.
On 11 and 31 March 2010 the SIZO doctors suggested that the applicant be admitted to a hospital within Bucha Correctional Colony. The applicant refused, arguing that detainees in that hospital were placed in solitary confinement, and that the hospital did not have the facilities for the operation which he needed.
On 1 April 2010 an ambulance was called for the applicant and he was taken to Kyiv Emergency Hospital, where he remained until his death on 7 April 2010. According to an autopsy carried out by a pathologist on 8 April 2010, the applicant died of pulmonary heart disease, lower lobe pneumonia complicated by an abscess, splenomegaly, and cirrhosis of the liver.
On 28 October 2010, in reply to a complaint by the applicant’s sister, the Kyiv prosecutor’s office refused to open criminal proceedings in relation to the death of the applicant, finding that there were no elements of a crime.
On 28 March 2011 the Pecherskyy District Court quashed that decision as unfounded and ordered further inquiries.
On 25 April 2011 the Kyiv prosecutor’s office issued another decision refusing to open criminal proceedings in relation to the death of the applicant, finding that there were no elements of a crime.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of Ukraine, the Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure can be found, in particular, in the Court’s judgment in Nechiporuk and Yonkalo v. Ukraine (no. 42310/04, §§ 121, 131 and 134, with further references, 21 April 2011). The relevant provisions of the Code of Administrative Offences can be found in Nikolay Kucherenko v. Ukraine (no. 16447/04, §§ 19-21, 19 February 2009).