The case originated in an application (no. 19689/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Hungarian nationals, Mr and Mrs József Jánosi (“the applicants”), on 20 May 2005.
The applicants were represented by Mr A. Cech, a lawyer practising in . The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr L. Höltzl, Agent, Ministry of Justice and Law Enforcement.
The applicants alleged that their property rights had been violated in that they had been effectively deprived of the ownership of their real estate on the basis of a purported purchase contract. Moreover, they also alleged that they did not have an effective remedy available to them to enforce their rights under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention and that the proceedings had lasted an unreasonably long time.
On 19 November 2007 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicants were born in 1955 and 1958, respectively, and live in .
The applicants intended to set up an enterprise and started to raise funds in March 1994. They contacted a loan agency and signed a real estate sales contract with an individual concerning their detached house on 12 March 1994. Change of ownership was registered on the basis of this contract on 14 July 1995.
In August 1995 the applicants brought an action before the Szolnok District Court requesting the court to order restitutio in integrum by declaring the contract invalid. The fact of the existence of these proceedings (perfeljegyzés) was registered in the Land Registry. This case ceased after a six-month stay by mutual agreement of the parties. However, for unknown reasons, the registration of the proceedings was not deleted from the register until July 1998.
In June 1998 the real estate was sold to a third party. After the deletion of the registration of the civil proceedings described above from the land register, the new owner was entered in that register on 25 August 1998. On 21 September 1998, after having been informed about these events and having unsuccessfully attempted to settle the case otherwise, the applicants brought an action before the Szolnok District Court, identical to the previous one, together with claims about other loan contracts between the same parties.
On 4 March 2004, after holding a hearing in June 2002, the District Court dismissed the applicants’ action in part. It established that, although the contract was ostensible, restitutio in integrum was impossible since the applicants had failed to bring their action before the court in due time.
The District Court pointed out that the purchase contract evidently concealed a loan and was thus invalid. However, this could not have any effect on the acquisition by a third party, whose good faith had not been successfully challenged by the applicants. It relied on paragraph 31(2) of Law-Decree no. 31 of 1972 on the Land Registry which provided – in order to secure the legal certainty of the real estate market – that in such disputes, a third-party proprietor could not be deprived of his acquisition after sixty days of his date of entry in the register, provided that he had acted in good faith and the decision to make the entry in the register had been served on the former owner.
However, applying paragraph 237(2) of the Civil Code, the court restored the financial balance between the parties, taking into account the ostensible purchase contract and other loan contracts. All in all, it obliged the defendants to pay the applicants 8,082,214 Hungarian forints (HUF) (approximately 32,300 euros (EUR)) plus accrued interest, from which HUF 4,160,000 (approximately EUR 16,300) was to compensate for the loss of the property.
All the parties appealed. The  upheld the first-instance decision on 20 October 2004.
The  confirmed that restitutio in integrum was impossible in this case, although it gave different reasoning. It noted that the sixty-day deadline could not be applied since the decision to enter the third party’s acquisition in the register had not been served on the applicants. It also observed that, flowing from the above-mentioned provision of the Law-Decree, after three years no change could be made at all to this entry in the land register. It further stated that paragraph 63(2) of the new Act on the Land Registry (no. 141 of 1997) ruled the same way. The  saw no reason to depart from the remaining findings of the District Court, including the value of the real estate, which was not in dispute during the appellate proceedings.
The applicants lodged a petition for review with the Supreme Court. On 24 May 2005 the Supreme Court dismissed their petition.
Article 2
“(1) The Republic of  is an independent, democratic state based on the rule of law.”
Article 13
 “(1) The Republic of  secures the right to property.
(2) Property may be expropriated only exceptionally in cases prescribed by law in the public interest and for complete, unconditional and immediate compensation.”
Article 57
“(1) In the Republic of Hungary, everyone is equal before the courts and is entitled to have ... his rights and obligations determined by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law ....”
Section 207
“(6) An ostensible (színlelt) contract is invalid and if it covers another contract it should be adjudicated according to the concealed one.”
Section 234
“(1) Unless provided otherwise by the law, any person may refer to the invalidity of a contract which is null and void (semmis) without any time limit. (...)”
Section 237
 “(1) If a contract is invalid, the situation existing prior to its conclusion shall be restored.”
(2) If the situation existing prior the conclusion of the contract cannot be restored, the court shall declare the contract effective until the delivery of the judgment. ... In these cases it must decide concerning the reimbursement of such services as remained without counter-service.”
Section 31
“(2) An action for cancellation may be initiated within sixty days from the delivery of the enrolment [of the new right] against the person who, by virtue of the new enrolment and trusting the validity of the previous one, acquired the right in good faith and for counter-value, provided that the decision about the original invalid enrolment [to the land register] was delivered to the party suffering damages. If there was no such delivery, the action for cancellation may be brought within three years [from the enrolment].”
Section 5
“(5) A right enrolled or a fact recorded in favour of a third party acting in good faith based on an invalid document cannot be deleted from the land register after three years from the date authoritative to the rank of registration [of the right or fact].”
Section 63
“(2) An action for cancellation may be initiated within sixty days from the delivery of the enrolment [of the new right] against the person who, by virtue of the new enrolment and trusting the validity of the previous one, acquired the right in good faith, provided that the decision about the original invalid enrolment [in the land register] was delivered to the party suffering damages. If there was no such delivery, the action for cancellation may be brought within three years [from the enrolment].”
Section 91
 “(1) This act comes into force on 1 January 2000, the pending proceedings have to be finished under the previous provisions [i.e. under those of the Law-Decree no. 31 of 1972 on the Land Registry].”