The case originated in an application (no. 20702/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Nadezhda Georgiyevna Raks (“the applicant”), on 18 May 2004.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Chernikov, a lawyer practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Ms V. Milinchuk and then by Mr G. Matyushkin, former and current Representatives of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights respectively.
On 3 December 2008 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 1).
In June 2010 the President of the Chamber, to which the case was assigned, invited the respondent Government, under Rule 54 § 2 (a) of the Rules of Court, to submit further documents concerning the application. The President of the Chamber also acceded to the Government’s request and held that pursuant to Rule 33 § 1 the above documents should not be made available to the public.
The applicant was born in 1973 and lives in the town of .
On 1 November 1998 an explosion destroyed the monument to Tsar Nicolas II in , in the Moscow Region.
On 13 August 1998 and on 4 April 1999 two night explosions damaged the facade of the Federal Security Service (“FSB”) building in .
Criminal investigations into acts of terrorism were opened following those events. Responsibility for the explosions was attributed to an anarchist movement known as the “New Revolutionary Alternative” (hereafter “the NRA”).
On 23 February 2000 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of involvement in the explosion of 4 April 1999. Her detention was subsequently extended on a number of occasions.
On 11 April 2000 the applicant was charged with terrorism, dealing in explosives and drug-related offences. The preliminary investigation was completed on 22 May 2001. Subsequently, the defence studied the case file. In December 2001 the investigating authority ordered the defence to complete its study of the case file before 5 February 2002.
On 21 February 2002 the criminal case was submitted to the Moscow City Court for trial. The case was assigned to judge Ko.. On 6 March 2002 judge Ko. refused to relinquish jurisdiction in favour of the  for holding a trial by jury. The judge determined that the nature of the charges and the need to ensure the security of the trial participants necessitated a non-public trial. On an unspecified date the case file was classified as “secret”. Apparently, despite that decision, the trial was filmed with a video camera, while the defence was refused permission to make an audio recording of the trial. On 25 April 2002 the Supreme Court upheld the decision of 6 March 2002 in the part concerning the closed trial.
On 26 April 2002 two lay assessors were appointed to sit with the presiding judge. It appears that the applicant and one of her co-accused retained new counsel, who were given time to study the case file.
It appears that since April 2002 at least twenty adjournments were ordered, mostly due to one or several defence lawyers’ absence for medical reasons, due to annual leave or unspecified reasons. In January 2003 judge Ko. sent a letter to the Moscow Bar Association complaining that the defence lawyers had obstructed the trial by failing to appear on a number of occasions. The judge indicated, for instance, that the applicant’s co-accused lawyer Mr Ka. had not been present on 21 May and 25 June 2002 owing to his involvement in another trial; had been on sick leave from 23 November to 11 December 2002; had been absent on 18 July and 16 December 2002 and on 9 January 2003 without a valid excuse supported by proof; and between 19 and 27 December 2002 had apparently been admitted to hospital, allegedly until 23 January 2003. Ms Ka. (also the coaccused’s lawyer) had not been present on 26 April 2002 owing to alleged illness and had been absent on 18 July and 27 December 2002 and on 23 January 2003 without a valid excuse supported by proof.
On 14 February 2003 the City Court rejected a motion the defence had submitted seeking to have the trial conducted in public. The court held that the case was “secret” for the purposes of Article 241 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and the anti-terrorist legislation. On 14 March 2003 the trial court examined a number of requests submitted by the defence. The court considered that the RSFSR Code of Criminal Procedure, which had been applicable before the trial, did not require that the defence should be provided with both the bill of indictment and any “annexes” to it. In any event, the defence had been provided with the annexes, including the list of persons to be called as witnesses at the trial.
At the trial, the applicant was kept in a metal cage guarded by convoy officers.
On 14 May 2003 the Moscow City Court convicted the applicant of several counts of possession of explosives and terrorism. She was sentenced to nine years’ imprisonment. Referring to written depositions by Ms V. and  made at the pre-trial investigation stage, the City Court established that the bomb had targeted a public building, the FSB office. The court also relied on written depositions by Mr N. and oral testimony by witnesses Mr R., Mr K., and Mr S., who had received information about the defendants’ anarchist activities and details of the explosions either directly from them or other persons, including Mr Biryukov.
On 4 December 2003 the Supreme Court, sitting in camera, upheld the judgment in respect of the applicant.
The applicant was released in July 2007.
From 26 April 2000 to an unspecified date the applicant was detained in  remand centre no. 77/6. According to her, cells were normally overcrowded so that each detainee was afforded less than four square metres. Between April and early June 2000 the applicant was detained together with persons suffering from mental disorders and had to sleep on the floor.
The medical unit in the remand centre had a little stock of medicine; it was impracticable to purchase medicine, and difficult to obtain it from relatives. Medication was unsatisfactory; dental treatment was limited to extraction of teeth. She had not had a general medical check-up during her detention in the remand centre. The food ration was poor; she had only one parcel of food per day, either purchased in the prison shop or received from relatives.
The supply of toiletries and one bath per week were not sufficient. Once a week detainees had to undergo a strip search in the corridor of the remand centre, in the presence of male officers and other detainees.
Cells were cold during the winter period and hot in summer, as there was no ventilation, in contravention of regulations.
The applicant had to obtain permission for family visits, and had to talk to her visitors through a glass partition.
On the day of court hearings, she had to wake up at 4 or 5 a.m. and would be returned to the remand centre at 1 or 2 a.m. No food was provided on those days.
Lastly, she submitted that she had been beaten up by several officers in the remand centre.