The case originated in an application (no. 7822/06) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Vyacheslav Mikhaylovich Denisov (“the applicant”), on 14 February 2006.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Y. Zaytsev, of the Ministry of Justice.
On 19 October 2009 the President of the Fifth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. In accordance with Protocol No. 14, the application is assigned to a Committee of three Judges.
The applicant was born in 1960 and lives in Sebastopol.
In January 2001 the applicant lodged a claim with the  against his former employer, the Akademstroy Company, seeking compensation for pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage as a result of an occupational injury. In the course of the proceedings, he also lodged a similar claim against several local departments of the Social Insurance Fund.
On 17 November 2004 the court delivered a judgment in the case. On 27 October 2005 the Sebastopol Court of Appeal quashed it and remitted the case for fresh consideration to the same court.
On 16 July 2007 the  allowed in part the applicant’s claim and awarded him certain amounts in health insurance payment arrears, compensation for non-pecuniary damage and court fees. It also ordered the recalculation of the applicant’s insurance payments.
On 31 January 2008 the Court of Appeal quashed the above judgment in the part concerning the award of compensation for non-pecuniary damage and court fees and upheld the remainder of the judgment.
On 24 March 2010 the Supreme Court quashed the lower courts’ decisions in the part concerning the award in respect of insurance payments and remitted the case for fresh consideration by the first-instance court, before which the proceedings are still pending.
According to the Government, in the course of the proceedings the applicant twice amended his claims. He lodged his appeal in cassation not in accordance with the procedural requirements and the Supreme Court gave him a new time-limit for rectifying it. Five hearings were adjourned as the applicant failed to attend them. Fifteen hearings were adjourned mainly due to the respondents’ failure to attend them or due to the absence of judges. Two forensic expert examinations were ordered by the courts (between 25 September 2001 and 28 February 2002 and between 2 October 2003 and 25 November 2003).
The applicant submitted that he had not attended only two hearings, without providing any further details.