The case originated in an application (no. 10809/06) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a national of Moldova and , Mr Dorel Ţurcan (“the applicant”), on 18 March 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Tănase, a lawyer practising in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent at the time, Mr V. Pârlog.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been held in inhuman and degrading conditions and deprived of medical assistance, that he had been unlawfully detained and that the courts had not given relevant and sufficient reasons for his detention.
The application was allocated to the Fourth Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). On 23 May 2006 a Chamber of that Section decided to communicate the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility. Having been invited to inform the Court whether they wished to exercise their right to intervene in the case, the Romanian Government did not submit any comments.
The applicant was born in 1952 and lives in Chişinău.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 12 October 2005 the applicant was arrested and charged with assisting the President of a commercial bank in extorting a bribe from a company in order to give it a loan.
On 16 January 2006 the applicant was transferred to the remand centre of the Ministry of Justice no.29/13 (also known as Prison no. 13, former Prison no. 3) in Chişinău.
On 3 February 2006 the Buiucani District Court prolonged the applicant's detention for a period of twenty days. The court found that
“... the criminal investigation is in its final phase; the final charges are to be submitted and the accused is to have access to the file. Taking into account the serious nature of the crime of which he is accused, the damaging effect of the deed and that, once aware of the contents of the file, the applicant could influence witnesses, destroy evidence and abscond from law enforcement authorities and the court, the court considers justified the prosecutor's request for prolonging the period of detention and rejects the lawyer's request for bail.”
On 9 February 2006 the Chişinău Court of Appeal upheld that decision.
The applicant made a separate complaint regarding the initial period of his detention, until 3 February 2006 (the case of Ţurcan and Ţurcan v. , application no. 39835/05). In the present application, he relies on the events subsequent to that date.
On 20 February 2006 the case file was submitted to the trial court. On 6 March 2006 the first hearing took place, during which the applicant submitted a habeas corpus request. He relied on Article 186 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 15 below) and on the cases of Baranowski v. Poland (no. 28358/95, ECHR 2000III) and Ječius v. Lithuania (no. 34578/97, ECHR 2000IX), and claimed that, following the referral of the case to the trial court on 20 February 2006, his detention did not have a legal basis. He also complained about the inhuman conditions of his detention in Prison no. 13 and referred to the findings of the European
Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in respect of that remand centre.
The Buiucani District Court rejected his request because
“[the applicant is] accused of a serious crime and the court does not find at the present time any ground for changing or annulling the preventive measures”.
On 28 September 2006 the Buiucani District Court accepted the applicant's request for release, relying on new relevant circumstances of the case, namely that most evidence had already been examined in court or recorded by the prosecution and that the applicant's health had worsened, and surgery was needed. On 31 October 2006 the same court gave the applicant permission to undergo medical treatment abroad.
The relevant domestic law and practice have been set out in Boicenco v. Moldova (no. 41088/05, § 88). In particular, as regards the exhaustion of domestic remedies, the Government relied on the following.
The relevant part of Article 186 of the Code of Criminal Procedure reads as follows:
“Article 186. Length of pre-trial detention and its prolongation
...
(2) Pre-trial detention during the investigation stage of the proceedings, before the bill of indictment is sent to the competent court, shall not exceed thirty days, except in cases provided for in the present code. The running of the duration of pre-trial detention during the investigation stage of the proceedings stops on the date when the prosecutor sends the bill of indictment to a court ...”
The Government referred to Article 53 of the Constitution, Article 1405 of the Civil Code and Law no. 1545 on compensation for damage caused by the illegal acts of the criminal investigation organs, prosecution and courts, as well as to the case of Drugalev v. the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Finance, cited in Holomiov v. Moldova, (no. 30649/05, § 88, 7 November 2006).
On 24 October 2003 Parliament adopted decision no. 415-XV, regarding the National Plan of Action in the sphere of human rights for 2004-2008. The plan includes a number of objectives for 2004-2008 aimed at improving conditions of detention, including the reduction of overcrowding, improvement of medical treatment, involvement of detainees in work and reintegration, as well as the training of personnel. Regular reports are to be drawn up on the implementation of the Plan. On 31 December 2003 the Government adopted a decision on the principles of reorganisation of the penitentiary system, and the Plan of Action for 2004-2013 for the implementation of the principles of reorganisation of the penitentiary system, both having the aim, inter alia, of improving the conditions of detention in penitentiaries.
On an unspecified date the Ministry of Justice adopted its “Report on the implementing by the Ministry of Justice of Chapter 14 of the National Plan of Action in the sphere of human rights for 2004-2008, approved by Parliament Decision no. 415-XV of 24 October 2003”. On 25 November 2005 the Parliamentary Commission for Human Rights adopted a report on the implementation of the National Plan of Action. Both those reports confirmed the insufficient funding of the prison system and the resulting failure to fully implement the action plan in respect of the remand centres in , including Prison no. 13 in Chişinău. The first of these reports stated, inter alia, that “as long as the aims and actions in [the National Plan of Action] do not have the necessary financial support ... it will remain only a good intention of the State to observe the human rights described in Parliament Decision no. 415-XV of 24 October 2003, the fate of which is non-implementation, or partial implementation.”
The relevant parts of the CPT report concerning the visit to Moldova between 20 and 30 September 2004 read as follows (unofficial translation):
“50. The CPT delegation again heard repeated complaints from persons charged with and convicted of administrative offences concerning the refusal of permission for them to receive visits or have contact with the outside world in EDPs.
The CPT reiterates (see paragraph 61 of the report on the 2001 visit) that, where persons awaiting trial are concerned, if it is necessary in the interests of the investigation to place restrictions on visits for some of them, the restrictions should be strictly limited in time and applied for the shortest period possible. In no circumstances should visits to a detained person by family and friends be prohibited for a prolonged period. If there is thought to be an ongoing risk of collusion, it is better to allow visits under strict supervision. ...
The situation in the majority of penitentiaries visited, in view of the economic situation in the country, remained difficult and the delegation encountered a number of problems already identified during its visits in 1998 and 2001 in terms of physical conditions and detention regimes.
Added to this is the problem of overcrowding, which remains serious. In fact, even though the penitentiaries visited were not operating at their full capacity – as is the case of Prison no. 3 in which the number of detainees was appreciably smaller than during the last visit of the Committee – they continued to be extremely congested. In fact, the receiving capacity was still based on a very unsatisfactory 2 m2 per detainee; in practice, this was often even less.
Facilities for contact with the outside world left much to be desired. Although there was no restriction on parcels and letters, inmates were entitled only to brief visits totalling three hours every three months, which were in practice often reduced to one hour. What is more, visits took place under oppressive conditions in a room where prisoners were separated from visitors by a thick wire grille, with a guard stationed nearby at all times.
The follow-up visit to Prison no.3 in Chişinău revealed an unsatisfactory situation. The progress noted was in fact minimal, limited to some running repairs. The ventilation system had been repaired primarily thanks to the financial support of civil society (especially NGOs), and the creation of places for daily recreation had been made possible only as a result of contributions by the detainees and their families.
The repair, renovation and maintenance of cells are entirely the responsibility of detainees themselves and of their families, who also pay for the necessary materials. They must also obtain their own sheets and blankets, the institution being able to give them only used mattresses.
In sum, the conditions in the great majority of cells in Blocks I-II and the transit cells continue to be very poor indeed. ...
Finally, despite the drastic reduction in overcrowding, the rate of occupancy of cells is still very high, not to say intolerable.
Except in the Lipcani Re-education Colony for Minors, where the efforts made in this respect are to be highlighted, the quantity and quality of detainees' food everywhere is a source of grave concern. The delegation was inundated with complaints regarding the absence of meat and dairy products. The findings of the delegation, regarding both the stocks of food and the menus, confirm the credibility of these complaints. Its findings also confirmed that in certain places (in Prison no. 3, ...), the food served was repulsive and virtually inedible (for instance, insects and vermin were present). This is not surprising given the general state of the kitchens and their modest equipment.
The Moldovan authorities have always claimed financial difficulties in ensuring the adequate feeding of detainees. However, the Committee insists that this is a fundamental requirement of life which must be ensured by the State to persons in its charge and that nothing can exonerate it from such responsibility. ...”