The case originated in nine applications (nos. 38054/05, 38092/05, 2178/07, 21770/07, 4708/09, 46303/10, 70688/10, 30537/11 and 43594/11) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by nine Russian nationals (“the applicants”), whose names and the dates on which they introduced their applications are set out in Appendix I.
Some of the applicants were represented by lawyers, whose names are listed in Appendix II. The applicant Mr Fedchenko had been granted legal aid. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants complained, in particular, that they had been denied an opportunity to appear in person before the appeal courts in the civil proceedings to which they were parties.
At the material time all the applicants were detained in Russian penal facilities.
While in detention, the applicants Mr Baban, Mr Barkov and Mr Bogatyrev sought compensation for inadequate conditions of their detention and substandard medical care; the applicants Mr Davydov, Mr Pflyaum and Mr Yakovlev were involved in contract disputes; Mr Fedchenko was the respondent in a divorce claim; Mr Starodubtsev challenged the decision by which he had lost the status of a disabled person; and Mr Shavayev was the defendant in an action for damages brought by the Federal Customs Service.
None of the applicants, apart from Mr Yakovlev, were able to attend the hearings before the courts of first instance. The domestic courts refused the applicants leave to be present at the hearings, on the ground that there was no domestic legal provision for bringing detainees to courts. In some of the cases they quoted Article 77.1 of the Code on the Execution of Sentences (see paragraph 10 below) and the relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure. In the other cases the issue of the applicants’ presence was left unaddressed. In the first-instance proceedings Mr Shavayev and Mr Starodubtsev were represented by their relatives. Mr Barkov and Mr Davydov were interviewed at courts located near the places of their detention.
The applicants appealed, raising the question of their appearance in court in their appeal statements. Some submitted separate requests seeking leave to appear before the appeal court. The appeal courts either dismissed their arguments and endorsed the findings of the first-instance courts or concluded that their absence from court was in line with the legislation and did not contravene the principle of fairness. None of the applicants were present or represented at the appellate hearings.
The dates of the final judgments are set out in Appendix I.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure (as in force at the material time) read as follows:
“1.  The cassation court reviews the lawfulness and reasonableness of the firstinstance court’s judgment on the basis of the arguments contained in the statements of appeal. It assesses the evidence in the case file, but also additional evidence if it determines that such evidence could not have been produced before the first-instance court, and ... may establish new facts and circumstances.
In the interests of justice the cassation court may carry out a full review of the first-instance court’s judgment.”
Article 77.1 of the Code on the Execution of Sentences provides that a convicted person may be transferred from a correctional colony to a temporary detention facility if his or her participation is required as a witness, a victim or a suspect in connection with some types of investigative measure in a criminal case. It does not mention the possibility for a convicted person to take part in civil proceedings, whether as a claimant or a defendant.