.  The case originated in an application (no. 56796/13) against the Republic of Malta lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Somali national, Ms Sagal Abdi Mahamud (“the applicant”), on 19 August 2013.
.  The applicant was represented by Dr K. Camilleri and Dr M. Camilleri, lawyers practising in Birkirkara and Valletta, respectively. The Maltese Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Dr P. Grech, Attorney General.
.  The applicant alleged that her continued detention was arbitrary and unlawful, and that she had not had a remedy to challenge the lawfulness of that detention. She further complained about the conditions of detention. She relied on Articles 3 and 5 §§ 1 and 4.
.  On 28 August 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
.  The applicant was born in 1992, and at the time of the introduction of the application was detained in Lyster Barracks Detention Centre, in Ħal Far.
The applicant entered Malta in an irregular manner by boat on 6 May 2012. On arrival she was registered by the immigration police, given an identification number (12D-001) and presented with a Return Decision and a Removal Order. The applicant was immediately detained in Lyster Barracks; her detention was based on Article 14 (2) of the Immigration Act (see Relevant domestic law below).
The Return Decision stated that she was a prohibited immigrant by virtue of Article 5 of the Immigration Act (Chapter 217 of the Laws of Malta) because she was in Malta “without means of subsistence and liable to become a charge on public funds”. The Return Decision also informed the applicant that her stay was being terminated and that she had the possibility to apply for a period of voluntary departure. The Removal Order was based on the consideration that the applicant’s request for a period of voluntary departure had been rejected. It informed the applicant that she would remain in custody until removal was effected, and that an entry ban would be issued against her. The two documents further informed the applicant of her right to appeal against the Decision and Order before the Immigration Appeals Board (“the IAB”) within three working days.
On 9 May 2012 the applicant was assisted to submit a Preliminary Questionnaire (PQ), thereby registering her wish to apply for asylum under Article 8 of the Refugees Act, Chapter 420 of the Laws of Malta. On 21 May 2012 the applicant was called for an interview by the Office of the Refugee Commissioner (ORC).
On 30 June 2012 the ORC rejected her application on the basis, inter alia, that she had failed to support her claim that she was from central/southern Somalia with convincing evidence (in particular, she had shown insufficient knowledge about Mogadishu and her speech displayed phonological, grammatical and lexical features not typical of those spoken in Mogadishu). Her appeal was also rejected by the Refugee Appeals Board (the “RAB”) on 18 December 2012. The appeal decision reads as follows:
“The Refugee Appeals Board refers to a fill-in-the-blanks form received in its Office on 18 July 2012 and to a legal submission on your behalf received in its Office on 8 October 2012.
The Board notes that you travelled to Libya in December 2011, first via Kenya and then via Sudan. In none of these countries did you consider applying for refugee status. During the popular insurrection against the Gaddafi regime in Libya you disembarked on the island of Malta, illegally and undocumented on 6 May 2012, claiming that you were looking for peace, although seven of your siblings still live in Somalia. You also claim that your brother had been killed by a terrorist Islamic organization, Al Shabab, because they thought he worked for the Government. However, you also claim that if there was peace back home, you would be prepared to return. Since you left, as you may know, Al Shabab has been driven out of Mogadishu and Presidential elections have been successfully held and several Somalis are repatriating.
Your appeal for the grant of refugee status by Malta cannot be upheld according to law.”
Up to the date of the lodging of her application with the Court on 19 August 2013 the applicant had heard no news about any steps being taken in connection with her removal. In practice Malta effected no removals to Somalia or Somaliland.
Ever since her arrival in Malta the applicant suffered from several medical problems, such as headaches, earaches and fainting, and was frequently hospitalised (see paragraphs 16-19 below). She showed signs of severe anxiety and depression which got worse following the refusal of her asylum request. In consequence, on 1 October 2012, she was referred to the Agency for the Welfare of Asylum Seekers (AWAS) by the Jesuit Refugee Service (JRS). This referral was made with a view to obtaining her release from detention in terms of government policy on the grounds of vulnerability due to physical and psychological ill-health. According to the referral form, filled in by an official of the JRS:
“Sagal has been complaining of several medical problems ever since she arrived in Malta. She had several appointments in hospital was also taken to emergency by ambulance after collapsing in detention. Sagal was also rejected by the Office of the Refugee Commission, causing her to be very depressed. Every time we visit she is in her bed crying and showing signs of severe anxiety.”
In December 2012 the applicant was interviewed (for a few minutes) by the Vulnerable Adults Assessment Team of AWAS, with a view to determine whether she should be released on the grounds of vulnerability. The interview was held in English and the applicant was assisted by another detainee who was not fluent in the language. Her impression is that she was verbally informed that she would be released. On 10 August 2013, that is just under one year after the referral, the interviewers verbally informed her that she would be released. The Government also confirmed that eventually the applicant’s request for release on the ground of vulnerability was acceded to by AWAS.
Nevertheless, up to the date of the lodging of her application with the Court on 19 August 2013 the applicant was still in detention. She hoped to be released in November 2013 after the lapse of an eighteen month detention as per domestic practice at the time.
The applicant submitted that the Vulnerable Adult Assessment Procedure operated by AWAS was developed by the said organisation in order to give effect to a government policy introduced in January 2005 which stated that vulnerable individuals should not be detained. The applicant submitted that although AWAS was not formally charged with the responsibility of this procedure by the law which set it up, in practice the agency had full responsibility for the procedure. However, in spite of the fact that this procedure can have a determining impact on the continued detention of individuals detained in terms of the Immigration Act, it was not adequately regulated by law or by publicly available rules or procedures. The determining authority does not give written reasons for its decision and there is no possibility of appeal, although it may be possible to request a review if more evidence is available or there is a degeneration of the individual’s condition.
.  According to the Government the Vulnerable Adult Assessment Procedure, which was operated to assess vulnerability, was widely known within the migration sector and a policy document had been issued about it. Forms were distributed to individuals working in the sector such as NGOs. The Government submitted that the Vulnerable Adult Assessment Procedure was a quick process in straightforward cases (such as pregnant women and families with very young children) which were usually determined within two weeks. However, less straightforward cases such as assessments on the grounds of mental health, psychological problems or chronic illness, required a more complex assessment procedure which was therefore lengthier.
. A certificate issued by a doctor in May 2012 confirmed that the applicant had been hospitalised on 7 and 8 May 2012 (upon her arrival in Malta) for dehydration, she was seen again on 15 May and 15 June of the same year. She suffered “fits” and was waiting for an appointment.
.   According to the documents provided by the applicant, after her initial hospitalisation, and apart from the two visits mentioned above, she was seen by a doctor at the state hospital around sixteen times between May and September 2012, and each time was prescribed medication. On these occasions she suffered from, inter alia, epigastric pain and nausea (repeatedly), bilateral conjunctivitis, inflammation, bleeding gums, insomnia, otalgia/earaches (also repeatedly) causing reduced hearing, as well as headaches and toothaches, and dizziness. In none of these occasions was she kept under observation overnight, or hospitalised. In June 2012 following claims by the applicant that she had been falling repeatedly, and that she was having episodes of jerking and tongue biting (which had left evident marks), the doctor requested her referral to a specified department to run the relevant tests to exclude epilepsy – the result of these tests, if undertaken, are unknown to the Court.
.  A medical certificate issued in March 2013 states that at the time the applicant was suffering from “low mood and insomnia” and had been “complaining of somatic symptoms such as chest pain”. The doctor noted “evident deterioration of her mental state” and suggested she be considered as vulnerable.
.  An attestation issued by a doctor in May 2013 states that according to available records “she has stayed unwell and been treated or referred to Mater Dei Hospital [the State hospital] more than usual” and that “her health has posed challenges in keeping her at the Ħal Far detention centre and any assistance will be appreciated”.
.  The applicant was detained in Hermes Block in Lyster Barracks, in conditions which she considered prison-like and basic. She explained that the Block is divided into five zones alike in terms of layout and facilities. The applicant was detained in Zone C for the first seven to eight months and was afterwards transferred to Zone D for a number of months until she moved to Zone A.
.  She noted that in Zone C there were over eighty (sic) single women and at one point the detention centre was so crowded that there were not enough beds and people had to sleep on metal tables in the television room. She noted that Zone D was less crowded but that it still lacked privacy and sanitation.
.  She complained about the lack of constructive activities to occupy detainees, overcrowding (particularly during the summer months), lack of privacy, limited access to open air, difficulties in communication with staff, other detainees and with the outside world, lack of information about their own situations, and the lack of proper arrangements for heating and cooling, leading to extreme cold in winter and extreme heat in summer. The applicant highlighted the lack of female staff - in particular she noted that every morning male soldiers barged into her dormitory while the inmates were still asleep to make a head count, during which they removed the sheets to check for their presence. This meant that the applicant had to sleep fully dressed every night, including her headscarf, to avoid embarrassing moments.
.  The applicant also complained of limited access to medical care, also because of a lack of interpreters to enable communication with medical staff.
.  The applicant was informed of the AWAS decision to accede to her request and was released from detention on 12 September 2013.
.  The relevant articles of the above-mentioned Acts can be found in Aden Ahmed v. Malta (no. 55352/12, §§ 31-35, 23 July 2013).
According to the Irregular Immigrants, Refugees and Integration Policy Document, issued by the Ministry for Justice and Home Affairs and the Ministry for the Family and Social Solidarity, in 2005:
 “Irregular immigrants who, by virtue of their age and/or physical condition, are considered to be vulnerable are exempt from detention and are accommodated in alternative centres”.
In so far as relevant, Regulation 6 of the Agency for the Welfare of Asylum Seekers Regulation, Subsidiary Legislation 217.11, reads as follows:
“(1) The function of the Agency shall be the implementation of national legislation and policy concerning the welfare of refugees, persons enjoying international protection and asylum seekers.
(2) In the performance of its functions, the Agency shall:
(a) oversee the daily management of accommodation facilities either directly or through subcontracting agreements;
(b) provide particular services to categories of persons identified as vulnerable according to current policies;
(c) provide information programmes to its clients in the areas of employment, housing, education, health and welfare services offered under national schemes;
(d) act as facilitator with all public entities responsible for providing services to ensure that national obligations to refugees and asylum seekers are accessible;
(e) promote the Government’s policy and schemes regarding resettlement and assisted voluntary returns;
(f) maintain data and draw up reports that are considered relevant for its own function and provide statistics to appropriate policy-making bodies;
(g) advise the Minister on new developments in its field of operation and propose policy or legislation required to improve the service given and fulfil any legal obligations in respect of its service users;
(h) encourage networking with local voluntary organisations so as to increase the service standards as well as academic research;
(i) work with other public stakeholders and, where possible, offer its services to asylum seekers accommodated in other reception centres not under its direct responsibility; and
(j) implement such other duties as may be assigned to it by the Minister or his representative.”
.  Further relevant domestic law concerning the case is to be found in Suso Musa v. Malta (no. 42337/12, §§ 23-32, 23 July 2013).
.  Part IV of Subsidiary Legislation 217.12, Common Standards and Procedures for Returning Illegally Staying Third-Country Nationals Regulations, Legal Notice 81 of 2011 (Transposing Directive 2008/115/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on common standards and procedures in member States for returning illegally staying third-country nationals, aka the Return Directive) in so far as relevant, is set out in Aden Ahmed (cited above, §§ 31-35).
The Report to the Maltese Government on the visit to Malta carried out by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) from 26 to 30 September 2011, published on 4 July 2013, in so far as relevant in connection with Lyster Barracks, reads as follows:
“44. At the time of the visit, Lyster Detention Centre was accommodating 248 foreign nationals (including 89 women), in five different detention units.
In keeping with the Government’s Detention Policy, no unaccompanied minors were held in either of the two detention centres visited. Upon issuance of a care order by the Minister of Social Policy, unaccompanied minors were always transferred to a juvenile institution. Single women were always accommodated separately from male detainees.
More generally, the CPT has serious misgivings about the fact that female detainees at Lyster Detention Centre were frequently supervised exclusively by male detention officers, since only one female officer was employed by the Detention Service at the time of the visit.
The CPT recommends that the Maltese authorities take steps as a matter of priority to ensure the presence of at least one female officer around the clock at Lyster Detention Centre.
As was the case in 2008, a number of detainees complained about disrespectful behaviour and racist remarks by detention officers (in particular in the Warehouses at Safi Detention Centre). The CPT reiterates its recommendation that the Maltese authorities remind all members of staff working in detention centres for foreigners that such behaviour is not acceptable and will be punished accordingly.
At both Lyster [and Safi Detention Centres], material conditions have improved since the 2008 visit. In particular, at Lyster Barracks, these improvements are significant: the Hermes Block, which had been in a very poor state of repair at the time of the 2008 visit, had been completely refurbished and the Tent Compound, which had also been criticised by the Committee in the report on the 2008 visit, had been dismantled. At Safi Barracks, additional renovation work had been carried out in Block B. It is noteworthy that all foreign nationals received personal hygiene products on a regular basis and were also supplied with clothes and footwear.
...
At Lyster Detention Centre, the situation had clearly improved as regards activities. Each zone comprised a communal room, and groups of detainees could attend English-language courses which were organised by an NGO (usually, three times a week for two hours per group). Further, single women and couples were provided with food so that they could prepare meals themselves in a kitchenette. Every day, detainees could go outside and play football or volleyball in a rather small yard for a total of two hours.
...
As regards contact with the outside world, the CPT welcomes the fact that, in both detention centres visited, foreign nationals could receive telephone calls from the outside. They were also were provided with telephone cards free of charge on a regular basis, although these were limited to a total of 5€ every two months.”
.  The 9th General report of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment (the “CPT”) on the CPT’s activities covering the period 1 January to 31 December 1998, at point 26, reads as follows:
“Mixed gender staffing is another safeguard against ill-treatment in places of detention, in particular where juveniles are concerned. The presence of both male and female staff can have a beneficial effect in terms of both the custodial ethos and in fostering a degree of normality in a place of detention.
Mixed gender staffing also allows for appropriate staff deployment when carrying out gender sensitive tasks, such as searches. In this respect, the CPT wishes to stress that, regardless of their age, persons deprived of their liberty should only be searched by staff of the same gender and that any search which requires an inmate to undress should be conducted out of the sight of custodial staff of the opposite gender; these principles apply a fortiori in respect of juveniles.”
.  Rule 53 of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, reads as follows:
“(1) In an institution for both men and women, the part of the institution set aside for women shall be under the authority of a responsible woman officer who shall have the custody of the keys of all that part of the institution.
(2) No male member of the staff shall enter the part of the institution set aside for women unless accompanied by a woman officer.
(3) Women prisoners shall be attended and supervised only by women officers. This does not, however, preclude male members of the staff, particularly doctors and teachers, from carrying out their professional duties in institutions or parts of institutions set aside for women.”
.  The report “Not here to stay: Report of the International Commission of Jurists on its visit to Malta on 26-30 September 2011”, May 2012, pointed out, inter alia, that:
“The ICJ delegation found a lack of leisure facilities in all three detention facilities visited. ... In the Lyster Barracks there was also a small recreation yard, but without direct access from the detention section. Detainees had two hours per day of “air” in the courtyard. They reportedly seldom received visits from outside, apart from the occasional NGO.”
Bridging Borders, a JRS Malta report on the implementation of a project to provide shelter and psychosocial support to vulnerable asylum seekers between June 2011 and June 2012, highlights the fact that not all medication prescribed by medical personnel in detention is provided free by the Government health service. In fact the said report notes that during the lifetime of the project the organisation purchased medication for 130 detainees.