The case originated in an application (no. 55216/08) against the Italian Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Italian national, Ms S.V. (“the applicant”), on 13 November 2008. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have her identity disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by Mr M. De Stefano and Mr G. Guercio, lawyers practising in Rome. The Italian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms E. Spatafora.
On 20 March 2016 the Government were given notice of the application.
On 19 September 2016 the non-governmental organisations Alliance Defending Freedom and Unione Giuristi Cattolici Italiani were given leave to intervene jointly in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1965 and lives in Ostia Lido.
At birth, the applicant was entered in the civil-status registers as male and was given the forename L. However, the applicant stated that she had always identified as female and lived in society as a woman under the forename S. For instance, her work colleagues (the applicant has worked as a civil servant since 1999) had always called her S., and in the photograph on her identity card issued in August 2000 her appearance was that of a woman.
In 1999 S.V. began treatment with feminising hormones as part of the gender transition process.
On 9 November 2000 she applied to the Rome District Court on the basis of section 3 of Law no. 164 of 1982, stating that she wished to complete the transition process by permanently changing her primary sexual characteristics, and sought authorisation to undergo gender reassignment surgery.
In a judgment of 10 May 2001 the District Court found that the applicant had embarked on the gender transition process after careful consideration. Having taken note of her determination the court authorised her to undergo surgery in order to adapt her primary sexual characteristics to match her female gender identity.
On 30 May 2001 the applicant, while awaiting the surgery authorised by the District Court, applied to the prefect of Rome for a change of forename under Article 89 of Presidential Decree no. 396 of 2000. She argued that, given that she had been undergoing a gender transition process for several years, and in view of her physical appearance, the fact that her identity papers indicated a male forename was a constant source of humiliation and embarrassment. She also asserted that the waiting period for surgery was approximately four years.
In a decision of 4 July 2001 the prefect refused the applicant’s request on the grounds that, under Presidential Decree no. 396 of 2000, a person’s forename had to correspond to his or her gender. In the prefect’s view, in the absence of a final court ruling ordering the change to her legal gender status for the purposes of Law no. 164 of 1982, the applicant’s forename could not be changed.
The applicant appealed against that decision to the Lazio Regional Administrative Court and also requested a stay of execution of the prefect’s decision.
On 23 July 2001 the applicant underwent mammoplasty. On 6 September 2001 she was placed on a waiting list at Trieste University Hospital for surgery to alter her primary sexual characteristics.
On 21 February 2002 the Regional Administrative Court refused to grant a stay of execution of the prefect’s decision.
On 3 February 2003, while the proceedings before the Regional Administrative Court were still pending on the merits, the applicant underwent an operation to change her sexual characteristics from male to female. She subsequently applied to the Rome District Court, on an unspecified date, for legal recognition of her gender reassignment under section 3 of Law no. 164 of 1982.
In a judgment of 10 October 2003 the Rome District Court granted the applicant’s request and ordered the Savona municipal authorities to alter the indication of the applicant’s gender from male to female and to change the forename L. to S.
By a judgment of 6 March 2008, deposited with the registry on 17 May 2008, the Regional Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal against the prefect’s decision of 4 July 2001. The court held that Article 89 of Presidential Decree no. 396 of 2000 concerning changes of forename was not applicable in the present case, which actually came within the scope of Law no. 164 of 1982 concerning changes to legal gender status. The court stressed in that regard that, under the terms of the latter, the amendment of the civil-status records of a transgender person had to be ordered by the court ruling on his or her gender reassignment. It therefore considered that the prefect had correctly refused the applicant’s request.
The applicant did not appeal against that judgment.
Law No. 164 of 1982 lays down rules on changes to legal gender status (rettificazione di attribuzione di sesso). Under that Law as in force at the material time, a person’s legal gender status could be changed on the basis of a final judgment of the court recognising a change of gender from that indicated in the person’s birth certificate, following the alteration of his or her sexual characteristics (section 1). If necessary, the court could order an expert opinion to assess the physical and psychological state of the person making the request. In the judgment granting the request, the court ordered the municipality with which the birth certificate was registered to amend the civil-status register (section 2).
Section 3 of the Law provided as follows:
“Where it is necessary to adapt the person’s sexual characteristics by means of medical or surgical treatment, the court shall deliver a judgment authorising such treatment. In such cases the court, [sitting] in private, shall order the change of legal gender status after verifying that the treatment has been carried out.”
Section 3 was subsequently amended by Article 31 § 4 of Legislative Decree no. 150 of 2011. A second decision given in private is now no longer required in order to obtain a change of legal gender status.
Article 31 § 4 reads as follows:
“Where it is necessary to adapt the person’s sexual characteristics by means of medical or surgical treatment, the court shall deliver a judgment authorising such treatment.”
Under Article 35 of Presidential Decree No. 396 of 3 November 2000, the forename given to a child must correspond to the child’s gender. According to Article 89 of the same decree, without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the correction of the civil-status records, persons seeking to change their forename or to add another forename to the existing one, or to change their surname because of its shameful or ridiculous nature or because it reveals their biological descent, must submit a request, giving reasons, to the competent prefect.
Prior to the entry into force of Presidential Decree No. 396, responsibility for dealing with applications for a change of surname or first name, governed at that time by Articles 158 et seq. of Royal Decree no. 1238 of 1939, lay with the public prosecutor.
By decision no. 18 of 12 April 1999, the public prosecutor at the Rome Court of Appeal granted a request for a change of name made by M.U., a transgender person who had not undergone surgery, under Article 158 of Royal Decree no. 1238. The person concerned, who was male, told the public prosecutor that he had always had a typically female mindset and behaviour, and alleged that having a male forename made it difficult for him to integrate socially and caused him immense personal suffering. The prosecutor declared M.U.’s request admissible and authorised the change of forename.
In judgment no. 15138 of 20 July 2015, referring inter alia to the principles set out in the Court’s case-law, the Court of Cassation ruled that section 3 of Law No. 164 of 1982 could not be construed as requiring a transgender person to have recourse to surgery in order to obtain recognition of his or her gender identity, since a match between sexual orientation and physical appearance could be achieved through psychological and medical treatment which respected the person’s physical integrity. The Court of Cassation thus brought to an end the divergence of interpretation in this regard that had existed between the lower courts.
By judgment no. 221 of 20 October 2015 the Constitutional Court rejected a plea of unconstitutionality with regard to sections 1 and 3 of Law no. 164 of 1982. Referring, inter alia, to Court of Cassation decision no. 15138, it stated first of all that the legislative provisions in question were the result of cultural and legal change aimed at recognising gender identity as a component of the right to personal identity. Interpreting the absence of an explicit indication of the means of altering a person’s sexual characteristics in the light of fundamental human rights, it added that such absence meant that surgical treatment was not a requirement for the purpose of obtaining a change of legal gender status, as it was only one of the possible treatments that could be used in order to alter a person’s appearance.
In her report of 17 November 2011 to the Human Rights Council on discriminatory laws and practices and acts of violence against individuals based on their sexual orientation and gender identity (A/HRC/19/41), the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights noted in particular that the regulations in countries that recognised changes in gender often required, implicitly or explicitly, that applicants undergo sterilisation surgery as a condition of recognition (§ 72). She recommended, among other things, that Member States (§ 84 (h)):
“[f]acilitate legal recognition of the preferred gender of transgender persons and establish arrangements to permit relevant identity documents to be reissued reflecting preferred gender and name, without infringements of other human rights.”
On 31 March 2010 the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted Recommendation CM/Rec(2010)5 on measures to combat discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation or gender identity. The recommendation states in particular that “[m]ember states should take appropriate measures to guarantee the full legal recognition of a person’s gender reassignment in all areas of life, in particular by making possible the change of name and gender in official documents in a quick, transparent and accessible way; member states should also ensure, where appropriate, the corresponding recognition and changes by non-state actors with respect to key documents, such as educational or work certificates” (Appendix, point 21).
In Resolution 1728 (2010), adopted on 29 April 2010, on discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe called on States to “address the specific discrimination and human rights violations faced by transgender persons and, in particular, ensure in legislation and in practice [the right of transgender persons] to ... official documents that reflect an individual’s preferred gender identity, without any prior obligation to undergo sterilisation or other medical procedures such as sex reassignment surgery and hormonal therapy” (point 16.11.2).