The case originated in an application (no. 27278/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by ninety-one Greek nationals listed in the Appendix (“the applicants”), on 4 August 2003.
The applicants were represented by Ms Z. Tsiliouka-Mousmoula and Mr I. Stamoulis, of the Athens Bar. The Greek Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent's delegates, Ms G. Skiani and Mr K. Georgiadis, Advisers, State Legal Council.
The applicants complained, inter alia, under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, about the length of proceedings before the administrative courts.
The application was allocated to the First Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court).
On 12 November 2004 the Court decided to communicate the complaint concerning the length of proceedings to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
On 18 May 2006 the Chamber constituted within the First Section to examine the case and composed of the following judges: Loukis Loucaides, Christos Rozakis, Françoise Tulkens, Elisabeth Steiner, Khanlar Hajiyev, Dean Spielmann and Sverre Erik Jebens, and Søren Nielsen, Section Registrar, declared the application partly inadmissible and concluded unanimously that there had been a violation of Article 6 § 1 on account of the excessive length of the proceedings. The Chamber also decided, by four votes to three, to award each of the applicants a sum in non-pecuniary damage, the same for all but one of the applicants.
On 27 July 2006 the Government requested, in accordance with Article 43 of the Convention and Rule 73, that the case be referred to the Grand Chamber. On 13 September 2006 a panel of the Grand Chamber accepted this request.
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined according to the provisions of Articles 27 §§ 2 and 3 of the Convention and Rule 24.
The applicants and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, , on 7 March 2007 (Rule 59 § 3).
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Ms Tsiliouka-Mousmoula, Mr Stamoulis, Ms Skiani and Mr Georgiadis.
In their capacity as doctors, the applicants are members of the National Health System (Εθνικό Σύστημα Υγείας) and are employed by the public hospital “O Evangelismos”.
On 28 April 1994 they applied to the Athens Administrative Court of Appeal seeking to have set aside the hospital's refusal to pay them an allowance for overtime work, set at 1/65th of their basic salary. The sole purpose of this application was to challenge the lawfulness of the disputed administrative decision.
Initially scheduled for 11 March 1996, the hearing was postponed seven times, one of these being at the applicants' request. It was eventually held on 22 November 1999. On 16 December 1999 the Athens Administrative Court of Appeal set aside the disputed administrative decision (decision no. 2684/1999).
On 18 April 2000 the hospital lodged an appeal against that decision. Initially scheduled for 18 January 2001, the hearing was held on 18 October 2001, after four postponements. On 7 March 2002 the Third Division of the  sent the case for examination by that court's seven-judge bench on account of the importance of a question concerning the way in which the document in dispute had been published (judgment no. 763/2002).
On 6 February 2003, following the postponement of one hearing, the Supreme Administrative Court overturned the Athens Administrative Court of Appeal's decision. It held that the ministerial decree on which the applicants based their claim to receive an allowance for overtime work had not been published in due form and was therefore without foundation (judgment no. 307/2003).
It appears from the case file that, in the meantime, the applicants had on several occasions brought actions in the administrative courts, seeking payment of various amounts in respect of allowances for overtime work allegedly owed by the public hospital in question. The total sum claimed by each applicant in this connection varied between 15,000 and 20,000 euros (EUR). It appears from the case file that these actions were dismissed by the domestic courts.
Article 115 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Procedure provides:
“Several persons may bring a joint action, in a single appeal, against the same act or omission, provided that the grounds advanced have, in substance, the same legal or factual basis with regard to the essential issues or are based on the same action. [A joint action may also be lodged] where the grounds advanced concern a shared right or where, in substance, the rights relied upon have the same legal or factual basis with regard to the key issues.
...”