The application concerns the explosion of a VOG-17 grenade from an AGS-17 grenade launcher in the residential area of Chita on 21 April 2008, in which the applicants, aged 13 and 7 at the time, sustained serious injuries, and the domestic authorities’ alleged failure to conduct an effective investigation into their complaint. The criminal proceedings into the explosion were suspended many times for failure to identify the perpetrator and were eventually discontinued as time-barred. The applicants’ civil claim for compensation in respect of non-pecuniary damage was dismissed for lack of evidence of the previously fired but unexploded grenade belonging to the State or of negligence on the part of the authorities in having abandoned it.
The first and second applicants were born in 1995 and 2000, respectively, and live in Chita. The applicants were represented initially by their mothers Ms T.N. Vovk and Ms M.V. Bogdanova, and subsequently by Ms A.V. Kopteyeva, a lawyer practising in Chita.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 21 April 2008 a grenade exploded in a residential area in “microdistrict no. 6” in Chernovskiy district in Chita (hereinafter “microdistrict no. 6”). Five children were wounded as a result of the explosion. The first and second applicants, who were 13 and 7 years old at the time, were among the victims.
The first applicant sustained open multiple displaced fractures of both shin bones, foreign bodies (shrapnel) in the soft tissue of the shins, and traumatic shock. He was hospitalised in the Regional Children’s Hospital in Chita where he received emergency treatment and surgery to both legs. His first period in hospital lasted until 30 May 2008. He was subsequently hospitalised from 16 June until 5 September 2008, from 19 until 30 January 2009, and from 19 January until 16 February 2010 for further treatment and surgery.
The second applicant sustained a penetrating wound to the stomach with an injury to the intestine and intra-abdominal bleeding, a perforating wound to the soft tissue of the chest, a blunt shrapnel wound to the soft tissue of the small pelvis and right hip, traumatic shock, and cardiopathy. He was hospitalised in the same hospital where he received emergency treatment and surgery. His stay in hospital lasted until 16 May 2008.
In the course of the subsequent pre-investigation inquiries and investigation both boys’ injuries were classified as life threatening injuries constituting grievous harm to health (опасные для жизни повреждения, причинившие тяжкий вред здоровью), according to forensic medical examination reports of 22 October 2008 (ordered in respect of the first applicant by an inspector from the unit for juvenile affairs of the Chernovskiy district police on 31 July 2008) and of 18 November 2008 (ordered in respect of the second applicant by an investigator from the investigation unit of the Chernovskiy district police on 31 October 2008).
At 6 p.m. on 21 April 2008 the explosion was reported to the Chernovskiy district police in Chita. A pre-investigation inquiry was carried out. The scene of the incident was inspected. Samples from the epicentre of the explosion were taken for examination. The examination established the explosion of 30-mm projectile VOG-17 from an AGS-17 heavy grenade launcher.
On 26 April 2008 the investigation unit of the Chernovskiy district police opened a criminal case and commenced an investigation under Article 222 § 1 of the Criminal Code (illegal acquisition, transfer, sale, storage, transportation, or bearing of firearms, ammunition, explosives, or explosive devices) against an unidentified individual who had acted in violation of the federal Arms Act by having acquired, transported and stored explosive devices which had been found by the second applicant near garages in the proximity of school no. 30 in micro-district no. 6 (hereinafter “school no. 30”). The case was given the number 160304.
On 12 May 2008 the Chernovskiy district prosecutor’s office examined the criminal case and gave instructions to carry out investigative actions in order to ensure full and thorough investigation.
In parallel proceedings an inspector from the unit for juvenile affairs of the Chernovskiy district police carried out a pre-investigation inquiry aimed at verifying whether the first applicant had committed criminal acts. It was established that on 20 April 2008 when playing outside with two other children the second applicant had found a cylinder-shaped metal object in a ditch near garages situated 200 metres from school no. 30 and had taken it home. At about 5 p.m. the next day near his block of flats the second applicant had handed the object to the first applicant who had dropped it on the tarmac. That had caused an explosion in which five children had been injured including the first applicant. The explosion had also damaged the windows of a flat located on the ground floor of a nearby block of flats. In her decision of 30 April 2008 the inspector concluded that there had been the elements of the crimes provided for by Article 118 § 1 (infliction of grievous bodily harm by negligence) and Article 168 (destruction and damage to property by negligence) of the Criminal Code in the first applicant’s actions. However, since he had not reached the age of criminal liability, criminal proceedings could not be instituted against him. On 5 May 2008 that decision was annulled as unlawful by the Chernovskiy district prosecutor’s office, which ordered an additional pre-investigation inquiry. The inspector’s new decision of 16 May 2008 not to institute criminal proceedings against the first applicant in view of his minor age was again annulled by the district prosecutor’s office on 19 May 2008, and an additional inquiry was ordered. On 19 May 2008 the applicants’ mothers lodged a complaint with the district prosecutor’s office, expressing their disagreement with the investigating authority’s pre-investigation inquiry into the first applicant’s criminal liability, as well as alleging that the investigation in the criminal case opened on 26 April 2008 had not been conducted properly. On 21 May 2008 their complaint was dismissed. No criminal proceedings were instituted against the first applicant and the file of the pre-investigation inquiry was joined to the file of criminal case no. 160304.
In the course of the investigation in the latter case two explosivesexpert reports were obtained. According to an expert report of 10 June 2008, one of the objects found at the site of the explosion was the head of a 30mm projectile which had been fired through a bore. According to an expert report of 11 July 2008, metal debris from the site of the explosion included fragments of the body of a 30mm VOG-17 grenade which had been fired through the bore of an AGS-17 heavy grenade launcher.
On 23 August 2008 an investigator from the investigation unit of the Chernovskiy district police suspended the investigation in accordance with Article 208 § 1 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure on the grounds that the perpetrator had not been identified.
The next day the head of the investigation unit annulled that decision for failure to thoroughly investigate the case and resumed the investigation.
In the course of the investigation witnesses and victims of the explosion and forty-six residents of the nearby blocks of flats were questioned.
It was established that sand had been brought to a building site for the construction of a block of flats in microdistrict no. 6 by drivers M., N. and P. from the Chitaspetsstroy construction company. The company dispatcher and the driver, P., were questioned. The dispatcher stated that sand had been transported from the Olimpiyskiy kompleks building site situated in the Zabaykalskiy Military District. P. averred that he had transported sand from a warehouse of the Stroyinvest company. He had also transported sand from a former ski depot at the Zabaykalskiy Military District, but (according to him) that sand had been delivered to another micro-district of the town.
The first applicant’s mother complained to the Chernovskiy district prosecutor’s office that she had not been informed about developments in the investigation and investigative activities carried out by the investigation unit of the Chernovskiy district police. Her complaint was dismissed and on 15 September 2008 she complained further to the Zabaykalskiy regional prosecutor’s office, which dismissed her complaint in a decision of 24 September 2008, holding that a victim could only have access to the material of the criminal case after the completion of the investigation.
On 9 October 2008 the acts of the unidentified perpetrator were reclassified under Article 225 § 1 (improper discharge of duties by a person entrusted with guarding firearms, ammunition, explosives, or explosive devices, if this has entailed their theft or destruction or other serious consequences) and Article 348 (loss of military property) of the Criminal Code. A deputy head of the Chernovskiy district police forwarded “material extracted from case no. 160304 in relation to crimes of an unidentified person under Article 348 and Article 225 § 1 of the Criminal Code for taking a lawful decision” to the Chita garrison military prosecutor of the Siberian Military Circuit, who forwarded it to the head of the military investigation division of the Chita garrison.
On 17 October 2008 investigation in criminal case no. 160304 was assigned to Investigator S. from the investigation unit of the Chernovskiy district police, who informed the applicants’ mothers on 21 October 2008 that the case had been transferred to the competent authority for investigation under Article 225 § 1 of the Criminal Code.
On 22 October 2008 the deputy head of the military investigation division of the Chita garrison issued a decision on “the transfer of a report of a crime according to jurisdiction”. He stated that the report of the crime concerning the explosion of ammunition (сообщение по факту взрыва боеприпаса) had been received on 13 October 2008 from the Chita garrison military prosecutor; the pre-investigation inquiry into the report of the crime (проверка сообщения о преступлении) had established that on 9 April 2008 VOG-17 “grenades” from an AGS-17 heavy grenade launcher, which had passed through the bore of a grenade launcher during firing, had been brought to a building site in micro-district no. 6 in a delivery of sand; that on 20 April 2008 they had been found by children; and that subsequently they had exploded as a result of careless handling. The involvement of military personnel in the loss of the said grenades had not been established. The military investigating authorities were only competent to investigate crimes committed by service personnel, and the case should therefore be transferred to the Chernovskiy district police, who were competent to investigate crimes committed by the civilian population. The file of the preinvestigation inquiry carried out by the military investigating authorities in relation to crimes under Article 225 § 1 and Article 348 of the Criminal Code was joined to criminal case no. 160304.
On 24 and 30 October 2008, respectively, an investigator of the Chernovskiy district police ordered that the second and first applicants be acknowledged as victims of the crime, who had sustained physical and psychological harm. The investigator stated that before 9 April 2008 at an unidentified place an unidentified person who had been entrusted with guarding firearms, ammunition and explosive devices had failed to carry out his or her duties properly. As a result, a VOG-17 grenade from an AGS17 grenade launcher had been lost. The grenade had been fired through the bore of a grenade launcher. On 9 April 2008 it had been brought in a sand delivery to a building site in micro-district no. 6. On 20 April 2008 it had been found by children. In the evening of 21 April 2008 it had exploded near block of flats no. 14 (a) in micro-district no. 6 as a result of careless handling, causing serious damage to the children’s health. This summary of the facts was reiterated in the investigating authorities’ subsequent decisions.
On 24 October 2008 the second applicant was questioned as a victim in the presence of his mother. Other victims were also questioned.
On 9 November 2008 an investigator from the investigation unit of the Chernovskiy district police suspended the investigation under Article 208 § 1 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure on the grounds that the perpetrator had not been identified.
On 10 November 2008 a deputy head of the Chernovskiy district prosecutor’s office found that the investigation had been flawed and requested that measures be taken to establish where the ammunition had been found by the children and where it had been stored, and to identify the person responsible for its loss as a result of a failure to comply with the requirements for its storage. He also ordered that a certain D. should be granted victim status alongside the other victims.
On 24 November 2008 the decision to suspend the investigation was annulled and the investigator was instructed to take the measures enumerated in the prosecutor’s request.
In November 2008 the applicants’ mothers wrote to the military investigation department of the Investigative Committee at the prosecutor’s office of the Russian Federation for the Siberian Military Circuit that though the letter of 21 October 2008 (see paragraph 19 above) had not indicated the name of the investigating authority to which the case had been transferred, they believed, in view of the new classification of the crime under Article 225 § 1 of the Criminal Code, that the case had been transferred for investigation to the military investigation department of the Investigative Committee at the prosecutor’s office of the Russian Federation for the Siberian Military Circuit. Since they had not received any news, they asked that they be provided with information concerning any progress in the investigation.
On 14 December 2008 an investigator of the investigation unit of the Chernovskiy district police suspended the investigation again on the same grounds as before.
On 19 December 2008 the deputy head of the Chernovskiy district prosecutor’s office requested the annulment of the decision to suspend the investigation, and reiterated his request to take the measures previously requested by him. Except for granting a certain D. victim status, those measures had not been taken.
On 27 December 2008 the head of the investigation unit of the Chernovskiy district police annulled the decision of 14 December 2008 and resumed the investigation, ordering that those measures should be carried out.
On 24 December 2008 the applicants’ mothers requested that an investigator from the investigation unit of the Chernovskiy district police provide them with procedural documents concerning the investigative activities carried out in the course of the investigation. Their request was unsuccessful, and on 10 February 2009 they lodged a complaint with the Chernovskiy district prosecutor’s office. On 12 February 2009 the investigator provided the applicants’ mothers with the requested documents. In a decision of 13 February 2009 the district prosecutor’s office held that a delay in providing documents concerning the investigation had been in breach of the statutory time-limits and that the prosecutor’s office had taken (unspecified) measures in respect of those violations.
On 13 February 2009 an investigator of the investigation unit of the Chernovskiy district police suspended the investigation again on the same grounds as before.
On 3 March 2009 the deputy head of the Chernovskiy district prosecutor’s office reiterated the request for the investigating authority to comply with the previously given instructions.
On 11 March 2009 the decision to suspend the investigation of 13 February 2009 was annulled.
On 11 April 2009 an investigator of the investigation unit of the Chernovskiy district police suspended the investigation again on the same grounds as before, after receiving a report from the criminal search unit of the Chernovskiy district police that it had neither been possible to establish where the ammunition had been found by the children and where it had been stored, nor to identify the person responsible for its loss.
On 14 January 2010 the latter decision was annulled.
On 16 June 2011 the investigation was suspended as before, under Article 208 § 1 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, for failure to identify the perpetrator.
On 27 December 2013 an acting head of the Chernovskiy district investigation unit of the Chita police discontinued, in accordance with Article 24 § 1 (3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the criminal proceedings in the case on the grounds that the prosecution of the offence under Article 225 § 1 of the Criminal Code, which belonged to the category of minor offences (преступление небольшой тяжести), was time-barred by virtue of Article 78 § 1 (a) of the Criminal Code.
The applicants’ mothers brought civil proceedings in the applicants’ interests against the Ministry of Finance of the Russian Federation and the Chita police, seeking non-pecuniary damages in the amount of 2,000,000 roubles each. They asserted that the State was responsible for its failure to ensure the safety of the explosive device and to identify and prosecute the people who had been involved in its unlawful circulation. They stated that grenades for VOG-17 grenade launchers were entirely excluded from civilian circulation and could only be stored in storage facilities of military units of the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation, the Ministry of the Interior of the Russian Federation and other authorised State organs. The investigating authorities had failed to identify those who had committed the crime under Article 225 § 1 of the Criminal Code. The applicants’ mothers argued that, as the victims of the crime, their children were entitled to compensation from the State.
At an open hearing held on 17 June 2009 the Tsentralniy District Court of Chita heard the applicants’ mothers and their representative, representatives of the respondents (who argued that the claims were unfounded because any harm sustained as a result of a crime should be compensated by those who had committed it), and a prosecutor from the Tsentralniy district prosecutor’s office of Chita (who also requested that the claims be dismissed). The District Court examined the decisions taken by the investigating authority in the criminal proceedings, noting that the perpetrator had not been identified. It therefore dismissed the claims, holding that under Articles 151 and 1064 § 1 of the Civil Code nonpecuniary damage was to be compensated in full by the person who had inflicted it, save for cases provided for by law. Domestic law did not provide for the State’s obligation to compensate for nonpecuniary damage sustained as a result of a crime, including where the State had been unable to prevent or solve a crime.
The applicants’ mothers appealed against that judgment. At an open hearing held on 9 September 2009 the Zabaykalskiy Regional Court heard evidence from the applicants’ mothers, a representative of the Chita police, and a prosecutor from the Zabaykalskiy regional prosecutor’s office, who requested that the appeal be dismissed. The court fully endorsed the findings of the first-instance court and upheld the judgment, reiterating that the State was not responsible for harm sustained as a result of an unsolved crime. It rejected as hypothetical the applicants’ mothers’ argument that the grenade must have been stored at the premises of the Ministry of Defence and that the State should be held responsible for the Ministry’s failure to ensure its proper storage. It held that there was no evidence that the grenade had been State property or that it had not been properly stored.
The applicants’ mothers lodged an application for supervisory review of the judgments of the Tsentralniy District Court of Chita and the Zabaykalskiy Regional Court. On 28 December 2009 Judge B. of the Zabaykalskiy Regional Court dismissed the application. She reiterated that the law did not provide for the State’s obligation to compensate for damage caused by unsolved crimes. Therefore, there was no basis in domestic law for awarding the applicants compensation for nonpecuniary damage.
According to information on the Internet site of the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation (), AGS-17 grenade launchers and VOG-17 grenade have been and are still used by Russian military units during military exercises.
The Arms Act 1996 (Federal Law no. 150-FZ) distinguishes between civilian arms, service arms and battlefield arms. Battlefield arms and ammunition are used exclusively by the State armed forces, the federal organs of executive power operating, inter alia, in the spheres of internal affairs, emergency relief and execution of criminal punishments, and other authorised State organisations.
Under Government decree no. 1314 of 1997 (adopted for enforcement of the Arms Act), as in force at the material time, circulation of battlefield arms and ammunition (including their manufacture, sale, transfer, acquisition, storage, bearing, transportation and destruction) was carried out by military units and organisations of the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of the Interior and other authorised State organs. All cases of theft, loss and damage had to be reported by service personnel or staff to their superiors who, in their turn, reported them further to competent authorities specifying the model, calibre, series, number and year of manufacture of each item, organised an investigation, and took measures for the search of stolen or lost items. Stolen or lost arms and ammunition had to be removed from the records of the State organisation concerned by the established protocol after obtaining confirmation from the Main Information Centre of the Ministry of the Interior of the Russian Federation or the Ministry’s regional organ that the stolen or lost items had been recorded as such. Damaged materiel had to be removed from the records of the State organisation concerned following the drawing up of a legal document by a specially created commission, after which it had to be disposed of or destroyed in the established order.
Article 222 § 1 of the Criminal Code, as in force at the material time, provided for criminal liability for illegal acquisition, transfer, disposal, storage, transportation, or bearing of firearms, ammunition, explosives, or explosive devices, punishable by, inter alia, deprivation of liberty for the period of up to four years.
Under Article 225 § 1 of the Criminal Code, as in force at the material time, improper discharge of duties through negligence by a person entrusted with guarding firearms, ammunition, explosives, or explosive devices, if this had entailed their theft or destruction or other serious consequences, was a crime against public safety punishable by, inter alia, deprivation of liberty for the period of up to two years.
Under Article 348 of the Criminal Code, as in force at the material time, loss of military property by negligence was a crime against military service punishable by, inter alia, deprivation of liberty for the period of up to two years.
Under Article 78 § 1 (a) of the Criminal Code, as in force at the material time, the limitation period for the prosecution of minor offences (that is to say offences punishable by deprivation of liberty for a period not exceeding three years) was two years.