The case concerns respect for the principle of equality of arms between the applicant and the prosecution during the extension of his pre-trial detention, as neither he nor his lawyer had received the prosecutor’s application to extend the pre-trial detention in good time.
The applicant was born in 1968 and lives in Miskolc. He was represented by Mr L. Kovács, a lawyer practising in Miskolc.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr Z. Tallódi, of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 7 October 2015 the applicant was arrested on charges of trafficking stolen goods and other offences.
On 9 October 2015 the Miskolc District Court placed the applicant in pre-trial detention until 9 November 2015, finding that there were grounds to believe that he would abscond, obstruct the investigations or commit further offences. The Miskolc High Court, acting as a court of second instance, upheld the decision on 26 October 2015.
On 30 October 2015 the Miskolc Public Prosecutor’s Office applied to have the pre-trial detention extended for the same reasons as above. No documents pertaining to the investigation were attached to the application.
The applicant received the prosecution’s application on 2 November 2015, and his defence counsel received it four days later.
Meanwhile, on 2 November 2015 the investigating judge delivered his decision in purely written proceedings (since the prosecutor’s application did not refer to any new circumstances) and extended the applicant’s pretrial detention until 9 February 2016.
Both the applicant and his defence counsel appealed. In the appeal, defence counsel referred in particular to the fact that the application to extend the detention had been served on him belatedly and without any supporting documents.
On 19 November 2015 the Miskolc High Court, acting as a court of second instance, upheld the decision to extend the detention without addressing the procedural issues raised by the defence.
The relevant parts of Act no. XIX of 1998 on the Code of Criminal Procedure, as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
Article 210
“1.  The investigating judge shall hold a hearing if an application pertains to the following subjects:
...
(b)  extension of pre-trial detention or house arrest where, as compared to the previous decision, the reason for the extension is a new circumstance in the application, ...
...
The investigating judge decides [exclusively] on the basis of written submissions [without a hearing]:
(a)  in cases which are not listed in paragraph 1 above, ...”
Article 211 § 1
“... If the subject matter of the application is the extension of pre-trial detention, the application shall be sent to the suspect or the accused and defence counsel even if the investigating judge is deciding [exclusively] on the basis of written submissions.”
Article 211 § 1a
“... If the subject matter of the application is the extension of the pre-trial detention, copies of the investigation documents – [that is to say, those] on which the application has been based and which have been generated since the last decision on the issue of pre-trial detention – shall be attached to the application to be sent to the suspect or the accused and defence counsel.”