The case originated in an application (no. 36755/06) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Ms Ecaterina Fomin (“the applicant”), on 17 August 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Zeamă from “Lawyers for Human Rights”, a non-governmental organisation based in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V. Grosu.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the courts had failed to give sufficient reasons for the judgments convicting her of an administrative offence and had imposed a penalty on her despite the expiry of the statutory time-limit for doing so.
On 9 December 2008 the Court decided to communicate the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (former Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1959 and lives in Soroca.
The applicant works as a technician for a State telephone company. On 9 June 2005 she called R. over the phone and they arranged for the applicant to visit R. at her house situated on Viilor str. no. 15/36 in Soroca in order to verify the functioning of the phone line installed there. Some twenty minutes later when she came to R.’s home, she was met by R. who, according to the applicant, started shouting at her and calling her names.
The applicant called the police from her mobile phone, but was told that she needed to go to the police station in person in order to make a written complaint. She decided to go back to her workplace and told her superior about the incident, but was advised to forget about it. She was told that R. had already called her superior to complain about an alleged assault on her by the applicant.
R. complained to the police that the applicant had assaulted her on 9 June 2005. According to R.’s complaint, the applicant had entered her apartment situated on Viilor str. 15 apartment 36 without authorisation and started ripping the phone lines off the wall and insulting her with offensive language. The applicant had then gone to the cellar and destroyed the phone socket and phone lines. She had been extremely irritated and one could smell alcohol on her breath. Finally, she had hit R. in the face and left. R.’s husband wrote a similar complaint, also noting Viilor str. 15 as being the address of the apartment where the incident had taken place.
On 11 July 2005 the local police filed a report confirming that the applicant had committed an administrative offence by insulting R. The report attested that on 9 June 2005 the applicant had entered R.’s apartment without authorisation, insulted her with offensive language and then hit her in the face, causing her physical harm.
On 26 July 2005 the Soroca District Court found the applicant guilty of the administrative offence of hooliganism.
On an unknown date the Bălţi Court of Appeal sent the case for a rehearing.
The applicant submitted statements from five companies she had visited on 9 June 2005, all confirming that she had been polite and not under the influence of alcohol that day, which contradicted R.’s statements concerning the applicant’s aggressiveness and alcohol consumption. She also submitted a certificate confirming that no repair of the phone lines at R.’s home or office had been asked for on 9 June 2005 or thereafter, and evidence that after her alleged visit phone calls had been made from both phone lines. That proved, in the applicant’s opinion, that the statements in R.’s complaint concerning the ripping out of the phone line and phone socket had been untrue. She submitted further evidence proving that her company had a contract to service the phone line installed at R.’s place, that she had been asked to verify a number of phone lines on 9 June 2005, including that at R.’s place, and evidence of the applicant’s call to the police on 9 June 2005.
On 19 December 2005 the Soroca District Court found the applicant guilty of the administrative offence of insult (injuria). The decision was an almost word-for-word copy of that adopted on 26 July 2005 and reads as follows in its entirety:
“Decision concerning the administrative offence under Article 471-1 of the Code of Administrative Offences, 19 December 2005
Judge [V. N.] of the Soroca District Court, having examined the case concerning the administrative offence regarding [the applicant, her address and workplace], has found:
On 9 June 2005 at 12.20 p.m. [the applicant] entered [R.’s] apartment situated on Mateevici str. 1,  without authorisation and started shouting and calling her names, thus denigrating [R.’s] honour and dignity, therefore committing the administrative offence provided for in Article 473 (1) of the Code of Administrative Offences.
The allegation that [the applicant] hit the victim has not been confirmed.
In view of the above, relying on [relevant procedural provisions of the Code of Administrative Offences], the court decides:
To impose a fine on [the applicant] in the amount of ten conventional units amounting to 200 [Moldovan] lei.
This decision may be appealed against within 10 days to the Bălţi Court of Appeal”.
In her appeal in cassation the applicant submitted that there was no evidence whatsoever that she had ever been in R.’s apartment at Mateevici str. or shouted at her. The court had not given any ground for the decision such as a document, witness statement or anything other than the statements by R. and her husband. Moreover, she had visited R. at her address at Viilor str. no. 15 and not at Mateevici str. no. 1 as stated in the decision. Finally, the court had disregarded Article 37 of the Code of Administrative Offences (see below), according to which no administrative penalty could be imposed after three months from the date on which the offence had been committed.
On 8 February 2006 the Bălţi Court of Appeal upheld the lower court’s decision. The court’s decision started by stating that:
“By its decision [of 19 December 2005] the [lower court] imposed an administrative penalty on [the applicant] because on 9 June 2005 she insulted [R.] in her apartment situated on Mateevici str. in Soroca, thus denigrating [R.’s] honour and dignity.”
It then summarised the applicant’s appeal. The court further found that the lower court had properly applied the procedural law by summoning the parties and explaining their rights to them and by verifying all the circumstances of the case. It correctly dismissed the part of the complaint that the applicant had hit R., since during the court hearing R. herself had denied having been hit. The court reduced the fine to 136 Moldovan lei (8.80 euros (EUR)), using a slightly different manner of calculating the amount of the fine. That decision was final. Its text was accessible at the Soroca District Court, where it arrived on 20 February 2006.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”) read as follows:
 “Section 47/3. Insult
Insult, that is, the intentional denigration of honour and dignity of a person through an action, verbally or in writing, shall be punished by a fine of seven to fifteen conventional units or by administrative detention of up to fifteen days.
Section 266. Circumstances to be clarified during the examination of the case concerning an administrative offence.
The authority (official) shall clarify during the examination of the case concerning an administrative offence: whether an administrative offence has been committed; whether the person is guilty of having committed it; whether (s)he should be subjected to administrative responsibility; whether there are circumstances attenuating or aggravating responsibility; whether pecuniary damage was caused; whether there are grounds for forwarding the materials concerning the administrative offence for examination by a public association, the staff [of his/her employer]; as well as other circumstances which are important for the examination of the case.”