The case originated in an application (no. 6571/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Igor Aleksandrovich Vasilchenko (“the applicant”), on 27 January 2004.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights
On 7 December 2007 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 1).
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of the application. Having examined the Government's objection, the Court dismissed it.
The applicant was born in 1964 and lives in Shebekino, the Belgorod Region.
In March 1994 he signed a five-year serviceman contract with the Ministry of Defence of the . In January 1999 he applied for his discharge from military service on the grounds that his commander had failed to fulfil its contractual obligations, in particular to pay him certain allowances in due time. His application was refused.
In October 1999 the applicant instituted judicial proceedings before the . By a judgment of 10 November 1999 the latter upheld his action and ordered his commander to discharge him from service, to pay the amounts that were due to him and “to solve the question of providing the applicant with housing in accordance with law prior to his discharge”.
On 24 October 2002 the Tambov Housing Committee (Тамбовская КЭЧ) assigned to the applicant and his family (his wife and two sons) a flat in a newly built residence in  in  (“the flat”).
On 20 February 2003 the applicant was issued with an occupancy voucher (ордер на жилое помещение), a document that entitled him, his wife and their two sons to occupy and use the flat on the basis of a social tenancy agreement with the State.
On an unspecified date he brought an action seeking “the suspension of the occupancy voucher”. He alleged that the building had not yet been registered and that this prevented him from disposing of the flat. Besides, there were certain construction defects that had to be fixed. On 26 May 2003 the Sovetskiy District Court of Tambov upheld his action.
In November 2004 the applicant brought an action against the Tambov Housing Committee seeking ownership of the flat. By a judgment of 9 December 2004 the Oktyabriskiy District Court of Tambov granted joint title to the applicant and his two sons, whilst his wife waved her possibility to be granted title in respect of the flat.
On 25 August 2000 the Bailiff Service of the Sovetskiy District of Tambov opened enforcement proceedings in respect of the judgment of 10 November 1999 (see paragraph 7 above).
The proceedings were discontinued and resumed several times. On 25 December 2002 the Bailiff in charge issued a notice stating that the relevant domestic law prohibited the discharge of long-serving servicemen in need of housing if their commander had not provided them with such housing. In reply to an enquiry by the applicant of 30 June 2003 about measures taken in order to enforce the judgment of 10 November 1999, the Bailiff responded that his discharge from military service could not be executed because his commander had not yet provided him with housing.
The applicant and his family moved into the flat on 1 November 2004.
On 28 February 2005 the unit commander discharged the applicant from military service.
On an unspecified date in 2005 the Prosecutor of the Tambov Garrison instituted proceedings against the applicant before the , seeking annulment of the occupancy voucher (see paragraph 9 above). The prosecutor submitted that the applicant had failed to inform his commander that his wife held joint title in respect of a flat in another town which she had obtained by way of a privatisation measure and that the concealment of this information had resulted in the applicant and his family having been provided with a larger accommodation than that to which they had been entitled.
By a judgment of 18 August 2005 the  upheld the prosecutor's revision request. The Military Court, referring to section 15 of the Federal Law on the Status of Servicemen and to a Ruling of 22 April 1999 by the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation (summarised below), observed that only those servicemen and members of their families who were “in need of better housing” were entitled to State accommodation. The  found it established that the applicant's wife had indeed possessed housing, albeit in another town, and that he had omitted to inform the Housing Committee of this fact. The  concluded that the applicant's wife had not qualified as a person “in need of better housing”, that the applicant could only have claimed housing rights in so far as concerned his own needs and those of his two sons. His concealment of the information important for the assessment of the “housing needs” of the members of his family constituted a sufficient ground under the relevant provisions of the Housing Code to invalidate the occupancy voucher of 20 February 2003.
On 14 November 2005 the Garrison prosecutor brought further proceedings against the applicant. He sought to have the judgment of 9 December 2004 (see paragraph 11 above) set aside on the grounds of newly discovered circumstances: such circumstances formed the basis of the judgment of 18 August 2005 that had invalidated the occupancy voucher.
On 13 December 2005 the Oktyabriskiy District Court examined the prosecutor's revision request. Considering that the invalidation of the occupancy voucher was a fact “essential for the dispute”, the District Court decided to re-open the proceedings (Article 392 of the Code of Civil Procedure) and quashed the judgment of 9 December 2004. The prosecutor and the representative of the Tambov Housing Committee attended the hearing and made their oral submissions. The applicant did not appear “for an unknown reason”.
On 4 January 2005 the applicant filed his submissions in which he argued that the prosecutor had no standing to request revision and, with a view to a hearing that he thought was to be scheduled in future, asked the District Court to hear the prosecutor's revision request in his absence.
On 15 February 2006, after having decided to re-open the proceedings on 13 December 2005, the District Court examined anew and dismissed the applicant's claim for ownership of the flat. It further ordered that the applicant and his family be evicted from the flat and that they should be offered their “previous accommodation” (an apartment in a council dormitory in , see paragraph 23 below). The District Court reached these conclusions on the sole ground that the applicant had obtained the occupancy voucher unlawfully. It did not answer his argument that, pursuant to the judgment of 10 November 1999, his commander was still obliged to provide him with housing in accordance with the law.
On 14 June 2006, on an appeal by the applicant, the  upheld the judgment of 15 February 2006, endorsing in summary fashion the first-instance court's reasoning. The applicant received a summons for the appeal hearing on 14 June 2006, the day of the hearing. According to the date on the summons and postmarks on the envelope, it was issued on 1 June 2006, despatched by the court's registry on 2 June 2006 and arrived at the applicant's post office on 13 June 2006. Given the long distance between his town of residence at the time and , he was unable to attend the hearing. It appears from the 's judgment that the prosecutor had been present and had made his oral submissions to the court.
On 27 November 2006, in accordance with the judgment of 15 February 2006, the applicant and his family were evicted from the flat that they occupied in  in .
On 13 December 2006 the applicant was informed that an apartment in a council dormitory in  – their previous accommodation – had been assigned to him and his family and that they could all move in. The applicant refused. Instead he asked his former commander to put him back on the list of servicemen in need of better housing. By a letter of 17 January 2007 the commander replied that there were no legal grounds for putting him back on that list because he had been discharged from the army.
Under sections 1, 2 and 11 of the Federal Law on the Privatisation of Accommodations of 1991, privatisation consisted of a transfer of ownership of an accommodation from the State or municipal authorities made free of charge to a private party. Citizens could obtain private ownership in respect of accommodations which they occupied under terms of a social tenancy agreement or a lease and could enjoy their right to free privatisation, as a rule, only once.
A decision to grant a flat was to be implemented by way of issuing the person concerned with an occupancy voucher from the local municipal authority (Article 47). The voucher served as the legal basis for taking possession of the flat designated therein and for the signing of a tenancy agreement between the housing maintenance authority and the tenant (Article 51 of the RSFSR Housing Code, and also Articles 672 and 674 of the Civil Code of the ).
Article 45 of the Code of Civil Procedure (in force as of 1 February 2003) provides that a prosecutor may bring proceedings for the protection of the rights and lawful interests of citizens, other persons or the  (paragraph 1). A prosecutor may also intervene in ongoing proceedings in certain types of cases stipulated in the Code of Civil Procedure and other federal laws (paragraph 3).
The Code of Civil Procedure provides as follows:
Article 392. Grounds for reconsideration
“1.  [Judgments] which have come into force may be reconsidered on the basis of newly discovered circumstances.
The grounds for reconsideration ... shall be:
1)  essential circumstances that were unknown and could not have been known to the applicant;
4)  the annulment of ... a decision of the State authority ... that was the basis of the judgment or decision of the court ...”
Article 394. Lodging of an application
“... [An application for the reconsideration of a [judgment], owing to the discovery of new circumstances], shall be lodged by parties, the prosecutor, other persons who participated in the proceedings within three months of the discovery of the new circumstances.”
Article 397. Decision on the reconsideration of the case
“1.  Following examination of an application for the reconsideration of a [judgment] owing to the discovery of new circumstances, the court may either grant the application and quash the [judgment], or dismiss the application.
A court decision by which an application for the reconsideration of a [judgment] owing to the discovery of new circumstances is granted shall not be subject to appeal.
Provided that a [judgment] is quashed, the case shall be examined in accordance with the rules of this Code.”
The Code of Civil Procedure provides as follows:
Article 113. Court notices and summonses
“1.  Parties to the proceedings, as well as witnesses, experts, specialists and interpreters, shall be summoned to a hearing by letter sent by registered mail with an acknowledgment of receipt, by court summons with an acknowledgment of receipt, by telegram, by phone or fax or by any other means which can guarantee a record of the fact that the summons was sent and was received by the party.
A court summons shall be served on the parties in such a way that they have enough time to prepare their case and appear at the hearing.”
Article 116. Receipt of a court summons
“1.  A court summons ... to a person shall be served on him or her against his or her signature on a counterfoil of the summons, which shall be returned to the court ...
If the current place of residence of an addressee is unknown, an entry to this effect shall be made on the court summons, showing the date and time of the attempted service and the source of the information.”
Article 155. The court hearing
“A civil case shall be heard in a court session; mandatory notification of the place and time of the court session shall be provided to all parties to the case.”
Article 161. Checking attendance of the parties
“The secretary assistant informs the judge of the parties who appeared at a hearing, whether those who failed to appear had been notified, and reasons for the latter's absence.”
Article 167. Consequences of failure to attend
“... 2.  If a party to a case fails to appear at a hearing and there is no evidence that the party has been duly summoned, the hearing shall be adjourned...
A court may examine a case in the absence of a defendant who has been notified of the time and place of that hearing if he or she has failed to provide to the court any valid reasons for his or her absence and has not asked that the hearing be held in his or her absence.
Parties may ask a court to hold a hearing in their absence and to send them copies of the judgment. ”
According to Article 347 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the appeal court's role is to review a first instance court's decision with a view to verifying its lawfulness and validity. The appeal court has the power to assess evidence, including additional material submitted by the parties, to confirm the facts as established by the first instance or to establish new facts.