The case originated in an application (no. 46470/11) against the Italian Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Italian national, Ms Adelina Parrillo (“the applicant”), on 26 July 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr N. Paoletti, Ms C. Sartori and Ms N. Paoletti, lawyers practising in Rome. The Italian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their coAgents, Ms P. Accardo and Mr G. Mauro Pellegrini.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the ban (under section 13 of Law no. 40 of 19 February 2004) on donating to scientific research embryos conceived through medically assisted reproduction was incompatible with her right to respect for her private life and her right to the peaceful enjoyment of her possessions guaranteed under Article 8 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1. She also complained of a violation of freedom of expression guaranteed under Article 10 of the Convention, of which scientific research was, in her submission, a fundamental aspect.
The application was allocated to the Second Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court).
On 28 May 2013 notice of the complaints under Article 8 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
On 28 January 2014 a Chamber of the Second Section composed of Işıl Karakaş, President, Guido Raimondi, Peer Lorenzen, Dragoljub Popović, András Sajó, Nebojša Vučinić and Paulo Pinto de Albuquerque, judges, and Stanley Naismith, Section Registrar, relinquished jurisdiction in favour of the Grand Chamber, neither of the parties having objected to relinquishment (Article 30 of the Convention and Rule 72).
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined in accordance with Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the admissibility and merits of the application.
The European Center for Law and Justice, the associations Movimento per la vita, Scienza e vita, Forum delle associazioni familiari, Luca Coscioni, Amica Cicogna Onlus, L’Altra Cicogna Onlus, Cerco Un Bimbo, VOX – Osservatorio italiano sui Diritti, SIFES (Society of Fertility, Sterility and Reproductive Medicine) and Cittadinanzattiva and forty-six members of the Italian Parliament were given leave to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3).
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 18 June 2014 (Rule 59 § 3).
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Ms Accardo, Ms Morresi, Mr Paoletti, Mr De Luca and Ms Sartori, and answers to questions by judges from Ms Accardo, Mr Mauro Pellegrini, Mr De Luca, Ms Paoletti and Mr Paoletti.
The applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Rome.
In 2002 she had recourse to assisted reproduction techniques, undergoing in vitro fertilisation (IVF) treatment with her partner at the Centre for reproductive medicine at the European Hospital (“the centre”) in Rome. The five embryos obtained from the IVF treatment were placed in cryopreservation.
Before the embryos could be implanted the applicant’s partner died, on 12 November 2003, in a bomb attack in Nasiriya (Iraq) while he was reporting on the war.
After deciding not to have the embryos implanted, the applicant sought to donate them to scientific research and thus contribute to promoting advances in treatment for diseases that are difficult to cure.
According to the information provided at the hearing before the Grand Chamber, the applicant made a number of unsuccessful verbal requests for release of the embryos at the centre where they were being stored.
In a letter of 14 December 2011, the applicant asked the Director of the centre to release the five cryopreserved embryos so that they could be used for stem-cell research. The Director refused to comply with her request on the ground that this type of research was banned and punishable as a criminal offence in Italy under section 13 of Law no. 40 of 19 February 2004 (“Law no. 40/2004”).
The embryos in question are currently stored in the cryogenic storage bank at the centre where the IVF treatment was carried out.
“(1)  In order to remedy reproductive problems arising as a result of human sterility or infertility, recourse may be had to medically assisted reproduction in the conditions and in accordance with the procedures provided for by this Law, which guarantees the rights of all the persons concerned, including those of the subject thus conceived.”
“... [only] couples [composed of persons] who have reached the age of majority, are of opposite sex, are married or cohabiting, are of reproductive age and living may have recourse to assisted reproduction techniques.”
“(1)  It is forbidden to experiment on a human embryo.
(2)  Clinical and experimental research on a human embryo shall be authorised only on condition that it is performed exclusively for therapeutic or diagnostic purposes with the aim of protecting the health and development of the embryo and that no alternative methods exist.
...
(4)  Anyone who infringes the prohibition provided for in subsection 1 shall be liable to a term of imprisonment ranging from two to six years and to a fine of 50,000 to 150,000 euros. ...
(5)  Any health professional convicted of an offence provided for in this section shall be debarred from practising medicine for one to three years.”
“(1)  The cryopreservation or destruction of embryos is forbidden, without prejudice to the provisions of Law no. 194 of 22 May 1978 [rules on social protection of maternity and voluntary termination of pregnancy].
(2)  Embryo production techniques shall not result in the creation of a higher number of embryos than that strictly required for a single and simultaneous implantation and in no circumstances shall more than three embryos be created.
(3)  Where the embryos cannot be implanted into the uterus for reasons of serious and proven force majeure affecting the state of health of the woman concerned which were unforeseeable at the time of fertilisation, cryopreservation of the embryos shall be authorised until the date of transfer, which shall be effected as soon as possible.”
By judgment no. 151 of 1 April 2009 (see paragraphs 29-31 below), the Constitutional Court declared unconstitutional the provision in section 14(2) of Law no. 40/2004 according to which embryo production techniques must not result in the creation of a higher number of embryos than that strictly required for “a single and simultaneous implantation and in no circumstances shall more than three embryos be created”. It also declared section 14(3) unconstitutional on the ground that it did not provide that the transfer of the embryos should be performed without jeopardising the woman’s health.
Following the enactment of Law no. 40/2004, the National Bioethics Committee examined the issue of the fate of abandoned cryopreserved embryos, the Law making no specific provision in this regard but implicitly banning the use of surplus embryos for scientific research.
In that connection the Committee issued an opinion in favour of “adoption for birth”, a practice enabling a couple or a woman to adopt surplus embryos for implantation and thus allowing the embryos in question to be used for the purposes of bringing them to life and starting a family.
“... Cryopreservation of embryos: ... There are two categories of embryos amenable to cryopreservation: the first is embryos that are awaiting implantation, including those that were cryopreserved prior to the entry into force of Law no. 40 of 2004; the second is embryos that have been certified as abandoned ...”
By a decree of 25 June 2009, the Ministry of Health appointed a Study Commission on embryos stored in cryopreserved form in assisted reproduction centres. The following is a passage from the final report by that Commission, adopted by a majority on 8 January 2010.
“The legal ban on the destruction of embryos is to be understood as prohibiting the interruption of cryopreservation other than in two cases: where the thawed embryo can be implanted in the uterus of the mother or another woman willing to have it implanted; or where natural death or permanent loss of viability as an organism can be medically certified. In the light of current [scientific] knowledge, the viability of an embryo cannot be certified unless it has been thawed, thus creating the paradoxical situation in which, once thawed, an embryo cannot be frozen a second time and if it is not immediately implanted into the uterus death will inevitably ensue. Hence, a tutiorist prospect of frozen embryos being stored for an indeterminate period. However, it can be assumed that advances in scientific research will make it possible to determine the criteria and methods for diagnosing death, or in any event loss of viability, of cryopreserved embryos. It will thus be possible to overcome the present – and legally inevitable – paradox of potentially indefinite cryopreservation. Pending those results, [it should be reaffirmed that] the explicit ban under section 14 of Law no. 40 of 2004 on the destruction of embryos, including therefore frozen embryos, cannot be ignored. That is not all, for as regards the fate of surplus embryos, the authors of Law no. 40 opted for their storage and not their destruction, thus establishing as a principle that they should be kept alive even where their fate is uncertain.”
The relevant Articles of the Constitution provide as follows.
“The Republic promotes the development of culture and of scientific and technical research. ...”
“The Republic safeguards health as a fundamental right of the individual and as a collective interest. ...”
“Legislative power is exercised by the State and the Regions in compliance with the Constitution and the constraints deriving from the Community legal order and international obligations. ...”
These judgments address questions raised by the Court of Cassation and an appellate court regarding the compatibility of Legislative Decree no. 333 of 11 July 1992 on the criteria for calculating expropriation compensation with the Constitution and with Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1. They take account of the Court’s Grand Chamber judgment in Scordino v. Italy (no. 1) [GC], no. 36813/97, ECHR 2006V.
In these judgments, after reiterating the legislature’s obligation to comply with international obligations (Article 117 of the Constitution), the Constitutional Court defined the place assigned to the European Convention on Human Rights in the Italian legal system, stating that it was of intermediate rank between an ordinary law and the Constitution. The Constitutional Court also stated that the courts below had to interpret rules of domestic law in a manner compliant with the Convention and the Court’s case-law (judgment no. 349, point 6.2, see paragraph 26 below) and that, where such an interpretation was impossible or the courts below doubted the compatibility of the domestic law with the Convention, they had to raise a question of constitutionality before the Constitutional Court.
The relevant passages of judgment no. 348 of 24 October 2007 read as follows.
“4.2.  ... It is necessary to define the rank and role of the provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights with a view to determining, in the light of [Article 117 of the Constitution], their impact on the Italian legal order. ...
3.  While on the one hand [these provisions] complement the protection of fundamental rights, and therefore supplement the values and fundamental principles protected by the Italian Constitution itself, on the other hand they maintain their formal status as simple sources of ordinary legislation. ...
Today the Constitutional Court is called upon to clarify the normative and institutional question [referred to above], which has significant practical implications for the everyday work of legal practitioners. ...
The ordinary courts do not have the power to set aside ordinary legislation conflicting with the European Convention on Human Rights, since the alleged incompatibility between the two raises a question of constitutionality regarding a possible violation of Article 117 § 1 of the Constitution and [thus] falls within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Constitutional Court. ...
5.  ... The principle enshrined in Article 117 § 1 of the Constitution will only become operative in practice if ‘the international law obligations’ binding on the legislative powers of the State and the Regions are duly specified. ...
6.  Compared with other international law treaties, the European Convention on Human Rights has the particular feature of having instituted the jurisdiction of a court, the European Court of Human Rights, which is assigned the role of interpreting the provisions of the Convention. Article 32 § 1 [of the Convention] provides: ‘The jurisdiction of the Court shall extend to all matters concerning the interpretation and application of the Convention and the Protocols thereto which are referred to it as provided in Articles 33, 34, 46 and 47.’
Since legal provisions acquire meaning [vivono] through the interpretation which is given to them by legal practitioners, and in the first place the courts, the natural consequence of Article 32 § 1 of the Convention is that the international law obligations undertaken by Italy in signing and ratifying the European Convention on Human Rights include the duty to bring its own legislation into line with the provisions of the Convention in accordance with the meaning attributed to these by the [European] Court [of Human Rights], which was specifically set up to interpret and apply those provisions. It is therefore not correct to speak of a jurisdictional competence that operates in addition to that of the Italian courts, but rather of a pre-eminent interpretative role which the signatory States have recognised in the European Court, thus contributing to clarifying their international law obligations in that particular area.
7.  It should not be inferred from the foregoing that the provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights, as interpreted by the Strasbourg Court, have the force of constitutional law and thus escape scrutiny by this court of their constitutional legitimacy. It is precisely because the provisions in question supplement constitutional principles, while remaining of lower rank, that it is necessary that they be in conformity with the Constitution. ...
Since, as stated above, the provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights acquire meaning through the interpretation given to them by the European Court, scrutiny of their constitutionality must give consideration to the norms that result from that interpretation, and not the provisions considered in themselves. Moreover, the judgments of the Strasbourg Court are not unconditionally binding for the purposes of reviewing the constitutionality of national laws. This review must always be a balancing exercise between the constraints arising from international law obligations, as imposed by Article 117 § 1 of the Constitution, and the constitutionally protected interests enshrined in other Articles of the Constitution. ...
In the light of the methodological principles set out above, the constitutional review requested by the referring court must be carried out in such a way as to ascertain: (a) whether there is actually a conflict that cannot be resolved through interpretation between the domestic provision in question and the provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights, as interpreted by the European Court and regarded as a source supplementing the constitutional principle contained in Article 117 § 1, and (b) whether the provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights integrating that principle, and understood according to their interpretation by the [European] Court, are compatible with the Italian constitutional order. ...”
The relevant parts of judgment no. 349 of 24 October 2007 read as follows.
“6.2.  ... [The principle laid down] in Article 117 § 1 of the Constitution [does not mean] that the provisions laid down in international agreements and implemented by ordinary legislation, as is the case for the provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights, must be regarded as having constitutional status. As the constitutional principle in issue imposes a duty on the legislature to comply with those provisions, any national provision incompatible with the European Convention on Human Rights and thus with the ‘international law obligations’ referred to in Article 117 § 1 would ipso facto violate this constitutional principle. Article 117 § 1 ultimately creates a reference to Convention provisions which may be relevant in a particular case, giving life [dà vita] and substantive content to the international law obligations evoked generally and to the [underlying constitutional] principle, such as to be generally classified as ‘interposed provisions’, and which in turn are reviewed in terms of their compatibility with the Constitution, as will be discussed below.
It follows that it is a matter for the ordinary courts to interpret national law in conformity with the international legal provision in question ... Where this is not possible, or where the court doubts the compatibility of the national law with the ‘interposed’ Convention provision, it must raise a question of constitutionality before the Constitutional Court in the light of Article 117 § 1 of the Constitution ...
Regarding the European Convention on Human Rights, consideration must be given to its special nature compared with other international agreements since it goes further than simply listing reciprocal rights and duties of the signatory States. The latter have created a system for the uniform protection of fundamental rights. The application and interpretation of that system is naturally in the first instance a matter for the courts of the member States, which are the ordinary courts in relation to Convention law. Definitive uniformity in application is on the other hand guaranteed by the centralised interpretation of the European Convention on Human Rights – a task assigned to the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg, which has the last word and the jurisdiction of which ‘shall extend to all matters concerning the interpretation and application of the Convention and the Protocols thereto which are referred to it as provided [therein]’ (Article 32 § 1 of the Convention). ...
The Constitutional Court and the Strasbourg Court ultimately have different roles, even though both share the same objective of protecting as effectively as possible fundamental rights. The interpretation of the Rome Convention and of the Protocols is a matter for the Strasbourg Court, which guarantees the application of a uniform level of protection throughout the member States.
However, where a question is raised before the Constitutional Court regarding the constitutionality of a national provision in the light of Article 117 § 1 of the Constitution in respect of an incompatibility – insurmountable through interpretation – with one or more provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights, it is incumbent on this Court to determine whether there actually is an incompatibility and [where one is found to exist] to verify whether the actual provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights, as interpreted by the Strasbourg Court, guarantee a protection of fundamental rights that is at least equivalent to the level guaranteed by the Italian Constitution.
This does not require an assessment of the interpretation by the Strasbourg Court of a provision of the European Convention on Human Rights ... but verification as to whether that provision, as interpreted by the court expressly charged with that task by the member States, is compatible with the relevant constitutional provisions. Accordingly, a correct balance will be struck between the duty imposed by the Constitution to guarantee respect for international obligations and the need to prevent this resulting in a breach of the Constitution itself.”
In this Order the Constitutional Court declared inadmissible a question of constitutionality raised by the Cagliari Court in respect of section 13 of Law no. 40/2004, which bans the use of pre-implantation diagnosis.
In ruling thus the Constitutional Court observed that the court referring the question for a preliminary ruling had confined itself to raising the question of the constitutionality of section 13 alone of Law no. 40/2004 whereas, according to the terms of the application for a preliminary ruling, other provisions of the same Law also had the effect of banning preimplantation diagnosis, particularly section 14(3).
This judgment concerns the constitutionality of the provisions of section 14(2) and section 14(3) of Law no. 40/2004, which provide for the creation of a limited number of embryos (maximum of three) and the obligation to implant them simultaneously and also prohibit the cryopreservation of surplus embryos.
The Constitutional Court held that the subsections in question were unconstitutional because they jeopardised women’s health by obliging them to undergo several cycles of ovarian stimulation and also to expose themselves to the risk of multiple pregnancies on account of the prohibition on selective abortion.
The judgment does not make any reference to the European Convention on Human Rights. Nor was the Convention cited by the referring courts (Lazio Regional Administrative Court and Florence Court).
In this Order the Constitutional Court declared inadmissible the questions of constitutionality that the Milan Court had raised before it, as those questions had already been dealt with in its judgment no. 151/2009.
In this Order, which referred to S.H. and Others v. Austria ([GC], no. 57813/00, ECHR 2011), the Constitutional Court remitted to the lower court the case brought before it concerning the ban on heterologous fertilisation laid down in Law no. 40/2004.
This judgment concerns the constitutionality of the blanket ban on access to heterologous fertilisation in the event of medically established sterility or infertility, as provided for in Law no. 40/2004.
Three courts of ordinary jurisdiction had sought a preliminary ruling from the Constitutional Court regarding the question whether the Law in issue was compatible with Articles 2 (inviolable rights), 3 (principle of equality), 29 (rights of the family), 31 (State’s obligations to protect rights of the family) and 32 (right to health) of the Constitution. One of those courts – the Milan Court – had also asked the Constitutional Court to rule on the compatibility of the Law in issue with Articles 8 and 14 of the Convention.
The Constitutional Court ruled the relevant legislative provisions unconstitutional.
It held in particular that the choice of the applicants in the proceedings to become parents and found a family with children was an aspect of their freedom of self-determination regarding the sphere of their private and family life which attracted the protection of Articles 2, 3 and 31 of the Constitution. It also observed that persons who were totally sterile or infertile had a right to protection of their health (Article 32 of the Constitution).
It found that, while the rights in question could be the subject of restrictions based on ethical considerations, those restrictions could not amount to a blanket ban unless it were otherwise impossible to protect other constitutionally guaranteed freedoms.
With regard to the compatibility of the legislative provisions in issue with Articles 8 and 14 of the Convention, the Constitutional Court confined itself to observing that the questions in that regard had been covered in the conclusions it had reached on the constitutionality of the provisions in issue (see above).
In this Order the Cagliari Court observed that the claimants had first instituted urgent proceedings in the context of which a question of constitutionality had been raised. It added that this question had then been declared inadmissible by Order no. 369 of the Constitutional Court adopted on 24 October 2006 (see paragraphs 27-28 above), which had therefore not provided any guidance regarding the interpretation to be given to domestic law in the light of the Constitution.
With regard to the civil proceedings brought before it, the court pointed out that there was no explicit ban under domestic law on access to pre-implantation diagnosis, and that interpreting the Law in such a way as to construe that a ban existed would have been contrary to the claimants’ right to be duly informed of the medical treatment that they sought to undergo.
Furthermore, it noted that a ban on pre-implantation diagnosis had been introduced subsequently by secondary legislation, namely, Ministry of Health Decree no. 15165 of 21 July 2004 (particularly the part providing that “tests to determine the state of health of embryos created in vitro, within the meaning of section 14(5) [of Law no. 40 of 2004], cannot be carried out for purposes other than observation of those embryos (“dovrà essere di tipo osservazionale”). It held that this was contrary to the principle of legality and the Council of Europe’s Oviedo Convention.
It observed, lastly, that interpreting Law no. 40/2004 so as to allow access to pre-implantation diagnosis was consonant with the right to health accorded to the mother. Consequently, it granted the claimants access to pre-implantation diagnosis.
In this Order the Florence Court referred to the Order of the Cagliari Court cited above and stated that it agreed with its interpretation of the domestic law. Accordingly, it granted the claimants access to pre-implantation diagnosis.
In this Order the Bologna Court granted the claimants access to pre-implantation diagnosis, stating that this was consonant with the protection of women’s health recognised by the Constitutional Court’s interpretation of domestic law in its judgment no. 151 of 1 April 2009 (see paragraphs 29-31 above).
In this Order, adopted following urgent proceedings, the Salerno Court referred to the new developments introduced by Ministry of Health Decree no. 31639 of 11 April 2008, namely the fact that tests to determine the state of health of embryos created in vitro were no longer limited to observation of those embryos and that access to assisted reproduction was authorised for couples where the man was a carrier of sexually transmitted viral diseases.
It concluded that pre-implantation diagnosis had to be regarded as just one of the antenatal treatment techniques designed to determine the state of health of the embryo.
Consequently, it authorised pre-implantation diagnosis of the claimants’ embryo in vitro.
In this Order the Cagliari Court referred to the reasoning in the above-cited Orders. It indicated, further, that judgments nos. 348 and 349 delivered by the Constitutional Court on 24 October 2007 showed that interpreting the law with a view to guaranteeing access to pre-implantation diagnosis was compatible with the European Convention on Human Rights, especially having regard to the judgment delivered by the Strasbourg Court in Costa and Pavan v. Italy (no. 54270/10, 28 August 2012).
In this Order the court raised the question of the constitutionality of sections 1(1) and (2) and 4(1) of Law no. 40/2004, which prohibit couples who are neither sterile nor infertile from using assisted reproduction techniques with a view to obtaining a pre-implantation diagnosis. The court also considered the matter from the standpoint of Articles 8 and 14 of the Convention.
While having regard to the judgment in Costa and Pavan (cited above), it found that the Law should not be interpreted extensively, since it did expressly provide that access to assisted reproduction techniques was reserved to sterile or infertile couples.
In a decision of 7 December 2012, the Florence Court raised the question of the constitutionality of the ban under section 13 of Law no. 40/2004 on donating surplus embryos to scientific research with regard to Articles 9 and 32 of the Constitution, which guarantee freedom of scientific research and the right to health respectively.
On 19 March 2014 the President of the Constitutional Court adjourned its examination of the case pending the decision of the Grand Chamber in the present application, Parrillo v. Italy (no. 46470/11).
“...
Aware that the progress [of medical science and technology] has made the legal position of the embryo and foetus particularly precarious, and that their legal status is at present not defined by law;
Aware that adequate provisions governing the use of living or dead embryos and foetuses do not at present exist;
Convinced that, in view of scientific progress which makes it possible to intervene in developing human life from the moment of fertilisation, it is urgent to define the extent of its legal protection;
Having regard to the variety of ethical opinions on the question of using the embryo or the foetus or their tissues, and to the conflicts between values which arise;
Considering that human embryos and foetuses must be treated in all circumstances with the respect due to human dignity, and that use of materials and tissues therefrom must be strictly limited and regulated ... to purposes which are clearly therapeutic and for which no other means exist;
...
Stressing the need for European co-operation,
[The Parliamentary Assembly r]ecommends that the Committee of Ministers:
call on the governments of the member states:
...
1.2.  to limit the use of human embryos and foetuses and materials and tissues therefrom in an industrial context to purposes which are strictly therapeutic and for which no other means exist, according to the principles set out in the appendix, and to bring their legislation into line with these principles or to enact rules in accordance therewith which should inter alia specify the conditions in which removal and use may be undertaken for a diagnostic or therapeutic purpose;
1.3.  to forbid any creation of human embryos by fertilisation in vitro for the purposes of research during their life or after death;
1.4.  to forbid anything that could be considered as undesirable use or deviations of these techniques, including:
...
research on viable human embryos;
experimentation on living human embryos, whether viable or not;
...”
“...
Considering that the human embryo, though displaying successive phases in its development ... displays also a progressive differentiation as an organism and none the less maintains a continuous biological and genetic identity;
Recalling the need for European co-operation and for the widest possible regulation in order to overcome the contradictions, risks and foreseeable shortcomings of exclusively national standards in these fields,
...”
The relevant passages of the Appendix to that Recommendation read as follows.
“B.  On live pre-implantation embryos:
In accordance with Recommendations 934 (1982) and 1046 (1986), investigations of viable embryos in vitro shall only be permitted:
for applied purposes of a diagnostic nature or for preventive or therapeutic purposes;
if their non-pathological genetic heritage is not interfered with.
... research on living embryos must be prohibited, particularly:
if the embryo is viable;
if it is possible to use an animal model;
if not foreseen within the framework of projects duly presented to and authorised by the appropriate public health or scientific authority or, by delegation, to and by the relevant national multidisciplinary committee;
if not within the time-limits laid down by the authorities mentioned above.
...
Donation of human embryological material
The donation of human embryological material shall be authorised solely for scientific research on diagnostic, prevention or therapeutic purposes. Its sale shall be prohibited.
The intentional creation and/or keeping alive of embryos or foetuses whether in vitro or in utero for any scientific research purpose, for instance to obtain genetic material, cells, tissues or organs therefrom, shall be prohibited.
The donation and use of human embryological material shall be conditional on the freely given written consent of the donor parents.
The donation of organs shall be devoid of any commercial aspect. The purchase or sale of embryos or foetuses or parts thereof by their donor parents or other parties, and their importation or exportation, shall also be prohibited.
The donation and use of human embryological material for the manufacture of dangerous and exterminatory biological weapons shall be forbidden.
For the whole of this recommendation, ‘viable’ embryos shall be understood to mean embryos which are free of biological characteristics likely to prevent their development; however, the non-viability of human embryos and foetuses shall be determined solely by objective biological criteria based on the embryo’s intrinsic defects.”
“The interests and welfare of the human being shall prevail over the sole interest of society or science.”
“1.  Where the law allows research on embryos in vitro, it shall ensure adequate protection of the embryo.
The creation of human embryos for research purposes is prohibited.”
“None of the provisions of this Convention shall be interpreted as limiting or otherwise affecting the possibility for a Party to grant a wider measure of protection with regard to the application of biology and medicine than is stipulated in this Convention.”
“1.  This Protocol covers the full range of research activities in the health field involving interventions on human beings.
This Protocol does not apply to research on embryos in vitro. It does apply to research on foetuses and embryos in vivo.
...”
“This report aimed at giving an overview of current positions found in Europe regarding the protection of the human embryo in vitro and the arguments supporting them.
It shows a broad consensus on the need for the protection of the embryo in vitro. However, the definition of the status of the embryo remains an area where fundamental differences are encountered, based on strong arguments. These differences largely form the basis of most divergences around the other issues related to the protection of the embryo in vitro.
Nevertheless, even if agreement cannot be reached on the status of the embryo, the possibility of re-examining certain issues in the light of the latest developments in the biomedical field and related potential therapeutic advances could be considered. In this context, while acknowledging and respecting the fundamental choices made by the different countries, it seems possible and desirable with regard to the need to protect the embryo in vitro on which all countries have agreed that common approaches be identified to ensure proper conditions for the application of procedures involving the creation and use of embryos in vitro. The purpose of this report is to aid reflection towards that objective.”
“...
Human stem cells may be derived from a growing number of tissues and fluids from humans of any age and are not limited to embryonic sources.
...
The harvesting of embryonic stem cells for the time being necessitates the destruction of human embryos.
...
The Assembly points out that a number of embryonic human stem cell lines suitable for scientific research are already available worldwide.
...
The destruction of human beings for research purposes is against the right to life of all humans and against the moral ban on any instrumentalisation of humans.
Therefore the Assembly calls on member states:
1.  to promote stem cell research as long as it respects the life of human beings in all states of their development;
2.  to encourage scientific techniques that are not socially and ethically divisive in order to advance the use of cell pluripotency and develop new methods in regenerative medicine;
3.  to sign and ratify the Oviedo Convention to make effective the prohibition of the production of human embryos for research;
4.  to promote common European basic research programmes in the field of adult stem cells;
5.  to ensure that, in countries where it is allowed, any research on stem cells involving the destruction of human embryos is duly authorised and monitored by the appropriate national bodies;
6.  to respect the decision of countries not to take part in international research programmes which are against ethical values enshrined in national legislation and not to expect such countries to contribute either directly or indirectly to such research;
7.  to give priority to the ethical aspects of research over those of a purely utilitarian and financial nature;
8.  to promote the establishment of bodies where scientists and representatives from civil society can discuss different kinds of projects on human stem cell research with a view to strengthening transparency and democratic accountability.”
This Recommendation, which does not apply to embryonic and foetal tissues (see Article 2, paragraph 3), aims to protect the fundamental rights of persons whose biological material might be used for a research project after having been removed and stored (i) for a specific research project prior to adoption of the Recommendation; (ii) for future unspecified research; or (iii) as residual material originally removed for clinical or forensic purposes. This Recommendation seeks, inter alia, to promote the establishment of practice guidelines on the part of the member States and to reduce to a minimum the risks related to research activities for the private life of the persons concerned. It also lays down rules about obtaining and collecting biological materials.
“...
... [T]he Assembly holds that more concerted ethical consideration should be given – at national, supraregional and global levels – to the goals and purposes pursued by science and technology, to the instruments and methods they employ, to their possible consequences and side effects, and to the overall system of rules and behaviour within which they operate.
The Assembly believes that having a permanent structure for ethical reflection at the global level would make it possible to address ethical issues as a ‘moving target’, rather than fixing an ‘ethical code’, and enable a periodic re-questioning of even basic assumptions, such as the definition of ‘human identity’ or ‘human dignity’.
The Assembly welcomes the initiative of UNESCO in setting up the World Commission on the Ethics of Scientific Knowledge and Technology (COMEST) with a view to engaging in ongoing ethical reflection and exploring the possibilities of drafting and periodically reviewing a set of fundamental ethical principles based on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It believes that the Council of Europe should contribute to this process.
In this respect, the Assembly recommends that the Secretary General of the Council of Europe consider establishing a flexible and informal structure for ethical reflection, through co-operation between relevant Assembly committees and members of relevant expert committees, including the Committee on Bioethics (DH-BIO), with a view to identifying emerging ethical issues and main ethical principles that could guide political and legal action in Europe.
To reinforce the common European framework of ethics in science and technology, the Assembly recommends that member States, which have not yet done so, sign and ratify the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Dignity of the Human Being with regard to the Application of Biology and Medicine: Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine (ETS No. 164, ‘Oviedo Convention’) and its protocols and fully engage in the work of the Committee on Bioethics.
...
The Assembly invites the European Union and UNESCO to co-operate with the Council of Europe to reinforce the common European framework of ethics in science and technology and, to this end:
1  create European and regional platforms to regularly exchange experiences and best practice covering all fields of science and technology, using the experience acquired in the framework of the European Conference of National Ethics Committees (COMETH) initiated by the Council of Europe, and more recently the Forum of National Ethics Councils (NEC Forum) funded by the European Commission, and the meetings of the Council of Europe Committee on Bioethics;
2  draft and periodically review a set of fundamental ethical principles to be applied to all fields of science and technology;
3  provide further guidance to help member States harmonise ethical rules and monitoring procedures, building on the positive impact of ethical requirements under the European Commission’s Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development (2007-2013) (FP7).”
Set up by the European Commission in 1991, the EGE is an independent body composed of experts whose task is to advise the European Commission on ethical questions relating to science and new technologies. The EGE has provided two opinions on the use of embryos in vitro for research purposes.
This opinion was published at the request of the European Commission following the proposal of the European Parliament to exclude research projects that resulted in the destruction of human embryos from Community funding in the context of the 5th Framework Programme. The relevant passages read as follows.
“2.6  ... [I]n the scope of European research programmes, the question of research on the human embryo has to be approached, not only with regard to the respect for fundamental ethical principles, common to all Member States, but equally taking into consideration diverse philosophical and ethical conceptions, expressed through the practices and the national regulations in force in this field.
...
8  In the light of the aforementioned principles and specifications, the Group considers that according to the ethical dimension of the Community’s Fifth Framework Programme Community funding should not a priori exclude human embryo research which is the object of different ethical choices in different countries ...”
The relevant parts of this opinion read as follows.
“2.3.  Pluralism and European ethics
... In the context of European pluralism, it is up to each Member State to forbid or authorise embryo research. In the latter case, respect for human dignity requires regulation of embryo research and the provision of guarantees against risks of arbitrary experimentation and instrumentalisation of human embryos.
5.  Ethical Acceptability of the field of the research concerned
The Group notes that in some countries embryo research is forbidden. But when this research is allowed, with the purpose of improving treatment for infertility, it is hard to see any specific argument which would prohibit extending the scope of such research in order to develop new treatments to cure severe diseases or injuries. As in the case of research on infertility, stem cell research aims to alleviate severe human suffering. In any case, the embryos that have been used for research are required to be destroyed. Consequently, there is no argument for excluding funding of this kind of research from the Framework Programme of research of the European Union if it complies with ethical and legal requirements as defined in this programme.”
“...
(7)  The regulation of advanced therapy medicinal products at Community level should not interfere with decisions made by Member States on whether to allow the use of any specific type of human cells, such as embryonic stem cells, or animal cells. It should also not affect the application of national legislation prohibiting or restricting the sale, supply or use of medicinal products containing, consisting of or derived from these cells.”
In this judgment, delivered following a referral for a preliminary ruling from the German Federal Court of Justice (Bundesgerichtshof), the CJEU ruled on the interpretation to be given to Directive 98/44/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 1998 on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions.
In issue was the part of the Directive which, tempering the principle that the use of human embryos for industrial or commercial purposes could not be patented, specified that this exclusion from patentability did not affect “inventions for therapeutic or diagnostic purposes which are applied to the human embryo and are useful to it”.
The CJEU observed that the purpose of the Directive in question was not to regulate the use of human embryos in the context of scientific research. It was limited to the patentability of biotechnological inventions. The CJEU then considered that inventions involving the use of human embryos continued to be excluded from patentability even where they purported to serve scientific research (those purposes being indistinguishable, where patents were concerned, from other industrial and commercial aims). The CJEU indicated at the same time that this exclusion did not affect inventions for therapeutic or diagnostic purposes which were applied to the human embryo and were useful to it.
Since 1984 the European Union has provided funding for scientific research through framework programmes covering periods spanning several years.
The relevant parts of Decision No 1982/2006/EC of 18 December 2006 concerning the Seventh Framework Programme of the European Community for research, technological development and demonstration activities (2007-2013) read as follows.
“1.  All the research activities carried out under the Seventh Framework Programme shall be carried out in compliance with fundamental ethical principles.
The following fields of research shall not be financed under this Framework Programme:
–  research activity aiming at human cloning for reproductive purposes,
–  research activity intended to modify the genetic heritage of human beings which could make such changes heritable,
–  research activities intended to create human embryos solely for the purpose of research or for the purpose of stem cell procurement, including by means of somatic cell nuclear transfer.
Research on human stem cells, both adult and embryonic, may be financed, depending both on the contents of the scientific proposal and the legal framework of the Member State(s) involved.
...”
The relevant parts of Regulation (EU) No 1291/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2013 establishing Horizon 2020 – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2014-2020) and repealing Decision No 1982/2006/EC read as follows.
“1.  All the research and innovation activities carried out under Horizon 2020 shall comply with ethical principles and relevant national, Union and international legislation, including the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and the European Convention on Human Rights and its Supplementary Protocols.
...
The following fields of research shall not be financed:
(a)  research activity aiming at human cloning for reproductive purposes;
(b)  research activity intended to modify the genetic heritage of human beings which could make such changes heritable;
(c)  research activities intended to create human embryos solely for the purpose of research or for the purpose of stem cell procurement, including by means of somatic cell nuclear transfer.
Research on human stem cells, both adult and embryonic, may be financed, depending both on the contents of the scientific proposal and the legal framework of the Member States involved. No funding shall be granted for research activities that are prohibited in all the Member States. No activity shall be funded in a Member State where such activity is forbidden.
...”
On 10 April 2014 the citizens’ initiative “One of Us” had proposed legislative amendments to exclude from European funding scientific projects involving the destruction of human embryos.
In its Communication of 28 May 2014, the European Commission stated that it could not uphold the request on the ground that its proposal to fund the projects in question took account of ethical considerations, potential health benefits and support at European Union level for stem-cell research.
The relevant parts of the conclusions of this report read as follows.
“A.  The IBC recognises that human embryonic stem cell research is a subject on which it is desirable for a debate to occur at national level to identify which position on this issue is to be adopted, including abstaining from this research. It urges that debates be conducted at appropriate national regulatory levels, enabling expression of a range of views, and whenever possible allowing a consensus to be reached on the limits of the permissible in this important new therapeutic research field. There should be an on-going process of education and information in this area. States should take appropriate measures to initiate an on-going dialogue within society on the ethical issues raised by such research, involving all actors concerned.
Whatever form of research involving embryos is allowed, steps should be taken to ensure that such research be carried out within the framework of a State-sponsored regulatory system that would give due weight to ethical considerations, and set up appropriate guidelines. When authorisation of donations of supernumerary pre-implantation embryos from IVF treatments for therapeutic embryonic stem cell research is under consideration, particular attention should be given to the dignity and rights of both parental donors of embryos. Thus, it is essential that the donation be made only after the donors should have been given full information as to the implications of the research and have given their prior, free and informed consent. The purposes for which such research is carried out, and the way of its performance, should be subject to assessment by the appropriate ethics committees, which should be independent of the researchers involved. This assessment should include ex post facto ethical evaluation of such research.”
In this case the Inter-American Court gave a ruling on the ban on carrying out in vitro fertilisation in Costa Rica. It held, inter alia, that an embryo could not be regarded as a “person” within the meaning of Article 4 § 1 of the American Convention on Human Rights (protecting the right to life), “conception” occurring only from the moment the embryo was implanted in the uterus.
According to the information available to the Court on the legislation of forty member States regarding the use of human embryos for scientific research, three countries (Belgium, Sweden and the United Kingdom) allow scientific research on human embryos and the creation of embryos for that purpose.
The creation of embryos for scientific research is banned in fourteen countries. However, research using surplus embryos is generally allowed in those countries, subject to certain conditions.
Like Italy, three member States (Slovakia, Germany and Austria) prohibit scientific research on embryos in principle, and permit it in very restricted cases, such as for the protection of the health of the embryo or where the research is carried out on cell lines imported from abroad.
In Slovakia any research on embryos is strictly forbidden, other than research for medical purposes for the benefit of the health of the persons directly participating in the research in question.
In Germany the importation and use for research purposes of embryonic cells is in principle banned by law and authorised only exceptionally and subject to strict conditions.
In Austria the law provides that “viable cells” cannot be used for purposes other than in vitro fertilisation. However, the concept of “viable cells” is not defined in the law. According to practice and legal commentary, the statutory ban concerns only “totipotent” embryonic cells.
In four countries (Andorra, Latvia, Croatia and Malta) the law expressly prohibits any research on embryonic stem cells.
In sixteen countries (Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, Ireland, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Republic of Moldova, Monaco, Poland, Romania, Russia, San Marino, Turkey and Ukraine) the matter is not regulated. Some of these States take a rather restrictive approach in practice (for example, Turkey and Ukraine), while others have a rather non-prohibitive practice (for example, Russia).