The case concerns the placement in detention and continued detention of the applicant, an investigative journalist working for the daily newspaper Cumhuriyet, in the context of criminal proceedings brought against the newspaper’s managers and some of its journalists on account of the newspaper’s editorial stance, which was critical of government policy in general and also of the means used by the authorities to combat illegal organisations. The applicant alleged a violation of Article 5 §§ 1, 3 and 4, Article 10 and Article 18 of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1970 and lives in Istanbul. He was represented by Mr F. İlkiz, a lawyer practising in Istanbul.
The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
At the material time the applicant was an investigative journalist and writer. He worked as a journalist and reporter on the national daily newspaper Cumhuriyet (“The Republic”).
Cumhuriyet was established in 1924 and is one of the oldest newspapers in Turkey. It is known for its critical stance towards the current government and for its particular attachment to the principle of secularism. It is regarded as a serious newspaper of the centre-left.
On 29 December 2016 the applicant was arrested at his home and taken into police custody by the Istanbul police. He was suspected of disseminating propaganda in favour of organisations considered by the Government to be terrorist organisations, including, in particular, the PKK (the Kurdistan Workers’ Party), FETÖ/PDY (“Fethullahist Terror Organisation/Parallel State Structure”) and the DHKP/C (People’s Revolutionary Liberation Party/Front), through articles and interviews published in the daily newspaper Cumhuriyet and items posted on social media. The applicant was also accused of having, through his writings, denigrated the organs of the State, an offence under Article 301 of the Criminal Code.
On 30 December 2016 the applicant, accompanied by his lawyers, was questioned by the Istanbul public prosecutor about the accusations against him. The public prosecutor questioned him mainly about eleven tweets which he had posted on the Twitter social network and five articles which he had written and published on the Cumhuriyet website and in the newspaper’s print edition.
The applicant replied that he had been placed in pre-trial detention in 2011 in connection with a criminal investigation which, in his view, was very similar to that being conducted in the present case. He alleged that the judges hearing that case had been members of the network of Fethullah Gülen (FETÖ/PDY) who had deprived individuals of their liberty on the basis of charges founded on falsified evidence. He maintained that, as in 2011, the reason why he had been brought before the public prosecutor was unrelated to the possible existence of any criminal offences. He added that he regarded his questioning as interference with his activity as a journalist. The applicant’s lawyers pointed out that the judicial authorities were not empowered to institute criminal proceedings under Article 301 without first obtaining the approval of the Minister of Justice.
Following the questioning, the public prosecutor sought a judicial order for the applicant’s pre-trial detention on suspicion of disseminating propaganda on behalf of terrorist organisations such as the PKK, FETÖ/PDY and the DHKP/C. The prosecutor also took into consideration the nature of the offence, the state of the evidence and the maximum sentence for the offence.
Still on 30 December 2016, the applicant appeared before the Istanbul 8th Magistrate’s Court and was questioned about his alleged acts and the suspicions against him. The applicant denied committing any offence. He maintained that his articles in Cumhuriyet and his posts on social media had not contained any propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation or any call to violence, but had simply amounted to journalistic activity conveying information to the public on actual events in the context of freedom of expression.
At the close of the hearing the magistrate, taking into account the content of eight tweets posted by the applicant and five articles written by him, ordered his pre-trial detention. The magistrate considered, firstly, that there were strong suspicions that the applicant had committed the offence of disseminating propaganda in favour of two terrorist organisations, the PKK/KCK and FETÖ/PDY. He noted in that regard that the applicant had expressed views similar to those voiced by the members of terrorist organisations, describing those organisations’ terrorist activities as a “war” or “struggle”; that he had presented those organisations as legitimate entities while seeking to portray Turkey as a State that supported terrorist organisations; that he had described the security forces’ efforts to combat the terrorist organisations as illegal and even as terrorism, referring to the State agents as “murderers, mafiosi, violent [individuals]” while terrorist activities were continuing in south-east Turkey, with armed attacks being carried out targeting State officials, trenches being dug, barricades being erected and bombs being planted; and that the applicant had disseminated propaganda in favour of terrorist organisations by stating in his posts that the security forces were setting off bombs and inciting others to war while the terrorist organisations took responsibility for the attacks. In the magistrate’s view, there was no contradiction in the claims that the applicant had disseminated propaganda in favour of two very different, even rival, terrorist organisations, namely the PKK and FETÖ/PDY, since the investigations carried out following the attempted military coup and the information in the public domain showed that the two organisations, with the support of external forces, had acted in coordinated fashion during and after the attempted coup. He further noted that the applicant, in his defence submissions, had continued to make accusations against the State and its leaders. As justification for the applicant’s placement in pre-trial detention the magistrate then referred to the nature of the alleged offence, the severity of the penalty laid down by law, the fact that the offence had been committed through the press, and the fact that protective measures other than pre-trial detention would clearly be inadequate since the applicant showed no remorse for his remarks and had continued throughout his questioning to employ the same rhetoric as the members of the abovementioned terrorist organisations.
On 1 January 2017 the applicant lodged an objection against the order for his pre-trial detention. In a decision of 3 January 2017 the Istanbul 9th Magistrate’s Court dismissed the objection, reiterating the reasons given in the impugned order.
Extension of the pre-trial detention
On 30 January 2017, at the public prosecutor’s request, the Istanbul 3rd Magistrate’s Court ordered the applicant’s continued pre-trial detention. The magistrate considered that the applicant’s posts on his Twitter account and his articles in Cumhuriyet were apt to amount to propaganda in favour of the armed terrorist organisations the PKK/KCK and FETÖ/PDY and that there were therefore strong suspicions that the applicant had committed the alleged criminal offences. The magistrate also took into account the fact that the evidence had not yet all been gathered and that there was no fresh evidence favourable to the applicant that would justify ending his pre-trial detention, given the length of the sentence liable to be imposed if the offence was established and the period already spent in detention. Lastly, the magistrate considered that the applicant’s release pending trial would be insufficient. On 9 February 2017 the applicant lodged an objection against the order of 30 January 2017, arguing that there was no evidence grounding a suspicion that he had disseminated propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation, and maintaining that the articles and posts in question had formed part of his journalistic activities protected by freedom of expression. On 14 February 2017 the Istanbul 10th Magistrate’s Court dismissed the objection, finding that the impugned order had complied with the law and the proper procedure and that there was no fresh evidence favourable to the applicant that would require his pre-trial detention to be ended.
On 2 March 2017 the Istanbul 10th Magistrate’s Court examined of its own motion the lawfulness of the applicant’s pre-trial detention and ordered its extension, reproducing verbatim the reasons given in the previous orders. On 20 March 2017 the applicant lodged an objection against the order of 2 March 2017, reiterating his grounds of objection and arguing that the fact of copying the reasons for a previous order was contrary to judicial ethics. On 24 March 2017 the Istanbul 11th Magistrate’s Court dismissed the objection.
Beginning on 19 April 2017, the date of acceptance of the bill of indictment filed by the public prosecutor’s office accusing the applicant of assisting terrorist organisations without being a member of them (an offence under Article 220 § 7 of the Criminal Code (“the CC”)), the Istanbul Assize Court, which was hearing the case, reviewed the lawfulness of the applicant’s pre-trial detention at maximum intervals of thirty days. The judges concerned noted that the offence of which the applicant was accused was among the offences listed in Article 100 § 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”) – the so-called “catalogue offences”. They took the view that if the applicant were released pending trial he was liable to abscond. They observed in that connection that in the previous investigations concerning Cumhuriyet journalists the suspects had fled, by lawful or unlawful means, as soon as an opportunity had arisen. The judges also took into consideration the risk of the deterioration of evidence, noting that the claimants and victims of the incidents in issue had not yet all been identified and/or that statements had not yet been taken from them.
At the close of the hearing of 9 March 2018 on the merits of the case, the Istanbul Assize Court ordered the applicant’s release pending trial. The court considered that all the relevant evidence concerning the applicant had been gathered, that there was no longer any evidence concerning him that was liable to be concealed, and that there were no strong suspicions that he would put pressure on the witnesses or the other accused who had not yet given evidence. It concluded that pre-trial detention was henceforth a disproportionate measure and that a judicial supervision measure would be adequate and sufficient.
The articles written by the applicant and published in the daily newspaper Cumhuriyet and the items posted by him on social media – as referred to by the public prosecutor in ordering the applicant’s arrest and by the magistrate in ordering his pre-trial detention, and as taken into consideration by the Constitutional Court when called upon subsequently to rule on the lawfulness of the detention measure – are as follows.
The full text of this article, which comprised an interview with Cemil Bayık, one of the leaders of the PKK, read as follows:
“Heading of the article: According to Cemil Bayık, joint chairman of the KCK’s executive council, only Öcalan can persuade the PKK to lay down their weapons.
We met Cemil Bayık in Kandil. He told us that [the PKK leaders] needed to meet Öcalan for the [peace] process to move forward. ‘If [the authorities] want’, he said, they could take them to the island of İmralı. ‘What we want’, he said, ‘is for Apo no longer to be held in İmralı. [The response to] that request is long overdue’.
According to Bayık, the only person who could convince the guerrilla fighters to lay down their weapons is Öcalan: ‘We’ll sit down at the negotiating table with anyone in the government. Those who have resolved issues like this reached agreements, or negotiated agreements, with fascist powers’. Bayık maintains that Erdoğan is the representative of the dictatorship in Turkey.
Question: Are you allowed to communicate directly with Abdullah Öcalan?
Answer: We’ve never had any direct communication. We made it clear that we wanted to contact him. During the Oslo process we were told that this was possible, but the promises never came to anything. The HDP delegation goes there [to İmralı], takes note of their discussions and, as the case may be, hands over our letters. It’s the HDP delegation that acts as the intermediary. There’s no other communication.
Sub-heading: We need to talk face to face.
Question: Do your demands include ... videoconferencing?
Answer: No. Videoconferencing wouldn’t work. We need to see Abdullah Öcalan in person, face to face.
Question: Abdullah Öcalan can’t come to see you. Will you go there? You wouldn’t be allowed...
Answer: We can go there too. If they want they can take us there, but what we’re really looking for is for our leader Apo no longer to be held in İmralı Prison, for him to be given back his freedom.
Question: In an interview with Banu Güven for the television station IMC you suggested that the decision to lay down weapons could be taken at an annual congress attended by Öcalan. Does that mean that Öcalan would have to be released?
Answer: Of course. No one will be able to persuade the guerrilla fighters unless the leader Apo comes and meets them. Although I’m the joint chairman of this movement, even I can’t persuade them. The only person who can do it is Apo. If he comes and meets the guerrilla fighters and their leaders, it would be possible to persuade them. Nobody else can do it.
Sub-heading: Our influence is limited.
Question: Would it not be enough for the leaders to pass on Öcalan’s decision to lay down weapons to the guerrilla fighters?
Answer: Our guerrilla force is obviously no ordinary guerrilla force. These are not mere soldiers. They [are fighting for an ideology]. They’ve had ideological training, they’re loyal to our ideals and to our leader Apo. Our influence is limited. They’ll only be convinced if the leader comes to talk to them.
Question: To what extent is it realistic to demand that Abdullah Öcalan be released?
Answer: In my view, it’s realistic. It’s even overdue.
Question: How realistic, how likely is it?
Answer: There are also certain circumstances that are conducive to [this demand] being met. If the will is there, it’s even easy to achieve. That decision lies with the political authorities, with the State. In Turkey, the authorities and the State are effective enough to create the perception they want among the public. If they want, they can easily create the perception that Apo needs to be released, without causing a reaction in society.
Sub-heading: We’ve done our duty
Question: Are we to understand that if this condition isn’t met, the armed struggle in Turkey will carry on and the weapons won’t be handed in?
Answer: The Turkish State and the government need to make significant efforts to put an end to the armed struggle. We began by conducting a political struggle in order to tackle the problems of this people. We never wanted an armed struggle. But we were left with no other option. We were unable to expose this issue, whose existence had been denied by the State. It was the armed struggle that served to highlight the issue in all its dimensions and to create a climate conducive to resolving it. Once we considered the armed struggle to have reached the necessary level, we began making political demands on this issue. We declared a unilateral ceasefire on several occasions to enable the groundwork [to be laid]. We’ve made all the necessary efforts on our side.
Sub-heading: No further efforts are required before signing
Question: What are those efforts?
Answer: We took initiatives that no other force in the world would have taken. If you look at similar problems around the world, you can see that ceasefires were declared under the auspices of a third party, that the guerrilla fighters came out of their trenches, the prisoners were freed and the war ended. Without third-party supervision, without an agreement between the parties, without a document signed by them, these stages would not have happened. Even without these conditions being met we made major unilateral concessions. It’s not up to us to take any more steps – it’s the turn of the State and the government. If they do it, we’ll do what’s required of us without hesitation. Our leader Apo said that if negotiations began, the parties would need to proceed in parallel, but it hasn’t happened like that. On our side, we’ve made concessions, we’ve even taken numerous steps [in that direction], but the State and the government have not reciprocated as required.
Sub-heading: Turkey has never wanted [involvement by a] third party
Question: Is there a third party? Was there one in the past?
Answer: No, at the moment there isn’t. At one time, during the Oslo process, there was one. But Turkey has never wanted a third party.
Question: When you say ‘third party’ are you talking about an independent body or about supervision by a State?
Answer: We were in touch with the leader Apo through the HDP delegation, before Apo made his historic declaration at the Nevruz [festival] in 2013. We sent the following message to Apo and to the State and the government: if we make a historic declaration proposing a democratic solution to the Kurdish question, then it has to be made clear what the mechanisms [of that solution] are. Our proposal was the presence of a third party.
Question: Did you mention any third party in particular?
Answer: No. It could have been the Turkish Parliament or a committee of Turkish non-governmental organisations. We presented several options. They didn’t accept them and instead sought a bilateral solution. They said that they wanted a local, national solution. In reality, they were inventing excuses not to do it (ipe un sermek). Because there’s no precedent for this kind of solution anywhere in the world. Turkey took no steps in this direction. They said that the process wouldn’t work with a third party.
Sub-heading: It wasn’t realistic
Answer (continued): As far as we were concerned it wasn’t realistic. In order to find out whether or not they were willing to resolve the issue, we nevertheless accepted their proposal, as they had rejected the alternative [third-party involvement]. Because we want to find a solution. That’s why we also agreed to those conditions. But we then realised that what they called a local or national [solution] wasn’t aimed at finding a solution.
Sub-heading: They don’t accept the Kurdish question
Question: Should we infer from your comments that the Turkish government or the State want to solve the problem of the PKK rather than the Kurdish question?
Answer: That’s it exactly. The State and its government don’t accept the existence of the Kurdish question. They don’t accept that there is a people like the Kurdish people. In reality, this question needs to be addressed and solved as a political issue.
Sub-heading: Their argument has failed
Answer (continued): If you characterise the issue as ‘terrorism’, then your solution will inevitably be war. The Turkish State’s actions are consistent with its argument that there is no Kurdish question, there’s just the issue of terrorism. But that argument has failed. The PKK’s struggle has highlighted the fact that this approach is untenable both in Turkey and internationally. All the countries in the world have also realised this. At the point we’re at now, they can’t leave this issue unresolved.
Sub-heading: We haven’t committed any crime
Question: At the negotiating table, did ... the AKP regard the members of the PKK as criminals who should be granted amnesty or as important players in the Kurdish question, which extends beyond its borders and also includes international players?
Answer: Of course, we’re criminals in the eyes of the Turkish government. But we haven’t committed any crime. We’re carrying on a struggle on behalf of the most natural rights of any people, but [the Turkish government] claim that no such people, and no such rights, exist. So we’re regarded as criminals under their laws. If what we’re doing is a crime then, yes, we have committed [that crime] and we’ll continue to commit it. Until we’ve achieved our objective.
Sub-heading: Ankara’s demands for a local solution are unrealistic
Question: What is your objective?
Answer: To secure for this people its natural rights. First of all, the Kurdish question is not just a problem for Turkey. It’s not simply an issue between the Kurds and the Turkish State and its government. We have an issue that transcends those borders. The issue concerns Turkey, but it also concerns the Middle East and even the international community. Kurdistan is a divided country, a divided people, with each part under the sovereignty of a different State. Each State conducts its [own] policy in the part under its control. And those States conduct international relations with various world powers. From that perspective, the whole world is concerned by this issue, but there are also regional particularities which [are at the root] of this issue and which make it more complicated. The United States plays the leading role in the region. Turkey is a member of NATO and at the same time is a member of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and a candidate for [accession to] the European Union.
Sub-heading: All the forces in the world are concerned
Answer (continued): That’s why this has become a question which concerns every grouping. Resolving an issue with Turkey in fact amounts to resolving an issue with the United States, NATO, the European Union and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation. In sum, all the forces in the world are concerned by this issue. Turkey’s obstinate insistence on finding a national and local solution is unrealistic.
Sub-heading: He specifically chose the date of 28 February
Question: On 28 February, at the meeting between the HDP and the AKP, a ten-point plan proposed by Öcalan was announced. Was this Öcalan’s final word on the subject of the process?
Answer: No. Because you say your final word when you’ve achieved your objective. In that situation you get exhaustion and depression, the rot sets in. Apo and the PKK are looking to lead a revolution within the revolution.
Question: When I mentioned the ‘final word’, I meant that this ten-point declaration forced the AKP to face up to its responsibilities. What happens if it doesn’t assume those responsibilities?
Answer: The leader asked us to insist that the declaration be made on 28 February. As we are a movement that is opposed to military coups, we wanted to make the declaration on 28 February. A joint declaration was signed by the parties and the joint text was announced to the public. The government delegation and the delegation of the HDP were photographed together. On the same photograph, in the same frame. That was significant, because it was the first time that the government had shown that it was facing up to its responsibilities. That wasn’t an easy thing for Turkey to do, and it’s very important.
Question: Indeed, but if the government doesn’t assume its responsibilities, what will happen?
Answer: Öcalan will make an appeal, the PKK will announce that it’s giving up its weapons, and the problem will be solved that way. It’s a superficial trick designed to deceive society. By selling this false perception to society, they hope to win the elections. The Kurdish movement is not fooled.
Sub-heading: If there were democracy there would be no Kurdish issue
Question: So why do you stay at the [negotiating] table with the AKP?
Answer: We sit down at the [negotiating] table with whoever is in power. It’s not surprising. Those who resolved similar problems around the world resolved them with fascist governments or dictators or negotiated with them. That’s what’s happening here too. If there were a democratic government in Turkey, there wouldn’t be a Kurdish issue or a democratic issue.
Question: Do Erdoğan and the AKP represent fascism in Turkey?
Answer: It’s Erdoğan who represents AKP hegemony and dictatorship. It’s impossible for the AKP to promote Erdoğan’s dictatorship in Turkey and at the same time to claim to resolve the issue of Kurdistan.
Question: Is this all a political initiative aimed at nationalist voters?
Answer: On the one hand [the AKP] addresses the nationalist community, and on the other hand it provokes us and provokes the people, so that we’ll say ‘Enough is enough’ and leave the negotiating table. If the AKP doesn’t resolve the issue and continues to provoke us and to stall the process, we can move on unilaterally to a certain point in resolving the issue. If we receive further provocation and threats [the AKP] could prompt us to leave the table. It’s made all these efforts, but they haven’t succeeded.
Sub-heading: The AKP is counting votes
Question: What interest does the AKP have in all this? What does it stand to gain if you leave the [negotiating] table?
Answer: Of course [the AKP] stands to gain. It claims that it’s the party that’s addressing the issue while we’re against [finding] a solution. They’re pushing us to tipping point, pushing us to make [concessions]. They’re patient, they work at it. If we leave the [negotiating] table [the AKP will say]: ‘We wanted to resolve the issue, we were patient, but the PKK didn’t want a solution, they wanted to carry on waging war. They weren’t in favour of peace, they think of nothing but waging war’. That’s how [the AKP] always operates.”
This interview, published on the evening of 31 March 2015 on the website of the newspaper Cumhuriyet, read as follows:
“Heading: The Cumhuriyet journalist Ahmet Şık spoke to the activists by telephone half an hour before their death. Why did they carry out this action? What do they want? Are they lawyers? What did they talk about to the prosecutor? They answered all these questions.
The activists B.D. and Ş.Y. answered Ahmet Şık’s questions by telephone half an hour before being killed in the hostage-taking incident. Ahmet Şık’s questions and their replies are set out here.
Question: Are you going to put an end to your action? What stage are the negotiations at?
Answer: We tweeted the service numbers of the police officers concerned taken from the investigation file. According to the file, the criminal bureau [the police inspectorate] found that three police officers out of the 21 officers suspected were especially implicated. We discovered that it was these three officers who may have fired at B.E.. The prosecutor also gave us that information. In the negotiations we’re asking for the identity of these three police officers to be disclosed and broadcast live. The negotiators also told us [that they were 99% sure that] the people who killed B.E. were police officers. We’re asking for the public to be told the names live on air. Here, we’ve studied the files too. We’ve looked at photos of the suspects. In the criminal bureau report the three officers were already circled in red. One of them is called G.T. His service number is ... We also provided the service numbers of the other police officers and we want their names to be disclosed live on air.
Question: Do you think your demand will be met?
Answer: The names of B.E.’s killers [are known] but haven’t been disclosed. Thanks to our action, the names will be announced and [the police officers] will face trial. The killers in the cases of A.İ.K. and E.S. were identified, but we know how that trial ended. The killers are never punished properly. That’s why we want them to be tried by a [lay] jury. That’s our second demand.
Question: What will happen if your demand isn’t met?
Answer: Our demand is clear. The names must be announced live on air. The negotiators have to honour their commitments. The identity of the cops has to be disclosed and the officers have to confess to their crimes in a live broadcast. When that demand has been met we can negotiate on the other demands which we’ve already announced. If our [first] demand isn’t met we’ll do what we said at the beginning. We provided the police officers’ service numbers. We want the names to be announced. Once that’s been done we can put an end to our action. Now we’re starting a final negotiation and we’ve given a deadline of half an hour [it’s now 7.40 p.m.]. [If the police officers] don’t admit to their crimes live on air, the negotiations will end. The telephone calls will end too and we’ll punish the prosecutor.
Question: Was it also you who demanded that the head of the security directorate and the deputy chief public prosecutor give a live statement at midday?
Answer: Yes, that statement was made in line with our demand. When we began our action we gave a three-hour deadline. We were able to get in touch with the team of negotiators shortly before that expired. As the authorities promised to announce the identity of B.E.’s killers, we said that if that was done the negotiations would continue. The chief of police and the deputy chief public prosecutor then made a statement live on air and we extended the deadline. If they hadn’t made that announcement the deadline wouldn’t have been extended.
Question: When you entered the building, did you use lawyers’ IDs? Reports that you were lawyers were also circulating. How did you get into the courthouse with weapons?
Answer: We’re not saying anything about how we got in. No doubt that will emerge eventually but we’re not giving any explanations at this stage. Rumours of this kind make lawyers a target. In fact, even without us putting on lawyers’ robes or using lawyers’ IDs, lawyers would be targeted in this case. Lawyers in this country have been targeted repeatedly. They’ve been put in prison and even killed because they [were identified to their] clients. So they won’t suddenly become targets because of our action. Anyone who doesn’t support the AKP and the established order in this country is already a target. We’re not lawyers either, we’re DHKP/C fighters. At the end of the day, we decided to carry out this action and we tried all kinds of methods. This action is a method [that we were forced to use].
Question: Does armed action deliver justice?
Answer: The revolutionaries have worked hard for justice in this country. They’ve carried out lots of actions to date. The revolutionaries have protested, the lawyers have insisted. But instead of prosecuting the killers they arrested the protesters. The protesters were investigated and tortured. We’re demanding justice for the killing of B.E. But they only make use of the justice system when the interests of the established order are at stake, and to arrest those who seek justice. We’re here today to deliver justice. The methods we use, and our action, are legitimate.
Question: You say that if your demand isn’t met you’ll punish the prosecutor. Is that legitimate?
Answer: We’re trying to avoid that. Meeting our demand and ensuring that nothing happens to the prosecutor, [all that] is in their hands. After all, these are their own prosecutors and police officers. It is these prosecutors and police officers who protect their established order. If they don’t want anything to happen to them, they just have to agree to our demand. We believe that the established order doesn’t respect its own people. They use them and then discard them. It’s up to them to decide what happens now. We’re not making any further demands.
Question: What condition is the prosecutor in? Can we speak to him?
Answer: I can’t let you speak to him. But he’s fine. He’s already spoken on the phone to another prosecutor whom he knows and to a senior police officer. He’s in good health, he says so himself.
Question: Have you spoken to the prosecutor at all? According to [some of the media], this prosecutor has worked hard to find the perpetrators of B.E.’s killing.
Answer: Yes, we’ve spoken to him. The prosecutor tries to defend himself. But when you look at the file, all you find is the lawyers’ applications. There’s no sign of any efforts by the prosecutor to make progress in the case. We now know how the case has been conducted so far. The prosecutors haven’t dealt with the case. It was the lawyers and the families who tried to find the video recordings. The revolutionaries took action several times to demand [that the case be dealt with]. But they were placed in police custody. They were tortured. They were arrested. No one can name a single step taken by the prosecutors in this case. Everyone knows what the judiciary does in cases like this. They just protect the State and its criminals. In this case as well the prosecutor is responsible for the impunity of the police. We’ve already said that to him.
Question: The murder of B.E. had already provoked a response among the great majority of the public. Hundreds of thousands of people who attended his funeral protested against that injustice. Does your action not destroy the legitimate basis [of the protests]?
Answer: B.E. was an ordinary person, but he was our kid. We knew him. We knew him personally, [he was] from our area. B.E. was a kid who grew up [with us]. He was our soul, our brother, our comrade. It was no accident that millions of people attended his funeral. The revolutionaries carried out actions for 360 days to draw attention to that injustice and provoke a public response. Lots of martyrs were killed during the June uprising, but none of the funerals were like that. Of course, B.E.’s age and the fact that he was still a child were a factor, but that huge gathering took place because of our demands for justice. As we said at the start, in deciding on this action [the hostage-taking] we’ve done [everything we could] up till now. We used democratic means to call for action to be taken. But since justice was not done we said that we might deliver justice by taking up our weapons. Our legitimacy comes from our ideology.”
When this interview was published in the print edition of Cumhuriyet on 1 April 2015, under the heading “This action is a method we were forced to use”, it was preceded by an introduction written by the applicant, worded as follows:
“[The activist] was on the phone shortly before the bloody operation which put an end to the latest hostage-taking incident without leaving a single witness behind to tell the truth. When I rang the number for the second time without being sure that anyone would answer, a young voice said ‘Hello’. I don’t know which [of the two] it was. When I introduced myself and began asking my questions one after another, the negotiations could be heard in the background. [The activist] asked me to be quick, but he answered all my questions.
Although his words showed his determination, he kept repeating the same thing: ‘If the police officers’ identity is disclosed, our action will end’. That didn’t happen. This simple demand, which the judicial authorities should already have met, was rejected. The operation, which was described as ‘successful’, resulted in the death of the prosecutor Mehmet Selim Kiraz and of Ş.Y. and B.D., who said that they had gone there to kill the prosecutor. This last interview is published here as a record.”
During a seminar on press freedom organised in Heybeliada (Turkey) in partnership with the European Parliament, the applicant reportedly made the following remarks:
“Working in the media wing of an organisation conducting an armed struggle does not make you a member of that organisation. As far as I’m concerned, all my colleagues who work in the PKK’s media wing are journalists.”
The post of 28 November 2015:
“They chose to slaughter Tahir Elçi instead of arresting him. You’re a mafia, you bunch of murderers.”
The post of 17 February 2016:
“Do people who try to prove that the PYD is a terrorist organisation, while the United States and the EU refer to it as their ally against jihadist terrorism, not become ordinary suspects?”
The post of 11 December 2016:
“Instead of comparing the people who were burnt in the cellars of the houses in Cizre and those who were killed by a bomb in Istanbul, speak out against both. Both are acts of violence.”
The post of 14 December 2016:
“A war has been going on with the PKK since 1984 in a particular region of the country, despite occasional interruptions.”
The post of 20 December 2016 concerning the possibility that the killer of the Russian ambassador in Ankara may have been a member of an organisation:
“To the government and its supporters who are trying to prove that the murderer is a member of FETÖ, but not of Al-Nusra: what will you do about the fact that the killer is a police officer?”
A message, the date of which is unknown, invoked by the magistrate’s court, but not taken up either by the indictment or by the Constitutional Court’s judgment:
“If the act attributed to S.S.Ö. is a crime, shouldn’t there be more suspects, starting with the person who resides in the Palace?”
An article published on 8 July 2015 under the heading “What we’re doing is journalism; what you’re doing is treason”, and another article published on 9 July 2015 under the heading “MİT had information on the Reyhanlı massacre but did not share that information with the police”, both reported on remarks made by the public prosecutor Ö.Ş. alleging that the organisation MİT (the national intelligence agency) had concealed the Reyhanlı explosives attack from the judicial authorities. The prosecutor Ö.Ş. was subsequently arrested in the context of a criminal investigation concerning some judges and members of the security forces who were alleged to be militants of the organisation FETÖ, in connection with the affair known as “the MİT lorries”.
An article was published on 13 February 2015 entitled “The secret in the lorries revealed”. The article stated, citing recordings of telephone calls between the leaders of the Turkmen forces in Syria, that the consignment of weapons and ammunition transported from Turkey to Syria in lorries belonging to MİT had not been intended for Turkmen militia but for the jihadist organisation Ansar Al-Islam.
On 3 April 2017 the Istanbul public prosecutor’s office filed a bill of indictment with the Istanbul 27th Assize Court against seventeen individuals including the applicant. They were accused mainly of lending assistance to terrorist organisations without being members of them (an offence under Article 220 § 7 of the Criminal Code (“the CC”)). The public prosecutor considered that, by publishing articles that were glaringly at odds with the world view of its readers (some of which had been written by the applicant), the newspaper Cumhuriyet had conveyed manipulative and destructive information concerning the State. He maintained that the newspaper, in publishing statements by leaders and prominent figures of terrorist organisations, had become the champion of terrorist organisations such as FETÖ/PDY, the PKK/KCK and the DHKP/C (People’s Revolutionary Liberation Party/Front). According to the public prosecutor, the newspaper had not acted within the limits of freedom of expression but had manipulated public opinion and disguised the truth, had acted in accordance with the aims of the terrorist organisations and had thus attempted to create domestic upheaval in order to render the country ungovernable.
In support of the charges against the applicant the Istanbul public prosecutor’s office referred, among other material, to the following published items (the charges that were not subsequently taken into account by the Constitutional Court are not mentioned here).
(a)  The article of 14 March 2015 containing an interview with one of the PKK’s leaders, Cemil Bayık. The public prosecutor stressed that the applicant had referred to the terrorists several times as guerrilla fighters. He considered that, in view of its content and presentation, the article had pursued an aim that went beyond informing the public, that it contained violence and coercion and that it had been designed to convey to the public manipulative comments made by the PKK, in order to achieve a form of indoctrination. The public prosecutor inferred from this that the article amounted to propaganda in favour of the PKK.
(b)  The articles of 31 March and 1 April 2015 concerning the incident in which a prosecutor had been held hostage in his office by left-wing extremists. In the view of the prosecuting authorities, the articles in question had not criticised the terrorists; instead, owing to their presentation on the front page of the newspaper together with a large photograph taken while the terrorists were holding a gun to the prosecutor’s head, and their use of the adjectives “young and determined” to describe one of the terrorists, the articles had conveyed the latter’s message to the public and intensified it with the use of images.
The public prosecutor’s office also cited the applicant’s contribution to a seminar on press freedom held from 23 to 26 September 2014 in Heybeliada (see paragraph 20 above), and, among other materials, the five social media posts referred to in paragraphs 21-25 above.
As to the classification of these acts, the public prosecutor pointed out that Article 220 § 6 of the CC provided that any person who committed an offence on behalf of an illegal organisation was to be sentenced for belonging to that organisation, even if he or she was not a member of it. In his view the methods employed by individuals, the timing of their actions and the contacts which they established with the leaders of the illegal organisation all constituted evidence of their wish to act in concert with that organisation. He added that the position with regard to persons who were aware of the organisation’s aims and had served it voluntarily should be assessed in the same way, and specified that the fact that the activities actually had a legitimate (legal) basis did not alter that position.
According to the public prosecutor, activities which in normal circumstances would be lawful, in view of the public’s right to receive information and journalists’ right to practise their profession, were subjected in all national and international systems to restrictions based on criteria such as national security, public order and public peace. It was clear that the following acts could not be regarded as lawful: participating, in the context of one’s personal journalistic activities, in a campaign to manipulate public opinion conducted by an illegal organisation; attempting to present the leaders and members of illegal organisations as likeable individuals; publishing statements by the leaders of those organisations containing calls to violence and threats; and giving a platform to the activities of the terrorist organisations by accusing the State of links to international terrorism.
In the proceedings before the Istanbul Assize Court the applicant submitted his defence against the public prosecutor’s charges. He argued mainly that he was being put on trial for his work as a journalist, and denied the accusations against him.
The applicant then submitted arguments concerning the articles referred to in the detention order and the bill of indictment and taken into consideration by the Constitutional Court.
The applicant submitted that his article of 14 March 2015 containing the interview with Cemil Bayık had remained within the bounds of ethical journalism, and that he had reproduced the words of the interviewee without adding or subtracting anything, merely correcting grammatical mistakes. In his view, the reason why that article had been referred to in the indictment was in order to establish a link between himself, the newspaper Cumhuriyet and the PKK. What actually troubled the prosecuting authorities was the content of Cemil Bayık’s message in that interview; an interview like that would have been regarded as newsworthy anywhere in the world, and by publishing it he had simply been practising his profession as a journalist.
As to the interview of 31 March 2015 with the terrorists who had taken the public prosecutor, S.K., hostage and killed him, the applicant maintained that in conducting that interview he had sought to discover the reasons for the militants’ action. As he was a journalist with Cumhuriyet, he was not very familiar with the running of the newspaper’s website, but was aware that the articles published in the newspaper were also posted on the website. As to the form in which the interview had been presented, on the front page and page 6 of the newspaper, the division of tasks within the newspaper and the different job descriptions meant that it was the editors who decided on the presentation of the articles and news items for publication, after making an overall assessment. The person who had written the article was not involved at that stage, in line with the newspaper’s practice. If an attempt was made to establish responsibility on the basis of the way in which the interview had been presented in the newspaper, he was prepared to accept that responsibility.
With regard to his social media posts, the applicant argued that these should not be interpreted without taking into consideration their context and the content of the information to which they related.
In a judgment of 25 April 2018 the Istanbul Assize Court, taking the view that the offences of which the applicant was accused were proven, found him guilty of assisting the terrorist organisations the PKK, the DHKP/C and FETÖ without being a member of those organisations, under Article 220 § 7 of the CC. It sentenced him to seven years and six months’ imprisonment. In giving reasons for its judgment the Assize Court referred to the evidence against the applicant, such as his posts referring to the need to try or punish the State at international level, for instance the posts concerning the “MİT lorries” affair, the interviews he had conducted with senior figures in the PKK/KCK portraying that organisation as being perfectly respectable or acting in democratic fashion, and his wish to see terrorist organisations like the DHKP/C and the PKK/KCK “legalised” and to portray them as innocent organisations.
As to the article of 14 March 2015 containing the interview with Cemil Bayık, entitled “Either Apo [goes] to Kandil or we [go] to İmralı”, the Istanbul Assize Court noted that the applicant had published it during the period when the newspaper Cumhuriyet had allegedly begun assisting terrorist organisations. It observed that in the course of the interview the link between Abdullah Öcalan and the organisation (the PKK) had been mentioned; that the organisation’s terrorists had been described as “guerrilla fighters” and thereby glorified; that the PKK’s so-called expectations had been listed; that the ceasefire declared by the PKK had been portrayed as a concession to the State; and that the views of one of the terrorist organisation’s leaders concerning the President of the Republic had been expounded. In the Assize Court’s view, the interview had depicted the terrorist organisation as a peace-seeking entity which carried out actions merely because it was forced to and which had the capacity to crush the State but refrained from doing so.
As to the applicant’s interview with the activists who had taken a public prosecutor hostage and killed him, the Assize Court considered that the immediate publication of the interview under the heading “This action is a method we were forced to use”, and its presentation together with a photograph on the newspaper’s front page, constituted an act seeking to legitimise those violent actions and amounted to assisting a terrorist organisation.
The Assize Court further held that the applicant’s social media posts had contained statements claiming that the PYD (a pro-Kurdish armed organisation in Syria) was not a terrorist organisation and that it was the State which was a mafia and a murderer.
Generally, the court noted that the above-mentioned articles and posts were characterised by their tendency to portray these organisations as legitimate and innocent rather than by any effort to inform the public or pursue the public interest.
The Assize Court classified the applicant’s articles and posts as assistance to terrorist organisations, for the following reasons. The applicant had been a journalist and reporter with Cumhuriyet at a time when the newspaper was publishing material in support of terrorist organisations and when the recently recruited managers had encouraged the practice; the applicant’s articles, which were aimed at a wide readership, had contained information and comments in support of the main arguments relied on by the terrorist organisations and their attempted actions against the State; these acts on the part of the applicant, combined with those of the other journalists and of the newspaper’s management, had gone beyond mere propaganda in favour of those organisations; in his defence before the Assize Court, the applicant had adopted an accusatory attitude towards the State and the State system, and had persisted in this attitude despite warnings from the court; his defence before the court had been based chiefly on political statements echoing the main arguments of the terrorist organisations; and a complaint had been made to the prosecuting authorities concerning his remarks during the trial. The Assize Court found that there were no mitigating factors in the applicant’s case, taking the view that he had committed the offence intentionally as he had chosen to interview individuals whom the terrorist organisations considered to be important, the interviews had been destructive and one-sided rather than shocking from the point of view of journalistic information, and the applicant had displayed no remorse.
The applicant and other convicted defendants appealed against the Istanbul Assize Court judgment of 25 April 2018.
In a judgment of 18 February 2019 the Istanbul Court of Appeal (Third Criminal Division) dismissed the applicant’s appeal after examining the case on the merits. It held as follows:
“... the impugned judgment did not contain any substantive or procedural irregularities. There were no deficiencies in the evidence taken or the other investigative steps carried out by the first-instance court. The impugned acts were correctly characterised in accordance with the types of offences provided for by law. The sentences were fixed in accordance with the convictions and the law. Accordingly, the grounds of appeal advanced by the prosecutor’s office and by the convicted persons are unfounded. ...”
In his submissions of 16 July 2019 the chief public prosecutor attached to the Court of Cassation sought the quashing of the judgment convicting the applicant of assisting terrorist organisations and requested that he be re-tried for the offence of disseminating propaganda in favour of terrorist organisations and/or the offence of denigrating the organs or institutions of the State. The chief public prosecutor sought the quashing of the judgment convicting the other Cumhuriyet journalists and managers on the grounds that there was no basis for their conviction.
In a judgment of 18 September 2019 the Court of Cassation quashed the appeal judgment convicting the applicant and his co-accused, basing its decision on the grounds advanced by the chief public prosecutor. In its reasoned judgment delivered on 27 September 2019 pointing out the particular features of the offence of assisting a terrorist organisation, the Court of Cassation emphasised that persons committing that offence, in addition to a general intentional fault, namely intent to carry out acts punishable under criminal law, had to have committed a specific intentional fault consisting in pursuing a particular objective. The court held that, for the offence of assisting a terrorist organisation to be established, the perpetrator had to have deliberately assisted such an organisation while being aware that the latter pursued the aim of committing criminal offences. The court specified that the expression “while being aware” also required direct intent on the part of the perpetrator. Hence, in the court’s view, it was also necessary to ascertain whether the person concerned had acted with the intention of helping to achieve the illegal aims of the organisation in question.
As to the issue of the establishment of the facts on the basis of the evidence for and against the accused, the Court of Cassation referred to the general criminal-law principle whereby the accused should have the benefit of the doubt. The court pointed out that, for any person to be convicted, the commission of an offence had to be proved beyond doubt. A decision to convict could not be arrived at by interpreting to the detriment of the accused facts or allegations that were doubtful or not wholly clarified.
The Court of Cassation therefore concluded that the lower courts had erroneously characterised the offences in issue as “assisting a terrorist organisation”.
However, the Court of Cassation considered that the applicant, unlike the other accused, should be tried for some of the acts in question under criminal-law provisions other than those concerning the offence of assisting a terrorist organisation. With regard to the interview of 31 March 2015 with the activists of the DHKP/C who had taken the prosecutor M.S. Kiraz hostage and killed him, the court held that “the fact of contacting members of the terrorist organisation DHKP/C by telephone when they were engaged in a violent terrorist act that caused [public] outrage, and publishing statements and explanations by them which sought to legitimise their methods, including violence, force and threats, and encouraged the use of such methods” should be assessed under section 6(2) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act, which made it an offence to print or publish the written or oral statements of a terrorist organisation. As to the items posted by the applicant on Twitter on 17 February 2016 on the subject of the PYD and on 14 December 2016 on the subject of the “war” with the PKK, the Court of Cassation ordered the lower courts to assess whether those posts had constituted the offence of disseminating propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation under Article 220 § 8 of the CC. The court also instructed the lower courts to examine whether the item posted by the applicant on 28 November 2015 on the subject of the killing of the lawyer Tahir Elçi was to be regarded as denigrating the institutions and organs of the State, an offence under Article 301 of the CC.
The case was remitted to the Istanbul Assize Court.
At the first hearing in the case, on 21 November 2019, the newly composed Istanbul Assize Court invited the applicant, like the other accused, to make a final statement before judgment was given. In a judgment of the same day the court departed from the Court of Cassation judgment of 18 September 2019 and confirmed its own judgment of 18 February 2019 convicting the accused.
The case is still pending before the plenary criminal divisions of the Court of Cassation.
On 30 January 2017 the applicant lodged an individual application with the Constitutional Court. He alleged a breach of his right to liberty and security and his right to freedom of expression and freedom of the press. He also maintained that he had been arrested and detained on grounds other than those provided for by the Turkish Constitution and the Convention.
In a decision of 2 May 2019 the Constitutional Court declared the application inadmissible as being manifestly ill-founded.
With regard to the applicant’s complaint concerning the lawfulness of his initial and continued pre-trial detention, the Constitutional Court, in seeking to ascertain whether there had been a strong suspicion that the applicant had committed the offences with which he was charged, referred to the pre-trial detention order made by the magistrate on 30 December 2016. It noted the magistrate’s findings to the effect that the applicant had depicted the security forces’ efforts to combat terrorist organisations as terrorism, that he had manipulated the facts in order to present the State as an entity that cooperated with certain terrorist organisations and supplied weapons to them, that he had written articles and posts supporting the actions carried out by the PKK, the DHKP/C and FETÖ/PDY, and that he had thus sought to legitimise those actions, had gone beyond the aim of informing the public and had ensured that the points of view of the terrorist organisations were disseminated widely among the public.
As to the articles published on 31 March 2015 on the newspaper’s website and on 1 April 2015 in the print edition, concerning the incident in which a public prosecutor had been taken hostage and killed, the Constitutional Court noted that the applicant had interviewed members of the organisation before they killed the prosecutor and while lawenforcement officers were still attempting to dissuade them from continuing with their action, and that he had published the interview on the newspaper’s website on the evening of the killing and on the front page and page 6 of the print edition the following day, together with a photograph showing a gun being held to the prosecutor’s head. The Constitutional Court held that it had been neither arbitrary nor unfounded for the investigating authorities to consider, taking into account the content of the interview and the manner in which it had been presented, that there was a strong suspicion that the applicant was guilty, given that he had interviewed the perpetrators of the action while they were actually committing it and had relayed their message to the public although it was clear that the organisation to which the perpetrators belonged had carried out the action in order to have its voice heard and to remain in the headlines.
The Constitutional Court also noted that the magistrate who had ordered the applicant’s detention had taken into consideration the fact that the applicant, in presenting his interview with Cemil Bayık, one of the leaders of the PKK, had referred to the terrorists several times as “guerrilla fighters”; that it was clear from the content and presentation of the interview that the applicant, overstepping the limits of his task of informing the public, had relayed to the public the PKK’s rhetoric concerning current events, a rhetoric which contained manipulative messages in support of violence and coercion and was designed to create a particular perception; and that the applicant had thus disseminated propaganda in favour of that organisation. The Constitutional Court also observed that, according to the detention order, the applicant – in his contribution to a seminar held from 23 to 26 September 2014 in Heybeliada and in the items he had posted on social media on 17 February 2016 concerning the organisation PYD, on 11 December 2016 concerning the bomb attacks in Cizre and Istanbul, on 14 December 2016 concerning the “war” with the PKK, and on 20 December 2016 concerning the possibility that the killer of the Russian ambassador was a member of the organisation Al-Nusra or of FETÖ – had supported the actions of terrorist organisations and had attempted to legitimise those actions. The Constitutional Court held that it had been neither arbitrary nor unfounded for the investigating authorities to consider that there was a strong indication of the applicant’s guilt, in view of the language used in the article, statement and posts in question and the impact that they had had on public opinion at the time of their publication.
On the basis of those suspicions the Constitutional Court considered that the applicant had posed a flight risk in view of the severity of the statutory penalty for the offences of which he had been accused, that not all the evidence had been gathered at the time of his arrest and that protective measures other than detention would have been insufficient.
In the light of its finding that there had been strong suspicions against the applicant and that his pre-trial detention had been a proportionate measure, the Constitutional Court held that there was no reason to reach a different conclusion regarding the applicant’s claim that he had been placed in pre-trial detention solely on account of acts coming within the scope of his freedom of expression and freedom of the press. It therefore dismissed this complaint also.
The Vice-President of the Constitutional Court wrote a dissenting opinion expressing the view that there had been no reasonable or strong suspicion capable of justifying the applicant’s arrest and detention. With regard to the applicant’s interview with one of the perpetrators of the hostage-taking and killing of a public prosecutor, published on 31 March and 1 April 2015, he considered that, although interviewing terrorists while their action was in progress undeniably resulted in their message being conveyed to the public, a distinction had to be made between the offence of disseminating propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation and journalism which disregarded professional ethics in search of a scoop. In the view of the Vice-President, the applicant could have been more sensitive in his presentation of the information in terms of the language, style and imagery used. However, conveying information on terrorist acts to the public inevitably involved informing society about the terrorists’ aims. In covering this particular event, virtually all the media outlets concerned had provided the public with information on the terrorists’ aims and the reasons behind their action; this was quite natural in the context of journalistic activity. Were it otherwise, any information concerning terrorist actions was liable to be regarded as propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation. That would prevent the flow of information and the creation of a climate of healthy discussion in a democratic society on the subject of terrorism.
As to the applicant’s interview with one of the PKK’s leaders, Cemil Bayık, the dissenting judge considered that the approach taken by the majority – which had regarded the interview as possible propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation owing to the presentation and content of the interview and the use of the term “guerrilla fighters” – was problematic in that such a characterisation would severely restrict free independent journalism on the subject of the terrorist organisations.
The dissenting judge accepted that journalists, when reporting on a vital issue of immediate concern to the public and informing the public about terrorist organisations and terrorists, had to be careful not to use the kind of language and style that legitimised terrorism and terrorists. However, the terminology used in an interview was simply a matter of the editorial choices of the journalist or his or her newspaper. Poor choices were not the result of the offence of disseminating propaganda in favour of terrorism but were simply poor journalism. In the dissenting judge’s view, the existence of propaganda in favour of terrorist organisations could not be inferred solely from a few words used in a text without taking the whole text into consideration. To do so would have a chilling effect on independent interviewing.
The dissenting judge also criticised the approach of the majority, who, in examining the existence of strong suspicions, had taken account of the way in which the articles and posts had been perceived by society at the time of the events, and their impact on people. He argued that it was not possible, on the basis of guesswork and suppositions, to attribute to the articles and posts in question meanings other than those attributed by an objective observer.
The dissenting judge observed that the applicant had not, in any of the impugned articles, news items or posts, used language that expressly incited others to the use of violence or to terrorist acts, even though his style had been sharply critical and even at times problematic from the point of view of journalistic ethics. In the judge’s view the writings in question, which undoubtedly had news value, clearly came within the scope of public debate and were covered by freedom of expression and freedom of the press. He considered that the investigating authorities, by interpreting the applicant’s remarks broadly, had attributed a meaning to them which went beyond their outward meaning.
The dissenting judge also took the view that there had been a breach of the applicant’s freedom of expression and press freedom on account of the applicant’s initial and continued pre-trial detention. In the judge’s view, detaining individuals on the basis of suspicions of disseminating propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation grounded merely on a few sentences within some articles had a chilling effect on freedom of expression and press freedom, rendering them meaningless and undermining the media’s role as a public watchdog. In a free democratic society the press was expected not just to deliver journalism that had close links to the authorities and simply published official statements, but also to deliver independent journalism that investigated events and explained the background to them.
The relevant parts of Article 19 of the Constitution read as follows:
“Everyone has the right to personal liberty and security.
...
Individuals against whom there are strong presumptions of guilt may be detained only by order of a judge and for the purposes of preventing their absconding or the destruction or alteration of evidence, or in any other circumstances provided for by law that also necessitate their detention. No one shall be arrested without an order by a judge except when caught in flagrante delicto or where a delay would have a harmful effect; the conditions for such action shall be determined by law.
...
A person who has been arrested or detained shall be brought before a judge within forty-eight hours at the latest or, in the case of offences committed jointly with others, within four days, not including the time required to convey the person to the court nearest to the place of detention. No one shall be deprived of his or her liberty after the expiry of the aforementioned periods except by order of a judge. These periods may be extended during a state of emergency or a state of siege or in time of war.
...
Anyone who has been detained shall be entitled to request a trial within a reasonable time and to apply for release during the course of the investigation or criminal proceedings. Release may be conditioned by a guarantee to ensure the person’s appearance throughout the trial, or the execution of the court sentence.
Everyone who is deprived of his or her liberty for any reason whatsoever shall be entitled to apply to a competent judicial authority for a speedy decision on his or her case and for his or her immediate release if the detention is not lawful.
...”
The relevant parts of Article 220 of the Criminal Code (“the CC”), which concerns the offence of forming an organisation with the aim of committing a criminal offence, provide as follows:
“...
(6)  Anyone who commits an offence on behalf of an [illegal] organisation shall also be sentenced for belonging to that organisation, even if he or she is not a member of it. The sentence to be imposed for membership may be reduced by up to half. This paragraph shall apply only to armed organisations.
(7)  Anyone who assists an [illegal] organisation knowingly and intentionally (bilerek ve isteyerek), even if he or she does not belong to the hierarchical structure of the organisation, shall be sentenced for membership of that organisation. The sentence to be imposed for membership may be reduced by up to two-thirds, depending on the nature of the assistance.
(8)  Anyone who disseminates propaganda in favour of the organisation [formed with the aim of committing offences] by legitimising or condoning methods such as force, violence or threats shall be liable to a term of imprisonment of one to three years.”
Article 314 of the CC, which concerns the crime of belonging to an armed organisation, provides as follows:
“1.  Anyone who forms or leads an organisation with the aim of committing the offences listed in the fourth and fifth parts of this chapter [crimes against the State and the constitutional order] shall be sentenced to ten to fifteen years’ imprisonment.
Any member of an organisation referred to in the first paragraph above shall be sentenced to five to ten years’ imprisonment.
The provisions relating to the offence of forming an organisation with the aim of committing criminal offences shall apply in their entirety to this offence.”
Article 301 of the CC, as amended by Law no. 5759 of 30 April 2008, reads as follows:
“(1)  Any person who publicly denigrates (aşağılayan) the Turkish nation, the State of the Republic of Turkey, the Turkish Grand National Assembly, the Government of the Republic of Turkey or the judicial organs of State shall be liable to a term of imprisonment of between six months and two years.
(2)  Any person who publicly denigrates the armed forces or the security forces of the State (Devletin askeri ve emniyet teşkilatı) shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of the first paragraph.
(3)  The expression of critical opinions shall not constitute an offence.
(4)  Prosecution of this offence shall be subject to the authorisation of the Minister of Justice.”
Pre-trial detention is governed by Articles 100 et seq. of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”). In accordance with Article 100, a person may be placed in pre-trial detention where there is factual evidence giving rise to strong suspicion that the person has committed an offence and where the detention is justified on one of the grounds laid down in the Article in question, namely: if the suspect has absconded or there is a risk that he or she will do so, and if there is a risk that the suspect will conceal or tamper with evidence or influence witnesses. For certain offences, in particular offences against State security and the constitutional order, the existence of strong suspicion is sufficient to justify pre-trial detention.
Article 101 of the CCP provides that pre-trial detention is ordered at the investigation stage by a magistrate at the request of the public prosecutor and at the trial stage by the competent court, whether of its own motion or at the prosecutor’s request. An objection may be lodged with another magistrate or another court against decisions ordering or extending pre-trial detention. Such decisions must include legal and factual reasons.
Pursuant to Article 108 of the CCP, during the investigation stage, a magistrate must review a suspect’s pre-trial detention at regular intervals not exceeding thirty days. Within the same period, the detainee may also lodge an application for release. During the trial stage, the question of the accused’s detention is reviewed by the competent court at the end of each hearing, and in any event at intervals of no more than thirty days.
Article 141 § 1 (a) and (d) of the CCP provides:
“Compensation for damage ... may be claimed from the State by anyone ...:
(a)  who has been arrested or taken into or kept in detention under conditions or in circumstances not complying with the law;
...
(d)  who, even if he or she was detained lawfully during the investigation or trial, has not been brought before a judicial authority within a reasonable time and has not obtained a judgment on the merits within a reasonable time;
...”
Article 142 § 1 of the same Code reads as follows:
“The claim for compensation may be lodged within three months after the person concerned has been informed that the decision or judgment has become final, and in any event within one year after the decision or judgment has become final.”
According to the case-law of the Court of Cassation, it is not necessary to wait for a final decision on the merits of the case before ruling on a compensation claim lodged under Article 141 of the CCP on account of the excessive length of pre-trial detention (decisions of 16 June 2015, E. 2014/21585 – K. 2015/10868 and E. 2014/6167 – K. 2015/10867).
In its decision of 4 August 2016 (no. 2016/12) concerning the dismissal of two members of the Constitutional Court and its decision of 20 June 2017 (Aydın Yavuz and Others, no. 2016/22169) concerning a person’s pre-trial detention, the Constitutional Court provided information and assessments on the attempted military coup and its consequences. It carried out a detailed examination, from a constitutional perspective, of the facts leading to the declaration of the state of emergency. As a result of this examination, it found that the attempted military coup of 15 July 2016 had been a clear and serious attack both on the constitutional principles that sovereignty was unconditionally and unreservedly vested in the people, who exercised it through authorised organs, and that no individual or body could exercise any State authority not emanating from the Constitution, and also on the principles of democracy, the rule of law and human rights. According to the Constitutional Court, the attempted military coup had been a practical illustration of the severity of the threats posed to the democratic constitutional order and human rights. After summarising the attacks carried out during the night of 15 to 16 July 2016, it emphasised that in order to assess the severity of the threat posed by a military coup, it was also necessary to consider the risks that might have arisen had the coup attempt not been thwarted. It found that the fact that the attempted coup had taken place at a time when Turkey had been under violent attack from numerous terrorist organisations had made the country even more vulnerable and considerably increased the severity of the threat to the life and existence of the nation. The Constitutional Court noted that in some cases it might not be possible for a State to eliminate threats to its democratic constitutional order, fundamental rights and national security through ordinary administrative procedures. It might therefore be necessary to impose extraordinary administrative procedures, such as a state of emergency, until such threats were eliminated. Bearing in mind the threats resulting from the attempted military coup of 15 July 2016, the Constitutional Court accepted the power of the Council of Ministers, chaired by the President, to issue legislative decrees on matters necessitating the state of emergency. In that context, it also emphasised that the state of emergency was a temporary legal regime, in which any interference with fundamental rights had to be foreseeable and the aim of which was to restore the normal regime in order to safeguard fundamental rights.
On 15 February 2017 the Commissioner for Human Rights published a memorandum on freedom of expression and media freedom in Turkey. The parts of this memorandum directly related to the present case are found at paragraphs 79-89 under the heading “Detentions on remand causing a chilling effect”.
Furthermore, the relevant Council of Europe and international texts on the protection and role of human-rights defenders, including journalists, are set out in the Aliyev v. Azerbaijan judgment (nos. 68762/14 and 71200/14, §§ 88-92, 20 September 2018) and in the Kavala v. Turkey judgment (no. 28749/18, §§ 74-75, 10 December 2019).
On 21 July 2016 the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the Council of Europe sent the Secretary General of the Council of Europe the following notice of derogation:
“I communicate the following notice of the Government of the Republic of Turkey.
On 15 July 2016, a large-scale coup attempt was staged in the Republic of Turkey to overthrow the democratically-elected government and the constitutional order. This despicable attempt was foiled by the Turkish state and people acting in unity and solidarity. The coup attempt and its aftermath together with other terrorist acts have posed severe dangers to public security and order, amounting to a threat to the life of the nation in the meaning of Article 15 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
The Republic of Turkey is taking the required measures as prescribed by law, in line with the national legislation and its international obligations. In this context, on 20 July 2016, the Government of the Republic of Turkey declared a State of Emergency for a duration of three months, in accordance with the Constitution (Article 120) and the Law No. 2935 on State of Emergency (Article 3/1b). ...
The decision was published in the Official Gazette and approved by the Turkish Grand National Assembly on 21 July 2016. Thus, the State of Emergency takes effect as from this date. In this process, measures taken may involve derogation from the obligations under the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, permissible in Article 15 of the Convention.
I would therefore underline that this letter constitutes information for the purposes of Article 15 of the Convention. The Government of the Republic of Turkey shall keep you, Secretary General, fully informed of the measures taken to this effect. The Government shall inform you when the measures have ceased to operate.
...”