The case originated in an application (no. 65290/14) against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Hungarian national, R.S. (“the applicant”), on 26 September 2014.
On 26 November 2018 the President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his identity disclosed (Rule 47 § 3 of the Rules of Court). She further decided that documents deposited with the Registry in which the applicant’s name appeared or which could otherwise easily lead to his identification should not be accessible to the public (Rule 33 § 1).
The applicant was represented by Mr T. Fazekas, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent at the Ministry of Justice.
On 12 January 2017 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1980 and lives in Püspökladány.
On 6 March 2010 the applicant got into a fight in a car park in front of a nightclub in Püspökladány, apparently under the influence of alcohol and drugs. The incident was reported to Püspökladány police station.
The applicant asserts that around 3 a.m. he and his girlfriend were sitting in his car, not in traffic, pulled over to the side of the road, when patrolling police officers approached them. According to the file produced in the subsequent criminal proceedings, the applicant refused to take a breathalyser test for alcohol. Following an identity check and a search, he was handcuffed and taken to Püspökladány police station to be held for questioning (előállítás), on suspicion of having committed an offence. According to the police reports, the police officers believed that he was under the influence of either alcohol or drugs.
At the police station the applicant started to insult the police officers and was handcuffed again. According to the applicant, he was also placed in leg restraints, during which time he suffered injuries. He was then transported to the Püspökladány medical emergency service by four police officers for a blood and urine test.
The applicant told a doctor that he was unable to urinate. According to the police reports, the applicant was under the influence of alcohol, “uncooperative, making the insertion of a catheter necessary”; he was also “violent and resisted the procedure”. Furthermore, “it was necessary to physically restrain him and have recourse to force” to obtain the necessary urine sample.
The doctor on duty proceeded with the applicant’s catheterisation while the latter’s arms were handcuffed. Afterwards, the doctor cut the applicant’s shirt and took a blood sample. He also issued a medical report on the applicant’s injuries.
On 22 April 2010 the applicant was fined 50,000 Hungarian forints (HUF – approximately 180 euros (EUR)) for the minor offence of failing to comply with lawful police measures. That decision was subsequently overturned, and the proceedings were discontinued by a decision of the Püspökladány District Court of 22 April 2011. The Püspökladány District Court established that the police measure could not be held to be lawful, since the medical intervention had been carried out without the applicant’s written consent, required under the Health Care Act.
Furthermore, in a judgment of 15 November 2011 the Püspökladány District Court found the applicant guilty of disorderly conduct, drink-driving and violence against a representative of a public authority. He was sentenced to two years and three months’ imprisonment. The applicant challenged the evidence obtained through the urine test, and the court found it established that he had consented to the use of the catheter, as evidenced by five or six witness testimonies, and he had only withdrawn his consent upon realising that the intervention was painful. The judgment stated that, irrespective of the result of urine test, it was clear that the applicant had been under the influence of alcohol at the material time, as observed by the police officers, the witnesses and the doctor on duty. On appeal, the applicant’s sentence was reduced to one year and nine months’ imprisonment suspended for five years by the Debrecen Regional Court.
On 11 March 2010 the applicant lodged a criminal complaint against the police officers involved in the incident, alleging that they had interrogated him by subjecting him to ill-treatment – beating him, using handcuffs and leg restraints, and forcibly taking blood samples from him and urine samples by catheterisation.
On 26 November 2010 the investigations division of the Debrecen public prosecutor’s office discontinued the criminal proceedings for lack of any conclusive evidence. As to the urinary catheterisation, relying on the witness testimonies of the doctor on duty, a nurse, a driver who was on duty at the medical service at the time and the police officers, the prosecutor’s office concluded that the applicant had voluntarily agreed to the sample being taken by catheterisation. Referring to an expert opinion produced by the Medical Expert Division of the Forensic Expert and Research Institute, the prosecutor’s office found that urinary catheterisation did not amount to a surgical intervention. In any event, the use of physical restraint had only been necessary as the applicant had become aggressive and tried to resist once the medical intervention had started.
The applicant lodged a complaint against the decision, requesting that the investigation into the unlawful use of leg restraints and the catheterisation continue. By a decision of 10 January 2011 the Hajdú Bihar county chief public prosecutor’s office dismissed the applicant’s complaint, endorsing the findings of the first-instance authority.
In a parallel procedure, on 16 March 2010 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Independent Police Complaints Board (“the Board”), the body responsible for inquiring into alleged violations of fundamental rights committed by the police, challenging the use of handcuffs and leg restraints, the fact that he had been held for questioning, his ill-treatment at the hands of the police officers, and the forcible taking of urine and blood samples. The Board inquired with the doctor on duty about the incident, who stated in his reply that the applicant had agreed to the insertion of a catheter before a number of witnesses, and that he had interpreted the fact that the applicant had removed his clothes as consent to the procedure. According to the doctor, the applicant had been cooperative and had only turned violent at a later stage. According to the facts established by the Board, since the applicant had been unable to produce the urine sample, the police officers had asked the doctor on duty to carry out the catheterisation.
The Board commissioned an expert opinion from the chief physician of the Budapest Institute of Forensic Medicine, who stated in an opinion of 4 June 2010 that, although some medical institutions required written consent for catheterisation, this was not the policy of the majority of institutions. In his opinion, such a procedure was not general practice, and recourse to an “emergency” intervention was professionally unreasonable. In any event, according to professional guidelines, if a urine test could not be carried out, a blood test was sufficient.
In an opinion of 4 August 2010 the Board found that the use of handcuffs had been legitimate and that the ill-treatment alleged could not be established. However, as regards the catheterisation and the use of leg restraints, the Board concluded that those measures had infringed the applicant’s right to dignity, physical integrity, health and a fair trial. It forwarded its opinion to the Commander of the National Police Service.
Following the adoption of the Board’s opinion, the applicant’s complaint was examined by the Commander of the National Police Service under section 92(1) of Act no. XXXIV of 1994 on the Police (“the Police Act”), with a view to establishing whether the police measure had been unlawful. It was dismissed on 26 October 2010. The decision established that the applicant had informed the doctor on duty that he had been unable to produce a urine sample and that he would not drink water in order to be able to do it later. He had behaved aggressively and had been uncooperative, but had nonetheless agreed to the catheterisation before witnesses by loudly screaming “do the catheterisation”, and had undressed voluntarily. He had only been restrained to prevent him from causing injuries to himself or the doctor, once the procedure had started. Moreover, the forcible taking of a sample was justified in situations where there were grounds to believe that the driver of a vehicle was under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
The applicant sought judicial review of the decision, arguing that he had not been heard during the proceedings and the facts had been established solely on the basis of the testimonies of the police officers and the medical staff. He disputed the finding that he had voluntarily undressed for his catheterisation. He emphasised that he had submitted a medical report substantiating his allegations about the use of leg restraints, which had been disregarded by the Commander of the National Police Service.
On 7 February 2012 the Budapest Regional Administrative and Labour Court dismissed his action. The court emphasised that, according to the medical expert opinion commissioned by the Board, there was no clear medical approach to catheterisation and the question of whether it was an invasive or non-invasive intervention, thus hospital practice differed in relation to the necessity of consent. If an examination was considered invasive, oral consent was not sufficient. In any case, the procedure could always be stopped. The medical expert also stated that, in comparison to a blood test, a urine test was not a precise method to establish whether a person was under the influence of drugs. Furthermore, catheterisation was a procedure that could be interrupted at any time.
The court concluded that the procedure had been in compliance with the provisions of the Police Act setting out that a police officer could oblige a driver to provide a sample of breath, blood and urine for the purposes of a test. The court also indicated that the question as to whether consent was required for catheterisation, and whether the procedure should or should not have been carried out against the applicant’s will, was outside the scope of its examination. It had been up to the doctor and not the police officers to decide on the method by which to take a sample. The court also took note of several witness testimonies and concluded that the use of leg restraints could not be established in the applicant’s case.
The applicant lodged a petition for review with the Kúria, arguing that the Commander of the National Police Service had failed to establish the facts of the case. In particular, the service had not commissioned a medical report capable of substantiating the use of leg restraints, had not heard him in person, and had drawn erroneous conclusions as regards his consent to the catheterisation. The applicant further submitted that the first-instance court had erred in classifying the medical examination, since it had been neither obligatory under the provisions of the Police Act, nor reasonable or proportionate according to medical standards.
The Kúria upheld the first-instance judgment on 25 March 2014, endorsing its reasoning. The judgment was served on the applicant on 11 July 2014.
Act no. XXXIV of 1994 on the Police provides as follows:
“(1) A police measure shall not cause harm which is obviously disproportionate to its legitimate aim.
(2) In the event that there are more appropriate police measures ... available, [the police] should choose the one which, while guaranteeing results, causes the least restriction, injury or harm to the person concerned.
...”
“...
(2)The police [have the power to] hold for questioning before the relevant authority
“(1) A police officer may, while fulfilling his or her role of managing traffic,
...
“Any person whose fundamental right has been infringed by a violation of [police] obligations, by a police measure, by a failure to take a police measure, or by a coercive measure (hereinafter referred to as a ‘measure’) can, according to his or her choice:
...”
“...
(6) ... The Independent Police Complaints Board transfers its opinion to the Commander of the National Police Service ...
(7) The Commander of the National Police Service shall decide on the complaint in the course of an administrative procedure (közigazgatási hatósági eljárás) within thirty days of receiving the opinion. If the ... decision of the Commander of the National Police Service differs from the opinion of the Board, he or she should provide reasons for it.
...
 (9) No ordinary appeal lies against the decision of the Commander of the National Police Service in the course of the administrative procedure, but judicial review [of the decision] can be directly requested.
...”
The Code of Civil Procedure (Act no. III of 1952) provided at the material time as follows:
“An administrative decision rendered on a discretionary basis shall be deemed lawful if the administrative body [which has made the decision] has appropriately ascertained the relevant facts of the case [and] complied with the relevant rules of procedure, [and if] the discretionary points can be identified and the justification for the decision can be linked to the assessment of the evidence.”
Act no. CLIV of 1997 on Health Care provides as follows:
“(m) [an] invasive intervention: a physical intervention penetrating the patient’s body through the skin, mucous membrane or an orifice, excluding interventions which pose negligible risks to the patient from a professional point of view;
...”
“(1) The patient’s human dignity shall be respected in the course of health care.
(2) Unless otherwise provided for by this Act, only the interventions necessary for the care of the patient may be performed.
(3) In the course of health care, a patient may be restricted in exercising his rights only for the period of time justified by his state of health, and to the extent and in the way provided for by law.
(4) In the course of health care, the patient’s personal freedom may be restricted by physical, chemical, biological or psychological methods or procedures exclusively in the event of an emergency, or in the interest of protecting the life, physical safety and health of the patient or others. Restriction of the patient may not be of a punitive nature, and may only last as long as the reason for ordering the restriction exists.
...”
“(1) The patient shall have a right to self-determination, which may only be restricted in the cases and ways defined by law.
(2) Within the framework of exercising the right to self-determination, the patient is free to decide whether he wishes to use health-care services, and which procedures to consent to or refuse in the course of using such services, taking into account the restrictions set out in section 20.
(3) The patient shall have a right to be involved in the decisions concerning his examination and treatment. Apart from the exceptions defined in this Act, the performance of any procedure relating to health care shall be subject to the patient’s consent thereto, granted on the basis of appropriate information, free from deceit, threats and pressure (hereinafter referred to as ‘informed consent’).
(4) A patient may give his consent as referred to in subsection (3) verbally, in writing or through implied behaviour, unless otherwise provided for by this Act.
(5) Invasive procedures ... shall be subject to the patient’s written consent, or, if the patient is not capable of [giving] this, to his declaration made verbally or in some other way in the joint presence of two witnesses.
(6) A patient may, at any time, withdraw his consent to the performance of a procedure. If, however, the patient withdraws his consent without good cause, he may be obliged to reimburse any justified costs incurred as a result of such a withdrawal.”