The case originated in an application (no. 59001/08) against the Republic of Armenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four Armenian nationals, Mr Vladimir Karapetyan, Ms Martha Ayvazyan, Mr Araqel Semirjyan and Ms Karine Afrikyan (“the applicants”), on 29 November 2008.
The applicants were represented by Mr Vahe Grigoryan, a lawyer practising in Yerevan. The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, Representative of the Government of Armenia before the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that their dismissal from office following their statements in the media had violated their right to freedom of expression under Article 10 of the Convention.
On 17 November 2011 the applicants’ complaint under Article 10 of the Convention was communicated to the Government.
The applicants, Mr Vladimir Karapetyan (the first applicant), Ms Martha Ayvazyan (the second applicant), Mr Araqel Semirjyan (the third applicant) and Ms Karine Afrikyan (the fourth applicant), are Armenian nationals who were born in 1969, 1967, 1973 and 1954 respectively and live in Yerevan.
At the material time, the applicants occupied different posts within the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, namely Head of Press and Information Department, Head of NATO Division of Arms Control and International Security Department, Counsel of the European Department and Head of USA and Canada Division of the American Department respectively.
On 19 February 2008 a presidential election was held in Armenia. The main contenders were the then Prime Minister, Serzh Sargsyan, and the opposition candidate, Levon Ter-Petrosyan. Immediately after the election, Levon Ter-Petrosyan announced that the election had been rigged. From 20 February 2008 onwards nationwide protests, such as demonstrations and sit-ins, were organised by thousands of Levon Ter-Petrosyan’s supporters.
On 23 February 2008 several ambassadors for Armenia in foreign countries made the following statement:
“We, the undersigned, remaining faithful to our calling as Armenian diplomats and led by our feeling of responsibility before the Republic of Armenia and the Armenian people, with concern for the situation which has arisen in Armenia, with profound respect for the right of Armenian citizens to free elections, with the conviction that only a president elected as a result of free and fair elections can best tackle the challenges facing our country on the international level and substantially raise the international image of Armenia, express our support to our compatriots who have risen to struggle for freedom, protection of the right to a fair election and establishment of true democracy in Armenia.
Considering the preservation of stability in the country important and public accord necessary, we appeal to our compatriots and especially the representatives of all the structures in the country responsible for maintaining public order and peace to avoid the temptation of resolving problems by use of force.
We appeal to all television companies in Armenia, and especially to Armenian Public Television, to ensure impartial and comprehensive coverage and to provide live airtime to representatives of all the powers who have a constructive position in overcoming the current inner-political crisis.
We appeal to all our colleagues working both in Armenia or abroad to join our statement.”
This statement was reported by the mass media on the same day. According to the first applicant, he also received the statement via his electronic mail. According to the Government, the ambassadors who issued this statement were dismissed from their posts the following day and their dismissal was widely reported in the media.
On 24 February 2008 the applicants made the following statement:
“By joining the statement issued by our colleagues from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs we express our concern with the situation created in Armenia, fraught with internal and external undesirable challenges, and outrage against the fraud of the election process, which shadow the will of our country and society to conduct a civilised, fair and free presidential election.
As citizens of Armenia, we demand that urgent steps be undertaken to call into life the recommendations contained in the reports of the international observation mission, as well as other prominent international organisations.
Only by acting in conformity with the letter and spirit of the law can we create democracy and tolerance in Armenia and earn the country a good reputation abroad.”
The names of the applicants, with the indication of their office, appeared under the statement. It appears that this statement was reported by several mass media outlets, including Radio Liberty, on the same day.
On 25 February 2008 the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Armenia adopted decrees dismissing the first, second and third applicants from office. The fourth applicant was dismissed from office by a similar decree on 3 March 2008. As a ground for the dismissals, the decrees referred to sections 40, subsection 1, point (j) and 44, subsection 1, point (c), of the Diplomatic Service Act (ՀՀ օրենքը «Դիվանագիտական ծառայության մասին», containing description which stated, inter alia, that a diplomat had no right to use his official capacity and work facilities for the benefit of parties and non-governmental organisations, or in order to carry out other political or religious activity (see paragraphs 22-24 below).
On an unspecified date in March 2008, the applicants instituted administrative proceedings challenging their dismissal and seeking to be reinstated in their work. In particular, they claimed that the decrees on their dismissal contained no reasons regarding the particular instance where they had made use of their official capacity and work facilities for the benefit of parties or non-governmental organisations or for engaging in political or religious activities, as prohibited by the sections of the Diplomatic Service Act. They also claimed that dismissal on the ground of convictions and opinions was prohibited by law.
On 10 April 2008 the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, as a respondent, lodged a response with the Administrative Court (ՀՀ վարչական դատարան), claiming that the applicants, by making their statement of 24 February 2008 which had then been reported by the mass media and announced during the demonstration, had engaged in political activities. Furthermore, the applicants had made use of their official capacity since they indicated their official titles in the statement.
On 29 May 2008 the Administrative Court dismissed the applicants’ claim, finding that their dismissal from work was lawful since the applicants, by making the impugned statement, in essence had engaged in political activity. In this respect, the Administrative Court mentioned that the impugned statement concerned political processes as it contained a political assessment of election and post-election events. Furthermore, that statement, as well as that of the ambassadors, had been read aloud during the demonstration organised by a political force and had received a political assessment. The Administrative Court also found that the applicants, by indicating their post titles, had made use of their official capacity. The applicants’ right to freedom of expression, as protected by Article 27 of the Constitution (ՀՀ Սահմանադրություն), was not breached since the applicants, in exercising that right, had made use of their official status and work facilities. Therefore, the restriction on that right was in compliance with Article 43 of the Constitution. Besides, the applicants had not been dismissed on the ground of their political opinion, but because in disseminating that opinion they had made use of their official status, which was prohibited by law.
On an unspecified date, the applicants lodged an appeal on points of law against the judgment of the Administrative Court, claiming, inter alia, a violation of their right to freedom of expression, as protected by Article 10 of the Convention. Besides, they claimed that they had been discriminated against on grounds of political opinion, in violation of Article 14, since those diplomats or state officials who had expressed publicly their support for the pro-governmental candidate had never faced any sanctions: the true reason for their dismissal was their critical opinion of government actions in the sphere of human rights and democratisation. They also claimed that their dismissal had been based on an erroneous interpretation of sections 40, subsection 1, point (j) and 44, subsection 1, point (c), of the Diplomatic Service Act since they had not made use of their official capacity or work facilities when making the impugned statement. Furthermore, the statement had not been made for the benefit of any political party and it could not be qualified as political activity as such.
On 23 September 2008 the Court of Cassation (ՀՀ վճռաբեկ դատարան) decided to declare the applicants’ appeal on points of law inadmissible for lack of merit.
Article 27 of the Constitution (ՀՀ Սահմանադրություն) provides that everyone has the right to freedom of expression, including freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas by any means of communication and regardless of state frontiers.
Article 43 provides that the fundamental rights and freedoms guaranteed by, inter alia, Article 27 of the Constitution may be subject to such restrictions as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society for the protection of national security, public order, prevention of crimes, health and morals, constitutional rights and freedoms of others and honour and good reputation.
According to section 4 of the Diplomatic Service Act (ՀՀ օրենքը «Դիվանագիտական ծառայության մասին», which entered into force on 12 December 2001 and was in force at the material time), the objectives of the diplomatic service are implementation of the foreign policy of the Republic of Armenia, proper and consistent representation of the rights and interests of the Republic of Armenia before the international community and protection of the rights and statutory interests of the nationals of the Republic of Armenia and its legal entities.
According to section 39, subsection 1, of the Act, the following disciplinary penalties shall be applied to a diplomat in case he or she breaches the diplomatic ethics:
“a) warning;
b) reprimand;
c) severe reprimand;
d) salary reduction (up to three months) in accordance with a procedure defined by law.”
Section 40, subsection 1, of the Act provides the grounds for dismissal from office of diplomatic service. A diplomat is dismissed from his or her office in the following cases:
“...
e) second application of one of the disciplinary penalties prescribed in clauses “b”-“d” in section 39, subsection 1, of the present Act within one year;
...
j) breaching the restrictions prescribed in section 44 of the present Act;
...”
Section 43 (i) of the Act provides that one of the basic obligations of a diplomat is to observe the rules of ethics as prescribed by the Government of Armenia.
According to section 44, subsection 1, point (c), of the Act, a diplomat has no right to use his official capacity and work facilities for the benefit of parties and non-governmental organisations (including religious ones), or in order to carry out other political or religious activity.
The Government Decree “On Approving the Rules of Ethics of a Diplomat” (Degree no. 590 of 20 May 2002) provides that:
“3.  A breach of these Rules shall entail disciplinary sanctions.
A diplomat is obliged:
...
c)  not to criticise representatives of the State and public agents and their actions in public (in writing or orally), refrain from actions or public statements which cast doubt on the politics of the authorities of the Republic of Armenia, the international policy of the Republic of Armenia;
d)  to secure political impartiality of the diplomatic service.
...
A diplomat is obliged:
a)  not to use his official duties for personal benefit or the benefit of third (private) persons and to avoid situations which may entail a conflict between professional duties and private interests, and, in particular, to uphold the restrictions prescribed by [inter alia] section 44, subsection 1, ... point (c) ... of the Diplomatic Service Act;
b)  not to use or abuse his professional (official) capacity and work facilities, or the information obtained when performing his official duties, for personal benefit or the benefit of third persons, as well as for the benefit of parties and non-governmental organisations (including religious ones) or in order to carry out other political or religious activity.”
According to the Resolution 1609 (2008) of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe on the functioning of democratic institutions in Armenia, the 2008 presidential elections involved a political crisis in Armenia. The Resolution states, inter alia, that:
“2.  The Parliamentary Assembly regrets that the violations and shortcomings observed did nothing to restore the currently lacking public confidence in the electoral process and raised questions among a part of the Armenian public with regard to the credibility of the outcome of the election. This lack of public confidence was the basis for the peaceful protests – held without prior official notification – that ensued after the announcement of the preliminary results, and which were tolerated by the authorities for ten days.
The Assembly deplores the clashes between the police and the protesters and the escalation of violence on 1 March 2008 which resulted in 10 deaths and about 200 people being injured. The exact circumstances that led to the tragic events of 1 March, as well as the manner in which they were handled by the authorities, including the imposition of a state of emergency in Yerevan from 1 to 20 March 2008 and the alleged excessive use of force by the police, are issues of considerable controversy and should be the subject of a credible independent investigation.
The Assembly condemns the arrest and continuing detention of scores of persons, including more than 100 opposition supporters and three members of parliament, some of them on seemingly artificial and politically motivated charges. This constitutes a de facto crackdown on the opposition by the authorities.
...
While the outbreak of public resentment culminating in the tragic events of 1 March 2008 may have been unexpected, the Assembly believes that the underlying causes of the crisis are deeply rooted in the failure of the key institutions of the state to perform their functions in full compliance with democratic standards and the principles of the rule of law and the protection of human rights. ...”