The case originated in an application (no. 46435/09) against the Republic of Armenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Armenian nationals, Mr Petros Makeyan (“the first applicant”), Mr Shota Saghatelyan (“the second applicant”) and Mr Ashot Zakaryan (“the third applicant”) (“the applicants”), on 26 August 2009.
The applicants were represented by Ms C. Vine, Mr Kerim Yildiz, Mr Mark Muller, Ms Ajanta Kaza, Ms Saadiya Chaudary, lawyers of the Kurdish Human Rights Project (KHRP) based in London, and Ms Narine Gasparyan, a lawyer practising in Yerevan. The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, and subsequently by Mr Y. Kirakosyan, Representative of the Republic of Armenia to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the admission of pre-trial witness statements in evidence against them had been in breach of their right to a fair hearing.
On 5 June 2012 notice of the complaint under Article 6 § 1 concerning the admission of pre-trial witness statements in evidence against the applicants was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
Mr Armen Harutyunyan, the judge elected in respect of Armenia, was unable to sit in the case (Rule 28 §§ 2 and 3 of the Rules of Court). Accordingly, the President of the Chamber appointed Ms Anna Margaryan to sit as an ad hoc judge (Article 26 § 4 of the Convention and Rule 29 § 1).
The first applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Yerevan. The second and third applicants were born in 1947 and 1966 respectively and live in Gyumri.
On 19 February 2008 a presidential election took place in Armenia. During the pre-election campaign the first and the second applicants were the heads of the regional and municipal electoral headquarters of the main opposition candidate, Mr Levon Ter-Petrosyan. On election day, all three applicants acted as the candidate’s proxies.
On 21 February 2008 criminal proceedings were instituted on account of the fact that on election day on 19 February 2008 the applicants visited in turn polling station no. 34/06 in Gyumri. It was alleged that there they had an argument with the chairperson and members of the electoral commission at the polling station concerning the stamping of voters’ passports and threatened them, thus obstructing for about thirty minutes the work of the commission and interfering in their carrying out their official duties by persons participating in the elections.
According to the applicants, in reality they visited separately the above polling station at different times during election day, voiced their concerns to the head of the polling station’s election commission about different violations of the voting process in that polling station, including ballot-box stuffing and the wrong passports being stamped, and left.
On 25 February 2008 the first and third applicants were arrested in connection with the instituted criminal case.
On 26 February 2008 the second applicant was arrested in connection with the same criminal case.
On 27 February 2008 the first applicant was charged with obstructing the work of the electoral commission and other persons involved in the elections. On the same day he was detained following a decision of the Kentron and Nork-Marash District Court of Yerevan (“the District Court”).
On 28 February 2008 the third applicant was charged with the same offence as the first applicant and on the same day detained following a decision of the District Court.
On 29 February 2008 the second applicant was charged with the same offence and placed in detention.
During the investigation several witnesses were questioned, including S.H., the chairperson of the polling station’s electoral commission, K.H., her deputy, L.M., S.V., L.Mel., V.G., N.H., H.K., L.S., G.G. and S.P., members of the electoral commission stationed at the polling station and proxies of the presidential candidates. All eleven witnesses made similar statements according to which on election day the applicants appeared in turn at the polling station and disrupted the voting by arguing with, shouting at and threatening the members of the electoral commission.
Confrontations were held between S.H. and the first and the second applicants; L.M. and the first applicant; and S.V. and the second applicant. The witnesses confirmed their previous statements during those confrontations.
In March 2008 the investigation was concluded and the applicants were committed to stand trial before the Shirak Regional Court (“the Regional Court”).
All the above-mentioned witnesses, except G.G. and S.P., were summoned to appear before the trial court.
In April 2008 the witnesses N.H., S.V., L.M. and L.S. submitted written requests to the presiding judge in the applicants’ trial seeking permission not to attend the relevant hearings for fear of being pressurised, insulted or harassed by groups of people supporting the applicants. Another witness, L.Mel., invoked health reasons for non-attendance. These witnesses all eventually attended the trial.
At the hearing of 7 May 2008 the witnesses K.H., L.M., S.V., L.Mel., N.H., H.K. and L.S. retracted their pre-trial statements, claiming that these had been either guided or dictated by the investigator and that no incident involving the applicants had in fact taken place.
At the same time, S.H., a witness, stated that she was not able to mention any difference between her pre-trial depositions and testimony given in court, while another witness, V.G., asserted that his pre-trial statements had not been guided or dictated by the investigator.
On 13 June 2008 the Regional Court found the applicants guilty as charged under Article 149 § 2 ((3) and (5)) of the Criminal Code and sentenced the first applicant to three years’ imprisonment and the third applicant to two and a half years’ imprisonment. In doing so, the Regional Court found that the applicants had acted as a group with a prior plan. As to the second applicant, the Regional Court decided to impose a suspended sentence of two and a half years’ imprisonment and released him from detention.
In substantiation of the applicants’ guilt, the Regional Court listed the following evidence in its judgment: the pre-trial statements of all eleven witnesses in the case, and the records of the polling station which confirmed that no ballot-box stuffing had taken place. The judgment further reads as follows:
“... Witnesses [K.H., L.M., S.V., L.Mel., N.H., H.K. and L.S.], who were questioned in court during the examination of the criminal case, entirely retracted their above-mentioned pre-trial statements incriminating [the applicants] with the common reasoning that their statements had been guided or dictated by the investigator and [stated] that the work of the electoral commission at the polling station had not been obstructed [or] impeded; the accused persons had not shouted, threatened, restricted the free voting rights of voters and so on [see the record of the court hearing].
During the trial the witnesses [S.H.] and [V.G.] made conflicting ... statements; the former failed to mention any difference between her pre-trial and trial statements while the latter partly [did so], mentioning that his statement had neither been guided nor dictated by another person ...
Having analysed the reasons and motives behind the retraction by the witnesses of their pre-trial statements and the change of their positions, the court does not accept them as credible because they are not based on other factual circumstances of the case, evidence incriminating [the applicants] and also taking into account that some of the witnesses in question, before being questioned in court, had lodged applications with the trial court whereby they had maintained their pre-trial statements and had asked not to be questioned in court due to the fear of testifying in the presence of a big audience gathered in the courtroom or the fact of being exposed to moral and psychological pressure and so on.
The court, considering the above-mentioned arguments put forward by the witnesses as justification for retraction of their pre-trial statements, finds therefore that those retractions were conditioned by external influences and are not credible since it is obvious that the witnesses have the intention to help [the applicants] escape criminal liability. Hence the court concludes that the pre-trial statements of those witnesses were credible and well-founded.”
The applicants lodged appeals against the judgment of the Regional Court claiming, inter alia, that no grounds or proper justification for relying on pre-trial statements of the witnesses had been provided and that the Regional Court, by not admitting into evidence the testimonies of the witnesses given during the trial, had violated their right to a fair trial.
On 20 August 2008 the Criminal Court of Appeal upheld the judgment of 13 June 2008. As regards the reliance by the Regional Court on the witness statements given at the investigation stage, the Court of Appeal found it lawful on the same grounds as those referred to by the Regional Court.
The applicants lodged an appeal on points of law against the judgment of the Court of Appeal, complaining, inter alia, that the Court of Appeal had admitted into evidence the statements of the witnesses made to the investigating authority despite the fact that those witnesses had retracted them at the trial stage.
On 27 February 2009 the Court of Cassation declared the applicants’ appeals inadmissible for lack of merit.
On 22 June 2009 the first and the third applicants were released under an amnesty.
Article 149 § 2 ((3) and (5)) of the Criminal Code provide that obstructing the work of a pre-election commission, if such an act is accompanied with a threat of violence and committed by a group of persons, is punishable by deprivation of liberty for a term from two to five years.