The case concerns the death of the applicants’ partner and father, shortly after release from prison. It concerns the alleged lack of adequate medical care in prison and the issue of the lack of diligence in the conduct of domestic proceedings instituted by the applicants in that regard.
The applicants, a mother and two daughters, were born in 1981, 2005 and 2006 respectively and live in Warsaw. They had been granted legal aid and were represented by Ms M. Gąsiorowska, a lawyer practising in Warsaw.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mrs J. Chrzanowska, and subsequently by Mr J. Sobczak, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The first applicant, her partner J.F. and the second and third applicants lived in Spain and only occasionally returned to Poland. One such occasion was in December 2008.
On 7 January 2009 J.F. went to the local police station in relation to a summons that he had received. On the same date he was detained pursuant to a wanted notice issued by the Warsaw District Court in order to serve a fortyday prison sentence for failing to pay a fine imposed on him (zastępcza kara pozbawienia wolności). J.F. signed a record of the arrest in which it was stated that he was healthy and had no visible injuries. He was placed in Warsaw-Grochów Remand Centre, where he remained until 15 January 2009.
On 7 January 2009 J.F. began serving a forty-day prison sentence in Warsaw-Grochów Remand Centre. On his arrival he confirmed that he had been a cocaine user and was a heavy drinker. He also stated that he had high blood pressure but had not recently received treatment for it. It was further noted that he was 175cm tall and weighing 140kg.
During a medical examination carried out on the same day, he confirmed that he had received treatment for diabetes, and had had two heart attacks. The prison doctor noted in his medical records: “no ailments; drug addiction since ten years; was not beaten; does not report any surgeries; treats hypertension with Prestarium; obesity; no significant changes during a [medical] examination”. He further prescribed him medicine in order to lower his blood pressure and ordered a consultation with a specialist in internal medicine.
On 12 January 2009 J.F. had a chest X-ray, which showed that his heart was enlarged and that he had pulmonary hypertension and symptoms of venous stasis. The radiologist who performed the chest X-ray recommended that J.F. consult a specialist in internal medicine.
On 13 January 2009, during a consultation with a psychologist, J.F. said that he was sleeping and eating reasonably well.
On 14 January 2009 J.F. informed the nurse that he had sleeping problems and slept during the day. On the same day he was examined by the prison doctor, who noted that his breathing and circulation were fine. His blood pressure was 145/80 and he had a heart rate of 70.
On 15 January 2009 the nurse informed the prison doctor of J.F.’s worsening state of health. On the same day he was taken to the emergency department of the Central Clinical Hospital of the Ministry of the Interior and Administration in Warsaw (Oddział Ratunkowy Centralnego Szpitala Klinicznego MSWiA) (“the Clinical Hospital”), where examinations were carried out; he was then transferred to the Institute of Cardiology in Anin. An aneurysm was found in his thoracic aorta. On the same day he urgently underwent surgery.
On 16 January 2009 the Warsaw District Court released J.F. from pre-trial detention on health grounds. On the same date the Warsaw Regional Court granted him leave from serving his sentence (przerwa w odbywaniu kary) and ordered his immediate release. The courts noted that J.F. was in intensive care, on circulatory and respiratory support, and that his medical prognosis was uncertain.
On 17 January 2009 J.F. regained consciousness. As he was suffering from respiratory insufficiency, he was put on a ventilator.
On 22 January 2009 he underwent further surgery. However, he was still suffering from renal and cardiac insufficiency. On 25 January 2009 he died at the Institute of Cardiology.
On 16 December 2009 the applicants lodged a civil action for compensation and an annuity from the State Treasury by bringing a claim against the Director General of the Prison Service. They complained that J.F. had died in custody on 25 January 2009 as a result of inadequate and belated medical assistance and inadequate conditions of detention. They further noted that given his general state of health, he should not have been detained.
During the proceedings, the Warsaw Regional Court ordered an expert opinion. The expert (a specialist in internal medicine) stated in his opinion of 30 January 2013 that the information on J.F.’s state of health included in his medical records from Warsaw-Grochów Remand Centre was scarce. The records did not contain any information about J.F.’s condition before his arrival at the Remand Centre. There was no medical documentation confirming that he had had two heart attacks and had been diagnosed with diabetes. The expert confirmed that J.F. had clearly been treated for hypertension. In his view, the condition suffered by him – an aneurysm and consequently aortic dissection – could have been caused by many years of inaptly treated chronic hypertension and using cocaine.
The expert concluded that it was not possible to assess the quality of the medical care provided to J.F. in prison on the basis of his medical records. There was no information on whether he had received and taken any medication, or about the monitoring of his arterial hypertension. There was no indication if he had reported the deterioration of his state of health or whether his transfer to the emergency department of the Clinical Hospital had resulted from a sudden deterioration in his health or whether it had been a consequence of the chest X-ray conducted on 12 January 2009.
On 28 August 2014 the expert submitted a supplementary opinion. On the basis of medical records from Costa Del Sol Hospital in Spain, the expert confirmed that J.F. had been treated for hypertension and dilated cardiomyopathy, a condition most often caused by excessive drinking. The expert also reiterated that it was impossible to determine J.F.’s state of health during the first days of his detention, given the scarce prison medical records. Most probably, J.F. had not consulted the prison doctor as he had not complained of any specific health issues.
The Warsaw Regional Court also heard evidence from a number of witnesses, including J.M., who had been J.F.’s cellmate. He stated that J.F.’s health had steadily worsened and that he had probably only been given vitamins. He also stated that there had been overcrowding and inadequate living conditions in Warsaw-Grochów Remand Centre. However, according to the court, the credibility of the statements given by J.M. was not supported by any other evidence.
On 30 March 2015 the Warsaw Regional Court gave judgment and dismissed the applicants’ claim. The court found that there had been no medical negligence in the case concerned. It held, referring to the expert’s opinion that, J.F.’s heart had been damaged as a consequence of his lifestyle and inaptly treated diabetes and hypertension. As confirmed by the medical records from the Spanish hospital, J.F. had taken his medication irregularly, had been a heavy drinker and a smoker. In the expert’s opinion, J.F.’s death could have happened outside the prison facility as the aortic aneurysm had occurred suddenly. Previous heart examinations had not disclosed this condition. In any event, given the patient’s obesity, diagnostic had been very difficult.
The court dismissed the applicants’ claim under Article 445 of the Civil Code (for the protection of J.F.’s personal rights) on the grounds that they had no legal standing. Under that provision, a claim for compensation passed to the heirs only if it had been acknowledged in writing or if the court action was brought when the party was still alive. The court noted that, under Article 446 § 3 of the Civil Code, relatives of a deceased could be awarded appropriate compensation if their situation had significantly deteriorated as a result of the person’s death. However, in the present case, as the State Treasury could not be held responsible for J.F.’s death, compensation could not be awarded.
The court established that J.F. had received adequate medical care in the Remand Centre. He had been examined by a doctor on his arrival, and shortly afterwards had undergone an X-ray examination. Every day a nurse had come to give him medication for his hypertension. Moreover, at the time of his arrival J.F. had not informed the prison authorities of any pains or other health issues which would have been incompatible with his detention. He had not had any medication or medical documentation on him. The court considered that J.F.’s illness had not been caused by the conditions of his detention. There was therefore no causal link between his death and the conditions of detention.
The applicants appealed against this judgment. In their appeal, they submitted that the first-instance court had not justified why it had disregarded the statements given by J.M. They also claimed that the Regional Court had not analysed the actions taken by WarsawGrochów Remand Centre in detail and had considered uncritically that the checkups done in the prison facility had been appropriate. Lastly, they were of the view that the first-instance court had violated the provisions of the Convention by finding that the State Treasury could not be held responsible for J.F.’s death.
On 7 October 2016 the Warsaw Court of Appeal dismissed the applicants’ appeal. The court agreed in principle with the Regional Court’s findings of fact and conclusions. It further held that the acts of the medical staff in the prison facility fell under the State’s liability in tort. Nevertheless, in the case concerned those acts had been conducted in accordance with the law and the applicants had not proven a causal link between them and J.F.’s death. In particular, as established by the expert, there had been no irregularities in the course of his medical diagnosis and treatment. It had not been shown that an earlier chest X-ray would have enabled detection of the aneurysm. The judgment was final as a cassation appeal was not available.
On 21 October 2009 the applicants lodged a criminal complaint with the Minister of the Interior complaining about J.F’s arrest on 7 January 2009. They submitted that since J.F. had been of poor health, had suffered from a serious heart condition and had had two heart attacks, he should not have been detained and sent to prison on that date.
On 11 December 2019 the Warsaw District Prosecutor refused to open an investigation. The prosecutor noted that at the time of his arrest J.F. had not complained of any health problems or had any injuries. Moreover, the arrest had been ordered in accordance with the law. On the date of his arrest J.F. had been transferred to the Remand Centre. According to the record of the arrest drawn on the same day J.F. had not informed the police officers of any health issues.
This decision was served on the applicants on 21 December 2009. They did not lodge an appeal within the prescribed timelimit of seven days.
Articles 415 et seq. of the Civil Code provide for liability in tort. Under these provisions, whoever by his or her fault causes damage to another person is obliged to redress it.
Article 444 provides that, in cases of bodily injury or harm to health, a perpetrator will be liable to cover all pecuniary damage resulting from such acts.
Article 445 § 1, which is applicable in the event that a person suffers a physical injury or health disorder as a result of an unlawful act or omission on the part of a State agent, reads as follows:
“... the court may award the injured person an adequate sum in pecuniary compensation for the damage suffered.”
Under Article 446 § 3, a civil court may award an appropriate level of compensation to relatives of a deceased if their situation has significantly deteriorated as a result of the person’s death.
The provisions pertaining to medical care in detention facilities and the relevant domestic law and practice are set out in the Court’s judgments in the cases of Sławomir Musial v. Poland (no. 28300/06, §§ 4861, 20 January 2009) and Kaprykowski v. Poland (no. 23052/05, §§ 3639, 3 February 2009). In particular, Article 115 of the Code of Execution of Criminal Sentences (Kodeks karny wykonawczy) (“the Code”) provides:
“1.  A sentenced person shall receive medical care, medication and sanitary items free of charge.
...
Medical care is provided, primarily, by healthcare establishments for persons serving prison sentences.
Healthcare establishments outside the prison system shall cooperate with the prison medical services in providing medical care to sentenced persons if necessary, in particular:
(1)  to provide immediate medical care because of a risk to the life or health of a sentenced person;
(2)  to provide specialist medical examinations, treatment or rehabilitation to a sentenced person;
(3)  to provide medical services to a sentenced person who has been granted prison leave or a temporary break in ... the sentence ...”
At the material time, specific rules relating to the provision of medical services to detainees were set out in the Ordinance of 31 October 2003 on the detailed rules, scope and procedure relating to the provision of medical services to persons in confinement by healthcare establishments for persons deprived of liberty, issued by the Minister of Justice (Rozporządzenie Ministra Sprawiedliwości w sprawie szczegółowych zasad, zakresu i trybu udzielania świadczeń zdrowotnych osobom pozbawionym wolności przez zakłady opieki zdrowotnej dla osób pozbawionych wolności).
A person deprived of his or her liberty was subjected to preliminary and periodic medical examinations and check-ups (section 2), and had to undergo preliminary medical examinations, such as a review of his or her medical history and a physical examination as soon as he or she arrived at a detention facility (section 3). Moreover, within fourteen days of arrival a person deprived of his or her liberty had to have a chest Xray and a dental examination.