The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission") on 8 December 1995 and by the Swiss Government ("the Government") on 20 February 1996, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 para. 1 and Article 47 of the Convention (art. 32-1, art. 47). It originated in an application (no. 18990/91) against the Swiss Confederation lodged with the Commission under Article 25 (art. 25) by a Swiss national, Mr Armin Nideröst-Huber, on 17 October 1991.
The Commission’s request referred to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48) and to the declaration whereby  recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46) (art. 46); the Government’s application referred to Articles 45, 47 and 48 (art. 45, art. 47, art. 48). The object of the request and of the application was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 6 para. 1 of the Convention (art. 6-1).
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 35 para. 3 (d) of Rules of Court B, the applicant stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings and designated the lawyer who would represent him (Rule 31).
The Chamber to be constituted included ex officio Mr L. Wildhaber, the elected judge of Swiss nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr R. Bernhardt, the Vice-President of the Court (Rule 21 para. 4 (b)). On 21 February 1996, in the presence of the Registrar, the President of the Court, Mr R. Ryssdal, drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr Thór Vilhjálmsson, Mr R. Macdonald, Mr C. Russo, Mr J. De Meyer, Mr N. Valticos, Mr R. Pekkanen and Mr K. Jungwiert (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 para. 5) (art. 43).
As President of the Chamber (Rule 21 para. 6), Mr Bernhardt, acting through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Government, the applicant’s lawyer and the Delegate of the Commission on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 39 para. 1 and 40). Pursuant to the order made in consequence, the Registrar received the Government’s memorial on 26 July 1996 and the applicant’s memorial on 29 July. On 7 August 1996 the Commission produced various documents requested by the Registrar on the instructions of the President of the Chamber.
In accordance with the President’s decision, the hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, , on 24 September 1996. The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:
(a) for the Government
(b) for the Commission
(c) for the applicant
The Court heard addresses by Mr Bratza, Mr Ziegler and Mr Boillat.
Mr Armin Nideröst-Huber is a Swiss citizen born in 1940 and resident in Rickenbach ().
On 9 December 1985 he was dismissed without notice from the posts of chairman (Verwaltungsratspräsident) and managing director (Geschäftsführer) of a family-run public limited company (Aktiengesellschaft) incorporated under Swiss law, following a change of majority among the shareholders.
On 29 July 1986 he brought proceedings against the company seeking arrears of salary and a severance payment (Abgangsentschädigung). The Schwyz District Court (Bezirksgericht) gave judgment against him on 22 September 1988.
On 19 June 1990 the  (Kantonsgericht) dismissed an appeal (Berufung) by the applicant. Endorsing the reasons of the lower court, it held that the applicant’s dismissal had been justified because in the conflict between Mr Nideröst-Huber and the minority shareholders he had neglected the interests of the company in favour of his own. As a result, the new majority no longer trusted him to manage the company honestly.
The applicant then applied to the Federal Court by means of an appeal (Berufung) lodged with the  on 12 October 1990. The Cantonal Court transmitted the appeal to the Federal Court on 22 October together with the case file and one page of observations (Stellungnahme zur Berufung), which were not communicated to the applicant. In these observations it argued that the appeal should be dismissed and refuted some of the grounds of appeal, emphasising, inter alia, that Mr Nideröst-Huber’s dismissal had been the legitimate consequence of his intractable and unlawful conduct over a number of years at the head of the firm.
The company submitted a defence (Berufungsantwort) on 12 December 1990. This was communicated to Mr Nideröst-Huber.
On 1 March 1991 the Federal Court dismissed the appeal, holding that the Cantonal Court had rightly ruled that the applicant’s dismissal without notice was justified, since he had abused his majority shareholding in the company in order to serve his personal interests, systematically disregarding those of the minority shareholders, even in breach of binding judicial decisions; the new majority had therefore been justified in dismissing him forthwith.
The judgment was served on the applicant on 30 April 1991. On the same day he asked the Federal Court to supply him with a copy of the Cantonal Court’s observations (see paragraph 10 above). He obtained this on 2 May 1991.
Section 56 of the Federal Judicature Act of 16 December 1943 provides:
"The cantonal authority shall immediately inform the respondent of the grounds of appeal, even if the appeal appears to be out of time, and shall transmit to the Federal Court, within one week, the documents whereby the appeal has been lodged, a copy of the final decision and the preliminary decisions which have preceded it, the complete file and, where appropriate, its own observations. It shall also inform the Federal Court of the date on which the impugned decision was notified, the date on which the appeal reached it or on which it was posted and the date on which it was communicated to the respondent."
In his application to the Commission of 17 October 1991 (no. 18990/91) Mr Nideröst-Huber complained that, contrary to Article 6 para. 1 of the Convention (art. 6-1), he had not received a copy of the observations sent by the Schwyz Cantonal Court to the Federal Court and had therefore been deprived of the opportunity to comment on them before the Federal Court gave judgment.
The Commission declared the application admissible on 17 January 1995. In its report of 23 October 1995 (Article 31) (art. 31), it expressed the opinion by twenty-six votes to four that there had been a violation of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1). The full text of the Commission’s opinion and of the two dissenting opinions contained in the report is reproduced as an annex to this judgment
In their memorial the Government requested the Court "to hold that  has not violated the European Convention on Human Rights in respect of the matters which gave rise to Mr Nideröst-Huber’s application".
The applicant asked the Court "to hold that there has been a violation of Article 6 para. 1 of the Convention (art. 6-1)".