The case originated in an application (no. 23380/09) against the Kingdom of Belgium lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Belgian nationals, Mr Saïd Bouyid (“the first applicant”) and Mr Mohamed Bouyid (“the second applicant”), on 28 April 2009.
The applicants were represented by Mr Z. Chihaoui and Mr C. Marchand, lawyers practising in Brussels. The Belgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr M. Tysebaert, Senior Adviser, Federal Justice Department.
The applicants were born in 1986 and 1979, respectively, and live in the municipality of Saint-Josse-ten-Noode, which is part of the district of Bruxelles-Capitale.
The applicants are brothers and live with their parents, brother and two sisters next to the local police station of Saint-Josse-ten-Noode. They both complained that they had been slapped on the face by police officers – an allegation which is disputed by the Government –, one on 8 December 2003, the other on 23 February 2004, and pointed out that the events had taken place in the context of tense relations between their family and certain officers in the police station.
The applicants indicated that on 8 December 2003, around 4 p.m., the first applicant was standing with a friend in the street outside the door of the building where he lived with his family, and, having forgotten his keys, he was ringing the bell so that his parents would let him in, when a plain-clothes policeman, A.Z., had asked him to present his identity card. The first applicant had refused to comply, asking the officer to show his credentials. The officer had then grabbed him by his jacket – tearing it – and had taken him to the police station. The first applicant had been placed in a room and, while he was alone with A.Z., the officer had slapped him on the face as he was protesting about his arrest.
The applicants produced a certificate issued on the same day at 7.20 p.m. by a general practitioner, who observed that the first applicant was “in a state of shock” and presented the following injuries: “erythema on the left cheek (disappearing)” and “erythema on the left-side external auditory canal”.
The Government observed that, on account of the first applicant’s refusal to show his identity card, officer A.Z. had had no choice but to take him to the police station for the purposes of identification. The first applicant had then caused a scene, claiming that he was the victim of an injustice and an unlawful identity check, and had insulted an officer who was telling him to calm down. He had been authorised to leave the police station once his identity had been verified and after being informed by A.Z. that a police report would be filed against him for forceful resistance to a public officer, abusive behaviour and verbal threats. He had returned to the police station a few minutes later with his parents, accusing A.Z. of having struck him, but the officer had always denied this.
The applicants indicated that, on 23 February 2004 at around 10 a.m., while the second applicant was at the police station of Saint-Josse-ten-Noode and officer P.P. was interviewing him about an altercation involving him and his mother together with a third party (and about which the latter had filed a complaint), P.P. had slapped him on the face after asking him not to lean on a desk. He had then forced him to sign the statement by threatening to put him in a cell.
The applicants produced a medical certificate issued on the same day by a general practitioner, who observed “bruising [on the] left cheek” of the second applicant.
The Government explained that the second applicant had been very arrogant during his interview: slouching in his chair, leaning casually on P.P.’s desk, laughing without reason and giving pithy answers to questions. He had had his statement changed several times, saying that the police were paid to do that, and had threatened the officers on leaving by shouting that they would be hearing from him again. The Government emphasised that, in spite of the attitude of the second applicant, who was clearly intent on conflict, P.P. had remained calm and patient.
In the applicants’ submission, their family had been harassed by the Saint-Josse-ten-Noode police force. They stated that the problems had begun in 1999, when one of the officers had suspected their brother N. of deliberately scratching his car. N. had subsequently been accused of threatening the same officer and of committing robberies, charges on which he had been acquitted by the Brussels Youth Court on 21 April 2000. According to the applicants, the case against him had been entirely fabricated by members of the Saint-Josse-ten-Noode police by way of reprisal.
They added that, on 24 June 1999, the first applicant, then aged 13, had been “beaten” by another police officer in the police station, where he had been taken following a fight in the street. He had sustained a perforated eardrum. His mother and one of his sisters, who had been in the waiting room, had been shaken and molested by police officers.
On 25 November 1999 one of their sisters had been verbally aggressed by a police officer of the Saint-Josse-ten-Noode force and, on 11 March 2000, their brother N. had been searched, jostled and verbally aggressed by police officers.
They further stated that in 2000, a “case” “initiated by the Saint-Josse-ten-Noode police force had been opened against N. and entrusted to an investigating judge”, but the proceedings had been discontinued. In the same year the second applicant had been “wanted for questioning” and even though the Saint-Josse-ten-Noode police had announced on 23 July 2002 that he was being taken off the relevant list, he had still had to take many steps at the level of the Crown Prosecutor and wait until March 2005 for the process to be completed, thus causing him much inconvenience.
On 6 April 2001 and 12 July 2001, respectively, their brother N. and the second applicant had been verbally aggressed by members of the Saint-Josse-ten-Noode police.
The applicants explained that they had systematically reported to the judicial authorities or police any incidents of which they were victims, and had filed complaints.
On 9 December 2003 the first applicant filed a complaint with the standing committee for the oversight of police services (or “Committee P”) and was interviewed by a member of the investigation department.
The second applicant followed suit on 23 February 2004. He indicated in particular that he considered that the “general attitude of the Saint-Josse police vis-à-vis [his] family [had become] absolutely intolerable and excessive to the point [where they had envisaged] moving house”. Testimony was also taken from the applicants’ mother by the investigation department of Committee P in relation to the second applicant’s complaints; she also filed a complaint, indicating, moreover, that she herself had been treated with scant respect by officer P.P.
On 5 May 2004 officer P.P. was interviewed by the director of internal oversight of the local police force in relation to the complaints by the second applicant and his mother. P.P. stated in particular that the second applicant had been particularly disrespectful towards him during his interview and that, whilst he had grabbed the youth by the arm to make him leave the office, he had not slapped him on the face.
On 17 June 2004 the applicants applied to intervene as civil parties in respect of charges of harassment, arbitrary interference with fundamental freedoms, abuse of authority, arbitrary arrest and wounding with intent. They gave an overview of all their difficulties with the Saint-Josse-ten-Noode police, and expressly stated that they wished to intervene as civil parties in relation to the events of 8 December 2003 and 23 February 2004.
Officers A.Z. and P.P. were charged with using violence, in the course of their duties, against individuals and, in particular, with intentional wounding or assault, and for engaging in arbitrary acts in breach of the rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution.
On 26 June 2004 an investigating judge of the Brussels Court of First Instance gave directions to the investigation department of Committee P asking it to take note of the applicants’ civil-party intervention, to interview them in order to ascertain the details of their complaint, to draft a report on the conduct of the Bouyid family, to draw up a list of the cases brought against them and complaints filed by them and to explain what action was being taken in that connection.
Having regard to the fact that it had already taken testimony from the applicants when they had filed their respective complaints (see paragraph 15), the investigation department of Committee P decided not to interview them again. It addressed a report on 26 July 2004 to the investigating judge, based on the documents from the internal oversight department of the police area covering Saint-Josse-ten-Noode, describing the development of the relations between the applicants’ family and the local police force. The report then listed the cases against the family, noting in this connection that the first applicant had been implicated in proceedings opened in December 2003 for abusive and threatening behaviour and for obstructing a police officer, and N. in seven sets of proceedings opened between October 1997 and June 1999. It then noted that, in addition to the applicants’ complaints at issue in the present case, three judicial complaints had been filed by members of their family (two with Committee P, in June 1999 and July 2001, and one with the “Youth Division” in 1999) and two complaints had been dealt with by the internal oversight department of the police area covering Saint-Josse-ten-Noode. Lastly, citing a report drawn up in the context of a case against the first applicant and the findings of administrative inquiries, it noted the problematic nature of the relations between the local police and the Bouyid family and commented on the “general behaviour” of the latter, observing as follows:
“In sum, and according to the police officers, the Bouyid family (especially the women and the mother in particular) apparently refuse to admit any implication of the children and family in the context of the abusive conduct in question. They are thus confronted in respect of their behaviour by this protective attitude. More generally, the family members allegedly behave aggressively and provocatively towards the police.
Following the incidents involving police officer [B.], a dialogue facilitator apparently failed in an attempt at reconciliation, owing to an intransigent attitude on the part of the women in the Bouyid family.
In 1999 and 2000 the situation required the appointment of a police cadet as a mediator for this family.”
On 3 August 2004 the investigating judge decided to close the investigation and to send the file to the prosecution.
On 16 November 2004 officer A.Z. was interviewed by a member of the investigation department of Committee P about the events of 8 December 2003. He stated in particular that he had not previously known the first applicant before he saw him at the door of a building in circumstances that appeared suspicious.
In an application of 10 November 2005 the Crown Prosecutor called for the discontinuance of the case on the ground that “the judicial investigation [had] not established that the facts constituted a serious or petty offence and [had] not adduced any evidence that would justify the taking of further measures”.
The applicants were informed that the case file would be finalised before the Committals Division of the Brussels Court of First Instance on 2 March 2006. On 1 March 2006 they sent an application to the investigating judge seeking twenty additional investigative measures. That request resulted in the adjournment sine die of the case before the Committals Division.
On 7 March 2006 the investigating judge ordered two of the requested measures and rejected the remainder of the request on the ground that it concerned facts that pre-dated the events referred to him and that the measures sought were not necessary for the manifestation of the truth. Consequently, recapitulating all their complaints against the Saint-Josse-ten-Noode police force, the applicants and other members of their family sent the investigating judge a request for an “extension of civil-party status”, but it was rejected. The two additional measures were performed on 25 April, 15 May and 24 May 2006.
In a decision of 27 November 2007 the Committals Division, endorsing the grounds submitted and maintained by the Crown Prosecutor, discontinued the proceedings.
The applicants appealed against that decision.
In an application of 3 December 2007 the prosecution requested that the discontinuance decision be upheld.
On 5 February 2008 the applicants and other members of their family filed a complaint as civil parties in respect of all the facts that the investigating judge had considered not to have been referred to him (see paragraph 32 below).
On 9 April 2008 the Indictments Division of the Brussels Court of Appeal, after refusing to join the case concerning the events of 8 November 2003 and 23 February 2004 to the new case that had been opened after the civil-party complaint of 5 February 2008, upheld the discontinuance decision in a judgment that read as follows:
“...
The facts of the case can be summarised as follows:
– On 8 December 2003 the defendant [A.Z.] is said to have engaged in illegal police conduct against the civil party Saïd Bouyid, described by the latter as follows: the policeman [A.Z.], on stopping him outside his house, allegedly grabbed him by his jacket and tore it; he was then taken to the police station close by, where this policeman allegedly slapped him on the face with his right hand.
– On 23 February 2004 the defendant [P.P.] is said to have engaged in illegal police conduct against the civil party Mohamed Bouyid, described by the latter as follows: on stopping his car in front of his house so that his mother could take out her shopping, he had a row with the driver of the car behind; he was summoned to the police station following a complaint by that driver; during the interview, Mohamed Bouyid was allegedly slapped by the defendant [P.P.] (see the medical certificate ...), who threatened to put him in a cell if he did not sign his statement, when in fact he wanted to change it.
– The Bouyid family have apparently encountered great difficulties with certain members of the Saint-Josse-ten-Noode police force since March 1999, when police officer [B.] suspected Saïd Bouyid of having scratched his car, giving rise to some tension and to persecution of this family by the police.
– There is said to be constant provocation on the part of the police of Saint-Josse-ten-Noode making the life of the Bouyid family unbearable.
Both the police’s internal oversight department for the police area [concerned] and the investigation department of Committee P conducted an in-depth investigation into the facts complained of by the civil parties.
It transpires from all the findings of the judicial investigation, and in particular from the diverging statements of the parties implicated, that there is no evidence against the defendants such as to justify their committal on the charges listed in the submissions of the Principal Crown Prosecutor, in respect of the period in which the offences were said to have been committed.
The statements of the defendants, who deny the charges, are coherent; it is appropriate in this connection to refer to the detailed report concerning the general conduct of the civil parties’ family drafted by Committee P, which sheds light on the general context of the case.
The civil parties have not adduced before the court, sitting as the Indictments Division, any new, relevant and convincing indications not previously brought to the attention of the court below and capable of revealing the slightest evidence against the defendants that might justify their committal for trial.
Moreover, the judicial investigation did not bring to light sufficient evidence to show that a criminal offence had been committed by the defendants at the time of the incidents in which they were allegedly implicated.
In addition, it does not appear from the case file that the provisions of section 37 of the Law of 5 August 1992 on the duties of the police have not been complied with.
As emphasised by the submissions of both the Crown Prosecutor on 10 November 2005 and those of the Principal Crown Prosecutor, and by the decision of the Committals Division, the facts of the present case do not constitute a serious or petty criminal offence.
...”
An appeal on points of law lodged by the applicants – in particular under Articles 3, 6 and 13 of the Convention – was dismissed on 29 October 2008 by the Court of Cassation.
The Court of Cassation found that, in taking the view that the complaint in the case that had been submitted to the Indictments Division concerned only the events of 8 December 2003 and 23 February 2004, that Division had not failed to interpret the civil-party complaint in a manner that was compatible with its terms. It further took the view that the legislature had left it to the conscience of the members of the courts reviewing the investigation to decide whether or not the evidence gathered by the investigating judge was sufficient. It followed that, where the civil parties’ pleadings challenged or alleged the existence in fact of sufficient evidence, the reviewing court would reply by the mere finding that such evidence did or did not exist.
On 5 February 2008 six members of the Bouyid family, including the two applicants, had filed a civil-party complaint with an investigating judge of the Brussels Court of First Instance concerning all their accusations against the Saint-Josse-ten-Noode police officers, in particular relating to facts that pre-dated the events of 8 December 2003 and 23 February 2004 (see paragraphs 9 to 13 above).
That civil-party complaint led to the appearance of six officers before the Brussels Court of First Instance, hearing the case on the merits. In a judgment of 30 May 2012 the court declared that the prosecution of the relevant offences was time-barred. It does not appear from the file that an appeal was lodged against that judgment.