The case originated in an application (no. 29070/15) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Yuriy Stepanovich Pivovarnik (“the applicant”), on 16 June 2015.
The applicant was represented by Ms I. Monina, a lawyer practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented, most recently, by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that while held in detention he had not been provided with adequate medical assistance for his hepatitis.
On 14 October 2015 the above complaint was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
Written submissions were received from the All-Ukrainian Network of People Living with HIV/AIDS (Всеукраїнська мережа людей які живуть з ВІЛ/СНІД – hereinafter “the All-Ukrainian Network”), which had been granted leave by the President of the Section to intervene as a third party (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 2).
The applicant was born in 1977 and prior to his arrest his permanent address had been in Svitlovodsk, Kirovograd Region.
On an unspecified date prior to his arrest the applicant had been diagnosed with hepatitis C (“HCV”).
On 26 June 2014 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of committing a drug-related offence and on 7 July 2014 placed in Kirovograd Remand Prison no. 14 (“the prison”).
On 27 June 2014 the Svitlovodsk Court remanded the applicant in custody. The applicant appealed, arguing in particular that he was suffering from HCV. On 14 July 2014 the Kirovograd Regional Court of Appeal upheld the detention order.
The applicant’s pre-trial detention was subsequently extended until his conviction.
On 24 March 2015 the Svitlovodsk Court convicted the applicant of the unlawful purchase, possession and transportation of drugs and sentenced him to three years’ imprisonment.
On 13 October 2015 the Kirovograd Regional Court of Appeal amended the applicant’s sentence and released him on probation.
On 8 July 2014 the prison governor sent a letter to the Svitlovodsk Central Hospital. According to the letter, the applicant had informed the prison authorities that he had been diagnosed with HCV in 2013 in Svitlovodsk but that he had not provided any more detailed information in this respect. The governor asked the hospital to confirm whether the applicant had indeed been examined for HCV and if so, what the results of the examination had been. The prison received no reply.
On 6 August, 27 November and 3 December 2014 and on 9 January and 4 June 2015 the applicant consulted the prison doctor, complaining in particular of discomfort in the hypochondrium (below the lower ribs), on the right-hand side. According to the applicant’s medical record, the applicant claimed to be suffering from HCV, but the doctor noted that there were no documents to support this diagnosis. The applicant asked for a medical certificate, to be provided to the courts examining his criminal case. According to three separate reports signed by three prison employees, during three of those consultations – those of 6 August and 27 November 2014 and 4 June 2015 – the applicant was offered an opportunity to undergo a “blood test” (it is unspecified of which type) to verify whether he had HCV but refused without giving any reasons. The applicant denied the latter allegation.
On 13 August 2014 the prison’s medical unit issued a certificate stating that the applicant, according to his own statement, was suffering from HCV and that during his stay in the prison he had consulted the prison doctor on several occasions in this connection and received treatment for his symptoms.
On 3 December 2014 the prison governor informed the applicant’s lawyer that on 6 August and 27 November 2014 the applicant had consulted the prison doctor concerning his HCV and had been prescribed treatment for his symptoms. The governor went on to state that it was planned that a consultation would be arranged with an infectious diseases specialist who would be able to order the necessary examinations and prescribe treatment for the applicant.
On 3 March 2015 a blood test, apparently an HCV antibody test, came up positive. On the same day an ultrasound examination showed that the applicant’s liver had undergone diffuse changes.
On 8 June 2015 the head of the prison’s medical unit issued a certificate which stated that the applicant’s health had worsened in the previous two months and that he was suffering from fatigue, nausea, and weight loss. The certificate also stated that in order to ascertain the state of his health the applicant needed to be examined by an infectious diseases specialist of the Kirovograd Central City Hospital (“the City Hospital”).
On 19 June 2015 the acting President of the Section, upon the applicant’s request under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, decided to indicate to the Government that they should present the applicant urgently for medical examination by a specialised doctor of the City Hospital; secure for the applicant immediately, by appropriate means, treatment to his state of health; and inform the Court by 17 July 2015 about the applicant’s state of health and the measures undertaken.
From 6 until 9 July 2015 the applicant underwent an in-patient examination at the City Hospital in the course of which a number of blood tests and an ultrasound examination were conducted and the applicant was examined by a number of specialists.
On 9 July 2015 the hospital issued an opinion according to which the applicant was suffering from сhronic HCV “in an inactive phase” and liver impairment. He was prescribed hepatoprotectors (Carsil and Ursohol). It was recommended that he undergo additional blood tests, namely the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for HCV, and, within ten days, another general blood test and a biochemical blood test. The applicant was to remain under the supervision of a gastroenterologist and an infectious diseases specialist.
On 14 July 2015 the Government informed the Court about the applicant’s examination at the City Hospital.
On 19 August 2015 the applicant complained to the Court that the recommendations of the City Hospital doctors were not being followed. On 26 August 2015 the Court invited the Government to comment on those allegations.
On 1 September 2015 the applicant started to be treated with hepatoprotector medicine. On 3 September 2015 he underwent general and biochemical blood tests which, according to the Government, revealed no abnormality. On 15 September 2015 he was consulted by a gastroenterologist and an infectious diseases specialist, who confirmed the diagnosis of inactive chronic hepatitis.
On 15 September 2015 the Government informed the Court of the measures taken from 1 to 15 September 2015.
The relevant part of the Report to the Ukrainian Government on the visit to Ukraine carried out by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment from 9 to 21 October 2013 reads as follows:
“161. The CPT is concerned by the lack of systematic screening and treatment for blood-borne viral hepatitis in the Ukrainian prison system. The delegation was informed that, currently, there was no National Programme for detecting and treating hepatitis in Ukraine (and no national standard for treatment), and that penitentiary establishments were not provided with any specific hepatitis medication. The Committee recommends that measures be taken to remedy this regrettable state of affairs.”
In 2013 the Ukrainian Parliamentary Commissioner for Human Rights published a special report dedicated to the monitoring of the observance of the right to medical care in the remand prisons within the purview of the State Correctional Service of Ukraine. The report contains the following observations concerning the rights of hepatitis patients (p. 35).
Diagnosing and treating hepatitis in patients was not a priority for remand prisons’ medical units. Testing was only voluntary and could only be conducted on the initiative of the prisoner in question. In practice it was difficult to get hepatitis diagnosed and treated. Where this happened, treatment was mainly conducted at the expense of relatives and friends, who furnished medications to prisoners. Only prisoners with HIV/AIDS could receive hepatitis treatment at public expense.
Medical units of remand prisons were in no position to ensure the treatment of acute hepatitis B and C and could only provide long-term antiviral and stabilising anti-inflammatory outpatient treatment.
On 29 April 2013 the Cabinet of Ministers approved a State programme for the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of viral hepatitis for the period until the end of 2016. The programme stipulates a number of goals to be achieved over that period, including extending access to hepatitis treatment to 30% of all patients.