The case originated in an application (no. 51284/09) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by five Bulgarian nationals, Mr Anzhelo Angelov Georgiev, Ms Kameliya Ivanova Dekova, Mr Georgi Mirchev Kosev, Mr Nikolay Angelov Dragnev and Mr Pavel Yonkov Tsekov (“the applicants”), on 1 September 2009.
The applicants were represented intially by Ms H. Dimitrova and subsequently by Ms Zh. Kaleva, both lawyers practising in Varna. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Ms N. Nikolova and Ms Y. Stoyanova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that they had been ill-treated by masked police officers during a special operation and that the authorities had not carried out an effective investigation into their complaints.
The application was communicated to the Government on 13 January 2012.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicants worked for a private company (“the company”). The company is one of the main Internet service providers in the city of Varna; it operated out of at least two offices in Varna, both of which were located on the same street. The first applicant was the company’s manager; the second, third and fourth applicants were employees of the company; the fifth applicant was a freelance expert providing services to the company at the time of the events.
On 16 June 2008 the Varna District Public Prosecutor initiated criminal proceedings (досъдебно производство) against a person unknown, suspected of disseminating materials in violation of intellectual property laws by using the company’s servers during the period January to May 2008 and thus committing a continuous offence as defined in Article 172a (1) of the Criminal Code. The proceedings were not directed at anyone specifically at the company. The prosecutor’s order for opening criminal proceedings comprised the following instructions: that the facts be established; that unlicensed software be identified and seized, and a forensic examination be carried out in respect of it; that the results be discussed with the prosecutor without delay; and that the investigation be carried out by officers of the Central Service for Combating Organised Crime (CSCOC).
The following facts are undisputed between the parties.
Following the prosecutor’s order of 16 June 2008, a special police operation was carried out on 18 June 2008 in two of the company’s offices located in the same street in Varna. The operation was aimed at the search and seizure of illegal software and was carried out pursuant to the instructions of the supervising prosecutor. Ya.K., a CSCOC officer and the head of the operation, had given the operational instructions to the officers involved shortly before the operation began. Those instructions were to enter the company’s premises as quickly as possible, to overpower all individuals found there in order to prevent them from interfering with any electronic evidence, and to seize the computer equipment found in the offices. A district court judge confirmed the validity of the searchandseizure operation within 24 hours of its having taken place. A number of computers and black boxes, the latter referred to in the searchand-seizure reports as “computer systems”, as well as one folder of paper documents, were seized in the presence of certifying witnesses during the operation. The manager of the company, Anzhelo Angelov Georgiev, was not present in the company’s offices when the operation took place. The second applicant was working in the first company office at the time of the operation and the third, fourth and fifth applicants were present in the second company office.
The parties disagree in particular in respect of whether the force used by some of the CSCOC officers during the above-mentioned operation had been provoked by the applicants and therefore whether it had been excessive or absolutely necessary in the circumstances.
The applicants, in their complaints to the prosecutor on 19 June 2008 about having been ill-treated during the operation the previous day, described the conduct of the operation as follows.
Anzhelo Angelov Georgiev, the first applicant, submitted that on 18 June 2008 CSCOC officers barged into two offices of the company, having broken the entrance doors to one of the offices. Then, he claimed, they had broken the cameras in the first office, ordered the employees found there, including the second applicant, to lie on the ground and hit them with electroshock batons, as well as kicked them in the chest and the head despite the absence of any resistance or provocation. The first applicant also claimed that a similar situation had arisen in the second company office. Copies of medical certificates, evidencing injuries allegedly sustained by several employees during those events, were enclosed with the complaint.
Kameliya Ivanova Dekova, the second applicant, submitted that at around 4.00 p.m. on 18 June 2008 masked armed men had cut the lock of the entrance door to the company’s first office where she was working, saying they were police. Then, she claimed, they had made her lie on the ground and had kicked her in the chest and head, as well as applied electroshock discharges from a baton-like device to her body before handcuffing her. She had not resisted in any way and had done nothing to provoke such treatment. One of the masked men had been shouting threats and insults at her and her colleagues present in the office, including threatening to shoot a firearm.
Georgi Mirchev Kosev, the third applicant, submitted in particular that he had heard loud bangs on the entrance door of the company’s second office at about 4.30 p.m. on 18 June 2008. After a colleague had opened the door, men had rushed in, pushed and shoved him and then handcuffed him to the window grill. While he was still attached to the grill, they had applied electroshock discharges from a baton to his abdominal area.
Nikolay Angelov Dragnev, the fourth applicant, submitted that at around 4.30 p.m. on 18 June 2008 several armed masked men had broken into the company’s second office, where he was at the time. Although he had not resisted in any way, they had hit him in the face and his lip had started bleeding. They had handcuffed his arms behind his back and then made him stay on his knees for an hour during which time they had continuously insulted him.
Pavel Yonkov Tsekov, the fifth applicant, submitted that at about 4.30 p.m. on 18 June 2008, while he had been working in the company’s second office together with seven other colleagues, he had heard strong bangs on the door and shouts “Open! Police!”. As soon as a colleague of his had opened the door, several men had thrown Mr Tsekov to the ground, then had handcuffed his arms behind his back and dragged him outside. Next they had made him remain crouching with his hands cuffed behind his back for around an hour. They had asked no questions of him or his colleagues nor asked them to produce their identity documents; instead, they had ordered the employees in the office to keep quiet.
Some of the twelve employees, including the second, third, fourth and fifth applicants, who were heard during the inquiry on 2 and 3 July 2008 following the applicants’ complaints (see paragraph 24 below), stated that police officers had cut open the entrance door to the first of the company’s offices in which they had been working on the afternoon of 18 June 2008. Following that the officers had hit them in the face, kicked them, stepped with a boot on their heads, applied electroshock discharges on them which had caused them very strong pain and a feeling of paralysis, insulted them and continuously shouted at them to keep silent. The officers had been wearing what some employees described as “helmets” and “hoods” on their heads. They had been dressed in black police uniforms and had been armed with machine guns. Once the masked officers had noticed that there were cameras on the premises, they had signaled this to each other and stopped hitting the employees. Shortly afterwards civilian police officers had entered the office premises; none of the civilian officers had illtreated any of the employees.
The Government submitted to the Court statements of thirteen police officers who had taken part in the operation. The statements were given to the prosecution on 7 July 2008, 27 August 2008, 2 September 2008 and 18 September 2008, as part of a preliminary inquiry carried out into the allegations of the company’s employees that they had been ill-treated by the police at the time of the operation. The Government also submitted to the Court the statements of twelve employees of the company given to the prosecution during the same inquiry (see paragraph 17 above).
Officers from the CSCOC who had participated in the operation were heard during the inquiry in August and September 2008 in Sofia following instructions of the Varna prosecutors. The CSCOC officers submitted that, prior to the operation they had received information from operative police sources and various media publications, that the company was connected to organised criminal groups. Given that the employees had refused to open the door to one of the offices which had been disguised as a family apartment, masked police officers had had to cut it open in order to prevent the destruction of evidence. The other office had been opened from inside by employees. CSCOC officers (it was not specified who or how many) had entered through the window into yet a third “hidden” office, thus “taking by surprise an employee found there who was attempting to destroy evidence”; they had handcuffed that employee, and then an unspecified person had opened the door to that office with a key. During the operation the company’s employees had refused to comply with the police orders and had actively disobeyed the officers, thus obstructing the operation. The officers had not used electroshock on any employee. They had used handcuffs on individual members of staff who had refused to open the entrance door or to move away from their computer stations and who had continued to erase data from the computers instead. The wife of the company’s manager had behaved arrogantly towards the officers, insulting and threatening them with revenge, and had ordered the employees to continue with their work.
Officers of the Varna Regional Police Directorate (“Областна Дирекция на Полицията Варна” or “VRPD”) who were heard during the inquiry in July 2008 in Varna submitted that they had been called in to assist their colleagues from the CSCOC in an operation to find company servers containing unlicensed software, films and music. None of the VRPD officers had been masked. They had not been involved in the opening of the entrance doors to the company’s offices as that had been done by masked officers from the CSCOC. They had entered the office premises after the doors had been opened. They had seen some masked officers on the company premises but had not seen what they had done. Some of them had heard calls of “Open! Police!” during a period of about 10 to 15 minutes and after that the sound of an electric grinder. They had not witnessed any physical force being used against any employee. Some of the VRPD officers had seen in the first office several women – none of whom bore any sign of injury – sitting on chairs guarded by two masked officers; in the entrance hall leading to the second office they had seen several company employees, some wearing handcuffs. While the VRPD officers had been waiting for the entrance doors to the offices to be opened, they had thought it likely that the company employees would delete most if not all of the information sought to be collected during the operation. All the employees had been calm and, at times, the officers had let them smoke outside the building before asking them to return inside to wait until the conclusion of the search-and-seizure operation. After officers had brought in another woman called A.G., acting as the manager of the company, ten computer systems were seized in her presence and in the presence of several certifying witnesses. The VRPD officers had left at around 8 p.m.
On 19 June 2008, the day after the police operation, at their request, a forensic expert examined Ms Dekova, Mr Kosev and Mr Tsekov, respectively the second, third and fifth applicants.
According to the medical reports, Ms Dekova had a swollen right upper eyelid and a swelling and a cut next to her right eyebrow, a bruise and an abrasion in her right armpit, four reddish-brown burns on and below her right shoulder blade and bruises on her right thigh and arm. The conclusion of the medical expert was that the burns on her back were of first to second degree and it was plausible that they had been sustained from not less than four strikes with an electroshock baton at the time and in the circumstances described by the applicant. Mr Kosev had a jaw injury, injuries to both arms, an injury and an open wound in the abdominal area and six reddish strips on his abdomen. Mr Tsekov had three long bruises around his left armpit which could have been the result of pressure applied with non-sharp, hard objects, possibly squeezing by hands. The medical expert concluded that the bruises and injuries could have been caused by blows with or against a blunt object, and that the injuries described above had caused the second, third and fifth applicant pain and suffering, and the second applicant also temporary non-life-threatening health disorder.
On 19 June 2008 the applicants, and five other individuals, complained to the prosecutor, in particular, that masked men had broken into two of the company’s offices the previous day and had used violence towards them, as well as shouting and insulting. Because the officers had been masked, they could not identify them. Civilian officers who had entered the office premises in order to search and seize computer equipment after the masked men had broken in had not mistreated the company employees. The prosecutor took the applicants’ statements which are summarised in paragraphs 12 to 16 above. They submitted the medical certificates drawn up on the same day (see paragraph 21 and 22 above).
A preliminary inquiry into the above complaints was opened the day after the operation took place. During the months of July, August and September 2008, investigators took statements from thirteen officers who had participated in the operation and twelve staff members of the company who had been present during the operation. The police statements are summarised in paragraphs 19 and 20 above and the employees’ statements are summarized in paragraph 17 above. The Government did not submit, and the documents in the file do not show, that any other investigative steps, apart from the questioning of several police officers and the company’s employees, were carried out.
The questions put to the officers during the inquiry were: 1)  whether during the operation any employee had disobeyed or showed manifest lack of cooperation; 2)  whether any of the masked officers had used electroshock batons against any employee and, if yes, why; 3)  who among the officers (masked or not) had used physical force and auxiliary means for restraint (помощни средства), against whom of the employees, in which of the company’s offices and why; 4)  officers from which police department (specialised in breaking into premises or in arresting individuals) had taken part in the operation; and 5)  whether the entrance doors to the company’s offices had been opened voluntarily or whether they had to be forced open.
All the officers heard during the inquiry stated that they had learned about the police operation of 18 June 2008 and had been called to assist with it earlier on the same day; none of them had used force against the applicants, apart from handcuffing individuals who had disobeyed the officers’ orders; no electroshock discharges had been applied to anyone. Not all police officers answered all questions asked as part of the inquiry.
The inquiry ended with a decision of the Varna Regional Military Prosecutor of 7 October 2008 not to institute criminal proceedings, finding that the officers involved in the operation had not exceeded the prerogatives vested in them by law. Upon appeal by the applicants, on 24 November 2008 the Varna Appellate Military Prosecutor returned the case with instructions that further acts be carried out (see paragraph 38 below, third sentence). More specifically, he observed that the file did not contain any documents showing that criminal proceedings had been opened against the applicants. Likewise, there was no information in the file showing that a search-and-seizure operation had been carried out and that it had been authorised by a judge. No information on file showed either that evidence had actually been found on the premises searched, or that there had been reasonable suspicion that evidence could have been found there. The prosecutor held that the scant assertions of several police officers who had been heard during the preliminary inquiry were not sufficient to establish the circumstances as recorded in the refusal to open criminal proceedings of 7 October 2008. Consequently, additional investigative acts had to be carried out. The higher prosecutor asked, in particular, that copies be collected of the orders for opening criminal proceedings on suspicion of violating intellectual property laws and for bringing charges on those grounds, as well as records of the search-and-seizure operation and “other documents of importance for the inquiry”. It is unclear whether any investigative steps were taken thereafter.
On 13 March 2009 the Varna District Public Prosecutor, to whom the file was sent for competence reasons following a legislative amendment, refused to open criminal proceedings (see paragraph 37 below) against the police officers. She found that a special police operation aimed at gaining access to the offices of the company and seizing unlicensed software had been carried out on 18 June 2008. The initial information available had been that the company had connections with organised criminal groups and that its main activity was the collecting and disseminating of unlicensed software. Officers from CSCOC had been in charge of the operation; masked officers from CSCOC Sector “Operational Intervention” (сектор “Оперативна реализация”) and officers from different units of the Varna Regional Police Directorate, had taken part in the operation. Following a preparatory briefing session, at around 3.30 in the afternoon the officers had tried to enter the office premises of the company. Someone on the inside had locked the front door; following this, the company’s employees had gone to their computers and started deleting data sought by the police. The employees had not complied with several orders by the police officers to open the doors. Acting upon the instructions to enter the company’s premises rapidly and to establish full control over all individuals there without giving them the opportunity to erase data or to obstruct the seizure of computers, the CSCOC officers had cut the entrance door lock to the building, thus breaking into the premises. They had then ordered all the individuals found there to lie on the floor and refrain from touching the computer equipment. However, the company’s employees had disobeyed the orders and, using different pretexts, had remained instead in front of their work stations, acting so as to delete information from the company’s computers. The officers had used physical force, electroshock batons and handcuffs in respect of some of the employees to overcome their resistance and prevent them from touching the computers located on the premises. During the operation, some employees had been knocked over. Those findings had been corroborated by the statements of all persons, civilians and police officers, collected during the inquiry, as well as by documents submitted by the Varna Regional Police Directorate. The prosecutor further found, on the basis of medical reports, that some complainants (without naming them) had sustained injuries during the operation and that they could not identify the officers who had caused the injuries as the latter had been wearing masks. The prosecutor concluded that it had been established unequivocally during the inquiry that the injuries sustained by the civilians during the police operation of 18 June 2008 had been the result of the use of force and auxiliary means for restraint by police officers in order to overcome the complainants’ resistance and to prevent them from destroying crucial evidence for the ongoing criminal proceedings. The officers had not exceeded their statutory right under section 72 of the Ministry of Interior Act to use force, as they had been faced with refusals to obey their orders. The material collected during the inquiry had shown that the searchandseizure operation had been carried out in accordance with the instructions of the supervising prosecutor and had been approved by a judge. The prosecutor concluded that the police officers involved had not committed a criminal offence.
Following an appeal by the applicants and one of the other complainants, on 8 April 2009 the Varna Regional Public Prosecutor (“Окръжна Прокуратура Варна”) upheld the lower prosecutor’s decision. He held, in particular, that the officers had used force for the purposes of gathering physical evidence and in compliance with the applicable legislation.
Article 172a of the Criminal Code prohibits the recording, storage, reproduction, emission, transmission or usage of material which is the object of someone else’s intellectual property rights. It is punishable by imprisonment of up to five years and a fine of up to 5,000 levs (around 2,500 Euros).
Search-and-seizure operations must be authorised in advance of their commission by a first instance court judge in accordance with Article 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. In urgent cases, the investigating authorities may carry out search-and-seizure acts without prior approval by a judge; however, a judge’s approval has to be sought and obtained within twenty four hours of the search-and-seizure operation.
Section 72 of the Ministry of Internal Affairs Act 2006 (“the 2006 Act”) in force at the relevant time provided that, in the exercise of their duties, the police could use force and special auxiliary means for restraint only “as a measure of last resort” in cases of, inter alia, resistance or refusal to obey a lawful order, arrest of an offender who disobeys or resists a police officer, and attacks against citizens and police officers.
Pursuant to section 73 of the 2006 Act, as in force at the time, the police could use force and auxiliary means for restraint only after giving a warning, and the use of force had to be commensurate with the specific circumstances and the personality of the offender. The same section imposed a duty on police officers to protect, wherever possible, the health of people against whom force was used as well as to take all measures to preserve those people’s lives. The use of force had to be discontinued as soon as the objective for which it was being used was attained.
As of 1 July 2012, the words “as a measure of last resort” in section 72 were changed to “only where absolutely necessary”. As of the same date, a new section 74a of the 2006 Act provides that “[t]he planning and control of the use of physical force, auxiliary means and firearms by the police ... shall include [the taking of] measures to attain the lawful aim at minimal risk to the life and health of the citizens”. In the explanatory notes to the bill the Government had referred to, inter alia, the need to bring domestic law fully into line with the applicable international standards and the Court’s case-law.
Article 12a of the Criminal Code provides that causing harm to a person while arresting them for an offence is not punishable where no other means of effecting the arrest exists and the force used is necessary and lawful. The force used will not be considered “necessary” where it is manifestly disproportionate to the nature of the offence committed by the person to be arrested or is in itself excessive and unnecessary.
Regulations of the Ministry of Interior on the use of auxiliary means of restraint by police officers were issued on 7 February 2011. Section 2 (1) stipulates that the police may use auxiliary means for restraint in cases where the grounds under section 72 of the Ministry of the Interior Act are present. As regards more specifically electroshock weapons, according to section 8 of the Regulations, electroshock batons can be used in the following situations: during arrest of persons who physically resist; in order to stop an attack on a police officer; during escape attempts by detainees; or during hostage-freeing operations. Section 2 (2) of the same Regulations provides that any auxiliary means may only be used following a warning, other than in cases of a sudden attack on an officer or another person, as well as during hostage-freeing activities.
In cases where the prosecutor refuses to institute criminal proceedings, and thus to carry out a full investigation, the higher prosecutor may, on his or her own initiative or following a complaint by a victim, order the institution of criminal proceedings and the opening of an investigation into the events (Article 213 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 2006). Refusals to open criminal proceedings cannot be appealed in court.
Criminal proceedings (досъдебно производство) are instituted where, as a result of preliminary information or following a preliminary inquiry into the events, there is a legitimate reason and sufficient information that a crime has been committed (Article 207 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 2006). Criminal proceedings for publicly prosecutable offences may be instituted only by a decision of a prosecutor (Article 212 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 2006). Written orders of the higher prosecutor are mandatory for the lower prosecutor (section 143 (3) of the Judiciary System Act 2007).
At the time of the events, during the pre-trail criminal proceedings victims had the right to personal safety, to be informed of the criminal proceedings’ progress, to take part in the investigation and to appeal against the acts suspending or terminating the proceedings (Article 75 of the Code of Criminal Procedure). An amendment introduced in that Article in May 2010 added to the above-mentioned rights the right to make requests, comments and objections in the context of the pre-trial criminal proceedings.
Pursuant to Articles 128, 129 and 130 of the Criminal Code, causing minor, moderate or severe bodily harm to another person is a criminal offence. Article 131 § 1 (2) provides that if the injury is caused by a police officer in the course of, or in connection with, the performance of his or her duties, the offence is an aggravated one. The offence is publicly prosecutable.
The general rules of the law of tort are set out in section 45 of the Obligations and Contracts Act 1951 (“the 1951 Act”). Section 45(1) provides that everyone is obliged to make good the damage which they have, through their fault, caused to another. Under section 45(2), fault is presumed until proved otherwise.
The 20th General Report on the Activities of the Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT), dated 26 October 2010, stated, inter alia:
“72.  Electrical discharge weapons [“EDW”] are increasingly being used when effecting arrests, and there have been well-publicised examples of their misuse in this context (e.g. the repeated administration of electric shocks to persons lying on the ground). Clearly, the resort to EDW in such situations must be strictly circumscribed. The guidance found by the CPT in some countries, to the effect that these weapons may be used when law enforcement officials are facing violence – or a threat of violence – of such a level that they would need to use force to protect themselves or others, is so broad as to leave the door open to a disproportionate response. If EDW gradually become the weapon of choice whenever faced with a recalcitrant attitude at the time of arrest, this could have a profoundly negative effect on the public’s perception of law enforcement officials.
...
Electrical discharge weapons issued to law enforcement officials commonly offer different modes of use, in particular a ‘firing’ and a ‘contact’ (drive-stun) mode. In the former, the weapon fires projectiles which attach to the person targeted at a short distance from each other, and an electrical discharge is generated. In the great majority of cases, this discharge provokes generalised muscular contraction which induces temporary paralysis and causes the person concerned to fall to the ground. In contrast, when the ‘contact’ mode is used, electrodes on the end of the weapon produce an electrical arc and when they are brought into contact with the person targeted the electrodes cause very intense, localised pain, with the possibility of burns to the skin. The CPT has strong reservations concerning this latter mode of use. Indeed, properly trained law enforcement officials will have many other control techniques available to them when they are in touching distance of a person who has to be brought under control.”
Amnesty International has expressed, in a 2007 statement given to the United States Justice Department, particular concern about using electrical discharge weapons in drive-stun mode, noting that "... the potential to use Tasers in drive-stun mode – where they are used as ‘pain compliance’ tools when individuals are already effectively in custody – and the capacity to inflict multiple and prolonged shocks, renders the weapons inherently open to abuse. In that statement Amnesty International called on all governments and law enforcement agencies to either cease using Tasers and similar devices pending the results of thorough, independent studies, or limit their use to situations where officers would otherwise be justified in resorting to deadly force where no lesser alternatives are available. Strict guidelines and monitoring should govern all such use. The degree of tolerable risk involving Tasers, as with all weapons and restraint devices, must be weighed against the threat posed and ... the vast majority of people who have died after being struck by Tasers have been unarmed men who did not pose a threat of death or serious injury when they were electroshocked. In many cases they appear not to have posed a significant threat at all.”
In a position, published in 2006 in connection with a widely publicised arrest of a drug-trafficking suspect, the Ombudsman expressed strong concerns about a number of cases of police violence during arrest, identified in the United States Department of State Report for 2005, as well as in reports by non-governmental organisations. The Ombudsman called upon the Ministry of Interior to strengthen their efforts in human rights training for police officers, referring specifically to the standards of the Council of Europe. He also invited the Ministry to present its strategy on eliminating unlawful use of police force vis-à-vis individuals for broad public discussion.