The case originated in an application (no. 9183/16) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Indian national, Mr Dzhitender Kumar Singla (“the applicant”), on 15 February 2016.
The applicant was represented by Mr O. Anishchik, a lawyer practising in Vsevolozhsk. The Russian Government (“ the Government” ) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 4 October 2016 the Government were given notice of the complaint under Article 8 concerning a violation of the applicant’s right to respect for family life due to his exclusion from Russia following a criminal conviction, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1972 in India. He arrived in Russia in 1991 on a student visa to study at a university in Moscow. From the documents submitted it transpires that upon completion of his studies he continued to reside in Russia on a regularly extended work visa.
In 1995 the applicant met a Russian national, Ms N. A., who was born in 1977, and with whom he has been living since 1996. In 2006 and 2009 they had two daughters, Ms P.D.S. and Ms P.A.S. respectively. The applicant’s partner, Ms N. A., and their children have no connections with India. The daughters, being minors, go to school in Moscow and maintain a close relationship with their grandparents, Ms N. A.’s parents, who also live in that city.
On 28 March 2012 the applicant was arrested and on 13 November 2013 he was sentenced to five and half years’ imprisonment under Article 165 of the Russian Criminal Code for defrauding the Moscow City authorities by fraudulently using State rental properties between 2006 and 2011. The applicant served his sentence in the Republic of Mordovia, Russia. Ms N. A. and daughters kept in contact with him through telephone calls and correspondence and by making regular visits. The applicant’s release was expected in September 2017.
The documents submitted indicate that on an unspecified date in the summer of 2015 the applicant applied for release on parole. On 10 August 2015 the Zubovo-Polyanskiy District Court in Mordovia refused to grant his application as premature.
On an unspecified date in 2016 the applicant lodged another application for release, which was granted. On 27 June 2016 the applicant was released on parole.
On 14 January 2015 the Russian Ministry of Justice issued decision no. 339-RN on the undesirability of the applicant’s presence (residence) in Russia until 27 September 2020 (“the exclusion order”), the date when his criminal record would be expunged. In accordance with the order, the applicant was to be deported from Russia shortly after his release from prison should he fail to leave of his own accord.
On 2 April 2015 the applicant appealed to the Zamoskvoretskiy District Court in Moscow (“the District Court”) against the exclusion order, complaining, inter alia, of a violation of his right to a family life. He pointed out that his family life was in Russia, that his daughters were minors, that neither they nor their mother had any ties with India, and that he had had no record of administrative or criminal offences prior to his imprisonment in 2013.
On 1 June 2015 the District Court upheld the exclusion order by stating, inter alia, that the applicant’s right to respect for his family life would not be violated, as “the impugned decision [had been] taken considering the degree of threat presented by [his] crime against the public”.
The applicant appealed to the Moscow City Court against the District Court’s decision, stating, inter alia, that the first-instance court had failed to properly examine his allegations concerning a violation of his right to respect for his family life. In particular, the District Court had disregarded the fact that the execution of the exclusion order would make it impossible for him to maintain a family life with his family, and that there had been no proof that the threat he allegedly posed to the public outweighed his right to respect for family life. In that connection, the applicant pointed out that the firstinstance court had stated in its decision that the crime he had been convicted of had been “especially grave”, whereas under Russian law it was classified as “moderately grave”. Lastly, the applicant stated that the execution of the exclusion order would make it impossible for him to officially register his marriage with Ms N.A.
On 8 September 2015 the Moscow City Court upheld the decision of the District Court. The decision stated, inter alia, the following:
“... the court notes that the applicant has relatives in the Russian Federation, that he intends to register his marriage with a Russian national, [and] that he [currently] studies at a higher education institution and is involved in organisations providing social assistance to invalids. [However], these facts do not lead to unconditional recognition that the exclusion order violates his right to respect for his personal and family life ... as the relevant decision was taken in view of the threat presented by the applicant’s crime against the public ...”
The court also noted that the first-instance court’s classification of the applicant’s crime as “especially grave” had indeed been incorrect, owing to a clerical error, and it should have been classified as “moderately grave”. However, that fact had had no bearing on the applicant’s case.
On 28 October 2015 the applicant lodged a cassation appeal against the decision of the Moscow City Court. Referring to the case-law of the Court, the applicant stressed that the exclusion order had been issued without any regard for his family life in Russia, and that the domestic courts had failed to examine his arguments concerning a violation of his right under Article 8 of the Convention. In particular, he stated that the crime he had been convicted of had been of moderate gravity, that he had been living in Russia permanently and legally since 1991, that he had obtained his university degree in Moscow, that he spoke fluent Russian, and that he was the head of a company in Moscow, where he also had real estate. Furthermore, the applicant pointed out that prior to his conviction he had had no record of criminal or administrative violations, and that there had been no evidence that he would pose a threat to society when released from prison. He further stressed that all the members of his family, that is Ms N. A. and his daughters, were Russian citizens, that he had had an ongoing family life since 1995, and that Ms N. A. and his two daughters maintained regular contact with him in prison by visiting him, making regular telephone calls and frequently exchanging letters. Lastly, the applicant pointed out that his family members were unable to relocate to India, as Ms N. A. had a permanent job in Russia, both daughters went to school there, and none of them spoke the main language needed to reside in India. The applicant argued that the courts of first and second instance had not taken all of the above factors into account when upholding the exclusion order, and had based their conclusions only on the fact that he had a criminal record.
On 16 November 2015 the Moscow City Court considered the cassation appeal and dismissed it by refusing to examine it further on the merits. The court stated, inter alia, that the exclusion order had been issued in full compliance with the domestic legislation, and that the applicant’s arguments concerning an alleged violation of his right to respect for his family life were unsubstantiated.
On 20 February 2016 the Russia Supreme Court rejected a further cassation appeal by the applicant.
On the date of the applicant’s release on parole, that is on 27 June 2016, the Mordovia FMS issued a deportation order against the applicant with reference to the exclusion order of 14 January 2015.
On 29 June 2016 the applicant wanted to leave Russia for India of his own accord, but he was prevented from leaving the country by the Moscow City Bailiff Service.
On 5 October 2016, following a complaint by the applicant, the Leninskiy District Court in Saransk, Mordovia, declared the deportation order against him unlawful. It stated that, owing to his release on parole, he was to remain in Russia until the end of his sentence in order to be supervised by a parole officer.
On 17 January 2017 the Administrative Chamber of the Mordovia Supreme Court overruled the decision of 5 October 2016 and stated that the deportation order was lawful.
According to the applicant’s representative, on 25 September 2017 the applicant was deported from Russia by way of controlled departure procedure.
For the relevant domestic law and practice and the Council of Europe material, see Gablishvili v. Russia (no. 39428/12, §§ 31-37, 26 June 2014).