The present case concerns the applicant’s participation in two demonstrations in 2011 and 2012 and the length of two sets of proceedings.
The applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Syktyvkar, in the Komi Republic, Russia. He was represented until 2019 by Mr I. Demin, a lawyer practising in Syktyvkar.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
At 2 p.m. on 10 December 2011 the applicant held a solo demonstration, displaying placards reading “We stand for fair elections” and “Shame on the elections in Komi”. At 2.25 p.m. he was approached by patrol officers P. and Z., who asked him to show his identity documents.
A report drawn up by officer P. indicates that he had been instructed to check a person standing next to a block of flats and wearing placards on his front and back. P. had arrived, had “explained the reason for his presence” and had required the applicant to show an identity document. The applicant had refused to give his name or show any identity document. Having consulted the officers’ superior, P. had received an order (apparently from the local police station) to take the applicant to the police station for identification. The applicant had then identified himself. After that, P. had received an order to escort the applicant as a possible suspect in connection with a theft. P. had then handed over the applicant to an officer who had arrived in a police vehicle.
Patrol officer Z. made a report in similar terms.
Senior officer M.’s report indicates that he had been on duty at the town police department and had received a radio communication, apparently from officer P. The latter had told him over the radio that the applicant had not identified himself; M. had then asked him to read out the contents of the placard, and had sent a vehicle to escort the applicant to the town police department for identification. Later on, M. had learnt that the applicant had actually been taken to the local police station on account of a profile indication in connection with a criminal offence.
No record of the escorting of the applicant to the police station or of his arrest was compiled. According to the police station logbook, the applicant was admitted there at 3 p.m. He was then taken to the town police department as he resembled the profile of a suspect (Caucasian appearance, around 50 years old) in connection with the theft of a mobile phone from a private vehicle in August 2011. He was made to give fingerprints and be photographed against his will (according to the applicant). As it was concluded that he had not been involved in the theft, he was allowed to leave at or around 3.30 p.m.
The applicant sued the police in relation to the above-mentioned actions. On 17 July 2012 the Syktyvkar Town Court of the Komi Republic dismissed his claims. The court considered that the police officers had acted in compliance with the Police Act when they had taken the applicant to the police station. On 13 September 2012 the Supreme Court of the Komi Republic upheld that judgment.
On 24 February 2012 the applicant staged a solo demonstration at Stefanovskaya Square in Syktyvkar holding a placard with the phrase “Putin, go away!”
It appears that at around 9.20 a.m. the applicant was taken to the police station, on suspicion of an offence under Article 20.2 of the Federal Code of Administrative Offences (CAO). According to the Government, the arresting officer had no statutory authority to compile an offence record on the spot for this type of offence (pursuant to the Ministry of the Interior Decree no. 444 of 2 June 2005). The applicant spent three hours at the police station.
On 5 May 2012 the justice of the peace convicted him under Article 20.2 § 2 of the CAO because he had been standing less than 150 metres from a court building, whereas the Public Events Act prohibited public events in the immediate vicinity of court buildings (see, for relevant national legislation, Lashmankin and Others v. Russia, nos. 57818/09 and 14 others, §§ 223 and 247, 7 February 2017). The applicant was ordered to pay a fine of 1,000 Russian roubles (RUB) (approximately 24 euros at the time when it was due). On 6 June 2012 the Syktyvkar Town Court upheld the judgment.
On 30 March 2004 the authorities instituted criminal proceedings against K. and B., who were accused of causing bodily injuries to the applicant (Article 115 of the Criminal Code).
On 7 September 2004 the investigation in respect of B. was disjoined, and a new investigative file (no. 2971501) was created for offences under Articles 115 and 213 of the Criminal Code. On 9 September 2004 the investigation was suspended because B.’s whereabouts had not been determined.
Following the Court’s request, in 2019 the applicant submitted to the Court a document dated 17 September 2004, which was addressed to investigator Ka. and the Syktyvkar Town Court. This document was entitled “Civil claims for non-pecuniary damage within criminal case no. 2387/2004” and contained a claim for RUB 100,000 against B. The document bore a stamp “Copy”. According to the applicant, he had lodged that claim within the investigator dealing with the investigation against B. and had sought that that claim be admitted to the investigative file.
In November 2004 the supervising prosecutor ordered the resumption of the investigation, including the taking of measures to determine B.’s whereabouts. A request to that effect was made to a local authority but it was not complied with. In December 2004 a further decision to suspend the investigation was issued. It was then quashed and the resumption of the investigation was ordered. B.’s whereabouts were determined in May 2005.
In the meantime, a case against K. was sent for trial before a justice of the peace. On 19 April 2005 the justice of the peace discontinued the proceedings against K. on a charge under Article 115 § 1 of the Criminal Code, noting the settlement reached between the parties.
After May 2005 B. did not attend interviews with the investigator. The investigation in respect of B. was again suspended in March 2006 but was then resumed in June 2006. By a decision of 29 December 2006 the regional prosecutor upheld a complaint by the applicant and acknowledged that the investigation had not been carried out properly. By a judgment of 19 November 2007 the Syktyvkar Town Court upheld a further complaint by the applicant and declared that the investigators’ inaction in pursuing the investigation had been unlawful. On 15 January 2008 the Regional Court of the Komi Republic upheld that judgment. On 29 November 2010 the case was discontinued because of the expiry of the time-limit for prosecution. The applicant was informed accordingly soon thereafter.
In the meantime, on 1 January 2004 the applicant had been involved in a traffic accident. The applicant applied to the police for the institution of administrative-offence proceedings against the owner of the other vehicle. No proceedings were instituted. An internal inquiry, carried out in September 2005, revealed that the relevant file had been lost. It appears that the applicant learnt about the results of the inquiry soon afterwards.
In September 2010 the applicant brought civil proceedings under Articles 1070 and 1100 of the Civil Code seeking RUB 25,000 in compensation for non-pecuniary damage on account of the length of the criminal investigation and RUB 5,000 on account of the loss of the file in the CAO proceedings. On 27 January 2011 the Syktyvkar Town Court awarded him RUB 5,000 and RUB 2,000 respectively (equivalent to EUR 123 and 49 at the time). On 11 April 2011 the Supreme Court of the Komi Republic upheld that judgment. The payment of the sums awarded was completed on 5 July 2011.
Under the Police Act (Federal Law no. 3-FZ of 7 February 2011, as in force at the relevant time), the police are empowered to check an individual’s identity documents where there are reasons to suspect the person of a criminal offence or if his or her name is on a wanted persons list; where there is a reason for prosecuting him or her for an administrative offence; or where there are other grounds, provided for by federal law, for arresting the person (section 13 of the Act). The police are also empowered to take the person to a police station in order to decide whether he or she should be arrested, if that cannot be done on the spot (section 13(13) of the Act), and to apply measures listed in Article 27.1 of the CAO, such as administrative escorting (административное доставление) or administrative arrest (административное задержание) (section 13(8) of the Act).
It is appropriate to take into account the statutory conditions, aims and grounds for taking a person to a police station (for instance, by way of administrative escorting), as well as the specific circumstances when such a measure is applied. Thus, any such measure should not be arbitrary and should “take account of proportionality as regards the scope of limitations on individual rights (for instance, as the case may be, freedom of expression or freedom of assembly) vis-à-vis the actual necessity arising from the circumstances, as well as the practicability of attaining the aim pursued by the measure” (Ruling no. 8-P of 17 March 2017 by the Russian Constitutional Court in relation to section 13(13) of the Police Act of 2011). After a record of escorting has been compiled and if the grounds for escorting are no longer compelling, the person must be released without delay. Continued retention of the person in that case may become arbitrary, thus violating his or her right to liberty and personal security as protected by Article 22 of the Constitution and Article 5 of the Convention. Individuals have the right to challenge the escorting measure applied to them (ibid.).
Article 21 § 2 of the Russian Constitution provides that no one may be subjected to torture, violence or any other cruel or degrading treatment or punishment.
Article 115 of the Criminal Code punishes (by a fine, community work or detention) the intentional infliction of minor damage to health.
Under Article 44 of the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure as in force at the material time, a “civil claimant” (гражданский истец) could lodge a claim for compensation in respect of pecuniary or non-pecuniary damage if he or she considered that such damage had been caused to him or her as a direct result of a crime. An inquirer, investigator, prosecutor or judge had to issue a decision recognising a person as a civil claimant. A claim for compensation could be lodged following the institution of criminal proceedings until the completion of the hearing before the trial court.
Pursuant to Article 20 §§ 2 and 4 of the Criminal Code as in force at the material time, an offence under Article 115 of the Code was classified as an offence subject to private prosecution, for which proceedings were only instituted upon a complaint by a victim (except for vulnerable victims dependent on the perpetrator) and had to be discontinued if the victim settled with the defendant. In April 2007 this Article was amended to state that an offence under Article 115 § 1 of the Code was classified as an offence subject to private prosecution, for which proceedings were only instituted upon a complaint by a victim (except for vulnerable victims, such as those who were dependent on the perpetrator or could not exercise their own rights, for instance where information about the perpetrator was unknown) and had to be discontinued if the victim settled with the defendant.