The case originated in an application (no. 37214/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Hungarian national, Mr Pál Bárkányi (“the applicant”), on 6 October 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr T. Szabó, a lawyer practising in . The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr L. Höltzl, Agent, Ministry of Justice and Law Enforcement.
The applicant alleged that his deprivation of liberty had been excessively long, in breach of Article 5 § 3 of the Convention.
On 29 April 2008 the application was declared inadmissible. Subsequently, it turned out from a fax by the applicant’s lawyer dated 24 June 2008 that relevant documents had been misfiled and thus not been taken into account when the decision was drafted. Therefore, the application was restored to the case list. On 3 September 2008 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1965 and lives in .
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 30 June 2005 the applicant and an accomplice were arrested on a charge of theft of a car and two motorcycles. In the ensuing proceedings he was assisted by defence counsel of his choice.
On 1 July 2005 the Szeged District Court ordered the applicant’s pre-trial detention until 1 August 2005. The District Court considered that – given that the applicant had previous convictions and that another accomplice had absconded – there was a risk that he would endanger the investigation.
The applicant appealed and requested his release. He argued that the stolen goods had been found and the third accomplice had been arrested, so that the reasons given by the first-instance court had ceased to exist. He also pointed out that his agricultural activity – which was his main source of income – was seriously hindered by his detention. Lastly, he stated that his mother was seriously ill and he had to take care of her.
On 7 July 2005 the  upheld the first-instance decision. It considered that, given the seriousness of the charges against him and that his presence in the investigation could not be secured otherwise, the applicant’s pre-trial detention was necessary.
The applicant was in the meantime charged with other minor offences. On 29 July 2005 the District Court prolonged his pre-trial detention until 1 October 2005. It considered that, in view of his record, there was a serious risk that he would abscond, reoffend or endanger the investigation, in particular by destroying evidence. It also established that the applicant’s request for release, which was based on identical reasons to those set out in his appeal, was insufficiently founded to justify ending his detention. The applicant appealed, asking to be released or to be placed under house arrest in lieu of detention.
On 1 September 2005 the  upheld the first-instance decision but deleted from the list of reasons the risk of destruction of evidence.
On 28 September 2005 the District Court again prolonged the applicant’s pre-trial detention until 1 January 2006 for the same reasons it had given previously. The applicant appealed and drew attention to the fact, inter alia, that the investigation was practically closed, as all the necessary investigative acts had already been carried out. He also stated that the seriousness of the charges against him could not serve as the sole basis for his detention. On 12 October 2005 the  upheld the first-instance decision.
On 28 December 2005 the District Court prolonged the applicant’s detention until the delivery of the first-instance judgment on the merits. It considered that the seriousness of the charges against him meant that there was a serious risk that he would abscond or jeopardise the procedure by conspiring with his missing accomplice. The applicant appealed and repeated his previous arguments.
On 6 February 2006 the  upheld the first-instance decision but changed the ground for detention to the risk of the applicant’s reoffending. It also established that the investigation had ended, so that the applicant could no longer jeopardise it.
On 21 August 2006 the District Court prolonged the applicant’s detention until the delivery of the first-instance judgment on the merits on the same grounds as before.
On 5 September 2006 the District Court terminated the applicant’s detention and ordered his house arrest. It considered that he was no longer in a position to endanger the goals of the proceedings and, based on the information in its possession, there was no risk that he would abscond.
On 25 September 2007 the Szeged District Court found the applicant guilty of trafficking in stolen goods (orgazdaság) and sentenced him to one year’s suspended imprisonment.
Act no. 9 of 1998 on the Code of Criminal Procedure, as in force at the relevant time
“...(2) The pre-trial detention of the accused may take place in the course of proceedings concerning a crime punishable with deprivation of liberty and if
a) the accused escaped, tried to escape or absconded from the court, the prosecution or investigation authority, or if during the proceedings other criminal proceedings were instituted against him for a crime punishable with deprivation of liberty,
b) given the risk of escape or absconding, or because of other grounds, it can be reasonably assumed that his presence for the investigation could not be secured otherwise,
c) it can be reasonably assumed that, if allowed to be at large, he would – in particular by influencing or intimidating witnesses, or by destroying, falsifying or hiding documentary and material evidence –, frustrate, render it more difficult or endanger the taking of evidence,
d) it can be reasonably assumed that, if allowed be at large, he would finish the attempted or prepared crime or commit another crime punishable with deprivation of liberty.”
“(1) Detention on remand, when ordered prior to the indictment, may last until the decision of the court in the preliminary proceedings before trial, up to a maximum of one month. Detention on remand can be prolonged by the investigation judge, for three month periods on each occasion up to a maximum of one year. Thereafter, detention on remand can be prolonged by a single judge of the , ... on each occasion for two months.
(4) Detention on remand, when ordered or upheld after the preferment of the indictment, may last until the delivery of the first-instance judgment, ....”