The case originated in an application (no. 48798/14) against the French Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a French national, Ms Laurence Guimon (“the applicant”), on 2 July 2014.
The applicant was represented by Ms M. Paulus Basurco, a lawyer practising in Saint-Jean de Luz. The French Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr F. Alabrune, Director of Legal Affairs at the Ministry of European and Foreign Affairs.
The applicant, who was imprisoned, alleged that the judicial authorities’ refusal to allow her to leave prison under escort to travel to a funeral home and pay her respects to her deceased father had infringed her rights as guaranteed by Article 8 of the Convention.
On 18 October 2017 the Government were given notice of the application.
The applicant was born in 1969.
At the relevant time she was detained in Rennes Prison. She has been released on licence since 1 March 2016.
On 24 January 2003 the applicant was placed in pre-trial detention in the context of several sets of criminal proceedings.
She was subsequently convicted on three occasions, primarily for participating in a criminal conspiracy for the preparation of an act of terrorism, receipt of stolen goods obtained through extortion as part of a criminal conspiracy, possession and transport of weapons, explosive substances or devices, and the possession and use of forged administrative documents in connection with a terrorist enterprise.
She was sentenced on 26 April 2006 by the Paris Criminal Court to eight years’ imprisonment; on 29 November 2006 she was sentenced by the Paris special Assize Court to a seventeen-year prison term, for two-thirds of which she would not be eligible for any form of release; and on 17 December 2008 the same assize court imposed a seventeen-year term, to run concurrently with the previous one.
By a judgment of 21 June 2011, the President of the Investigation Division of the Paris Court of Appeal ordered that the eight-year prison sentence be served, in part and for a period of five years, concurrently with the seventeen-year prison sentence imposed by the assize court on 29 November 2006.
On 21 January 2014 the applicant’s lawyer applied to the vicepresident at the Paris tribunal de grande instance responsible for post-sentencing issues and with jurisdiction for terrorism cases, requesting authorisation for the applicant to leave the prison under escort, so that she could pay her last respects to her father, who had died earlier that day in a Bayonne hospital. He pointed out that, in view of the latter’s health problems, he had been unable to visit the applicant since her transfer in 2009 to Roanne, and subsequently to Rennes. He added that the applicant had been very attached to her father and considered it essential to be able to honour him one last time, alongside her mother, sister, daughter and brother.
By a letter of the same date, the lawyer specified that the applicant was suffering from Crohn’s disease, a chronic inflammatory intestinal illness, which required frequent visits to the lavatory. He attached a document from the firm of undertakers, stating that the deceased’s remains would be placed in a coffin on 22 January and the funeral held on Monday 27 January 2014.
On 22 January 2014 the public prosecutor at the Paris tribunal de grande instance advised against granting the applicant’s request. He stated, in particular:
“... the [applicant’s] numerous convictions do not argue in favour of granting such authorisation to leave prison under escort, which would necessarily have to be reinforced. Furthermore, given the family environment, [specifically] the applicant’s brother and sister, who frequent Basque circles, an attempted escape cannot be ruled out, in spite of the circumstances at hand, namely the father’s death.”
By an order of the same date, the vice-president responsible for post-sentencing issues and with jurisdiction for terrorism cases refused the applicant’s request for escorted leave of absence. He held as follows:
“... although the death of Mr J.X.G., [the applicant’s] father, on 21 January 2014 is an exceptional ground that could justify a measure authorising her to leave the prison under escort within the meaning of Article 723-6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, this request must also be assessed in the light, firstly, of the given individual’s personality and, secondly, of the likelihood of an attempt to escape.
In this connection, it should be noted that [the applicant], an active member of ETA until her arrest in 2003, ha[d] been convicted on several occasions of numerous offences falling within the scope of Article 706-16 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, governing acts of terrorism; those convictions demonstrate a clear and long-standing foothold in the Basque movement and terrorist actions.
Furthermore, [the applicant] has always refused to submit to psychiatric or psychological tests in the context of the proceedings against her, so that the judge responsible for the execution of sentences currently has no tangible information about her personality and the potential danger posed by her, even if it is well-established that her conduct in prison has been satisfactory.
Further, having regard to the fact that the release date is still distant (17 June 2019), [the applicant’s] membership of a particularly well-organised terrorist movement and the potential for outside support in this connection, one cannot rule out the risk of attempted escape in the event of authorisation for escorted prison leave to travel to the Bayonne region.
Lastly, the geographical distance between Rennes Prison and Bayonne and the chronic illness from which [the applicant] suffers (Crohn’s disease, requiring very regular visits to the lavatory, as per the medical certificate drawn up by Dr. L. B.) give rise to particularly challenging practical issues, including that of sufficient security, when it comes to escorting the prisoner to pay her respects to her father. Moreover, the time constraints are very tight.
...”	
On 23 January 2014 the applicant appealed against this decision. She argued that the acts on which her convictions were based had been committed during the period she was in hiding; in addition, it had been decided that her two seventeen-year prison terms were to run concurrently and that five years of her eight-year sentence were to run concurrently with the other terms. She added that she had been imprisoned for eleven years and that her conduct in prison had been satisfactory; there had been no incident justifying fears that she would try to escape; in addition, she would be eligible for conditional release on 24 May 2014, which also undermined the likelihood of the alleged risk of absconding. She gave the example of a fellow prisoner in Rennes, who had been transferred to Saint-Jean-de-Luz in May 2013 in order to be able to attend her son’s funeral. She was asking only to be allowed to pay her respects before her father’s coffin in the funeral home and to embrace her mother and her daughter. She noted that her father’s cremation had been postponed to 27 January 2014 in order to give the prison authorities time to organise her trip. The applicant further emphasised that her health problems had never presented an obstacle to her transfers from the Paris region to Bordeaux, from Bordeaux to Roanne and from Roanne to Rennes; she added that she had undertaken to ensure that her health problems would not complicate her absence from prison, and had decided not to eat during the journey, which showed how important it was for her to be with her family during this time of grief.
By an order of 24 January 2014, a judge at the post-sentencing division of the Court of Appeal upheld the order of 22 January 2014. She held, in particular, as follows:
“Notwithstanding [the applicant’s] conviction for acts of terrorism and her membership of the separatist organisation ETA, which she continues to assert, the requested authorisation is perfectly justified on a human level at a particularly painful time for her, since [the applicant] has been unable to see her father since 2009 on account of her transfer to Rennes Prison and his illness, and legitimately wishes to see his body for one last time, with her family, when the coffin is removed prior to the cremation ceremony.
However, a threat to public order as a result of the return, in emotionally difficult circumstances, of a convicted Basque activist to the Basque Country, where she enjoys considerable support, cannot be ruled out, even if the visit is for only a few hours.
This risk implies, as a matter of necessity, particularly vigilant surveillance on the part of the authorities responsible for escorting her and for ensuring the smooth conduct of the journey, including organising the corresponding security arrangements, especially as a return journey in a single day is impossible, given the distances involved; a departure would have to be organised for the Sunday with an overnight stay in Gradignan Prison, so that [the applicant] could be present in Bayonne before 11 a.m., the time scheduled for the removal of the coffin.
However, after consultation with the competent gendarmerie units, which were contacted by the court as soon as it received the request on Friday 24 January, it appears that it will be physically impossible to organise this kind of escort at such short notice, having regard to the material and human constraints.
In those circumstances, the court can only take note of this impossibility and uphold the previous decision.”
The applicant applied for legal aid so that she could lodge an appeal on points of law against that decision.
By a decision of 27 March 2014, the legal aid board at the Court of Cassation refused her application, stating that no arguable ground of appeal on points of law could be made out against the impugned decision.
The applicant lodged an appeal against that decision. She relied on Article 8 of the Convention, emphasising that the president of the Post-sentencing Division had held that her request was perfectly justified on a human level. She submitted that mere material considerations were being used to justify the breach of her fundamental right. She challenged the arguments used, reiterating that she was not a prisoner subject to particular surveillance and thus did not require a reinforced escort, and that she would be eligible to apply for release on licence in four months. Lastly, she added that she could not be held responsible for the fact that she was being held in a prison hundreds of kilometres from her home, which was also the reason her father had been unable to visit her.
By an order of 29 April 2014 the judge delegated by the President of the Court of Cassation dismissed the appeal. He pointed out that the Court of Cassation’s review of a case did not concern the lower courts’ assessment of the facts and evidence, and that it did not appear, having regard to the documents in the file, that a serious ground of cassation based on a failure in the contested decision to comply with the applicable legal rules could be made out.
In respect of an individual who has been convicted of acts of terrorism and related offences, only the post-sentencing judge at the Paris tribunal de grande instance, the Paris Sentence Enforcement Court and the sentence-enforcement division at the Paris Court of Appeal have jurisdiction, irrespective of the convicted person’s place of detention or residence. In urgent cases, the post-sentencing judge with jurisdiction for terrorism cases issues orders regarding, among other areas, escorted leave without seeking the opinions of the post-sentencing judge who has territorial jurisdiction and the sentence-enforcement board. Such orders may be contested on appeal within twenty-four hours of their notification. An appeal on points of law may be lodged against orders and judgments concerning, in particular, escorted leave, within five days of notification; such an appeal does not have suspensive effect.
Persons sentenced to a prison term who are serving the minimum period in relation to their sentence are not entitled to unescorted leave. They may only be granted escorted leave on an exceptional basis.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CPP) as in force at the material time, read as follows:
Article 706-16
“The acts of terrorism established as crimes under Articles 421-1 to 421-6 of the Criminal Code, and the related offences, shall be prosecuted, investigated and tried in accordance with the rules of the present Code, subject to the provisions of the present Part. ...”
Article 706-22-1
“By derogation from the provisions of Article 712-10, only the post-sentencing judge of the Paris tribunal de grande instance, the Paris Sentence Enforcement Court and the post-sentencing division of the Paris Court of Appeal shall have jurisdiction to take decisions regarding persons convicted of an offence falling within the scope of Article 706-16, irrespective of the convicted person’s place of detention or residence.
These decisions shall be taken after obtaining the opinion of the post-sentencing judge who would have jurisdiction under Article 712-10...”
Article 712-5
“Except in urgent situations, decisions on reduction of sentences, requests for leave under escort and day-release shall be taken after obtaining the opinion of the sentence- enforcement board. ...”
Article 712-11
“The decisions of the post-sentencing judge and of the sentence enforcement court may be contested on an appeal by the prisoner, by the public prosecutor and by the Principal Public Prosecutor, from the point that they are notified:
Within twenty-four hours as regards the orders mentioned in Articles 712-5 and 712-8 ...”
Article 712-12
“An appeal against the orders referred to in Articles 712-5 and 712-8 shall be brought before the president of the Post-sentencing Division of the Court of Appeal, who shall decide by means of a reasoned order in the light of the written observations of the public prosecutor and of the prisoner or his or her lawyer.”
Article 712-15
“An appeal on points of law may be lodged within five days after the orders and judgments mentioned in Articles 712-12 and 712-13 have been served. Such an appeal shall not have suspensive effect.”
Article 723-3
“Authorisation for leave permits a prisoner to be absent from a detention facility for a certain fixed period of time which is set off against the length of the sentence that is being served.
It is intended to prepare the prisoner for professional and social reintegration, to maintain his or her family ties or to enable him or her to fulfil an obligation at which his or her presence is required.”
Article 723-6
“Every prisoner may, under the conditions laid down in Article 712-5, obtain, on an exceptional basis, authorisation for escorted leave.”
Article D49-79
“In urgent cases, the Paris post-sentencing judge may rule without obtaining the opinion of the post-sentencing judge who would have jurisdiction in application of Article 71210.”
Article D142-1
“The conditions for the time-period provided for in Articles D. 143 to D. 146 shall only be applicable if the prisoner is not serving the minimum term imposed.”
Article D144
“In the event of the serious illness or death of a close relative, leave may be granted for a maximum period of three days, both to prisoners who have been sentenced to a prison term not exceeding five years, and to prisoners serving a prison term of over five years, where they have served half of their sentence.”
Article D145
“Leave of a maximum duration of three days may be granted, with a view to maintaining family ties or preparing them for social reintegration, to prisoners who have served half of their sentence and who have a remaining period of less than three years to serve in detention...”
Article D146
“Convicted prisoners who are being held in detention centre may be granted leave as provided for in Article D. 145 where they have served a third of their sentence.”
Article D425
“In application of the provisions of Article 723-3 concerning leave authorisations, and under the conditions set out in Article D. 144, prisoners may be authorised to travel to a close relative who is seriously ill or had died.”