The case originated in an application (no. 21272/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Sergey Veniaminovich Sakhnovskiy (“the applicant”), on 18 April 2003.
In the proceedings before the Chamber the applicant was granted leave for self-representation. In the proceedings before the Grand Chamber the applicant was granted legal aid. He was represented by Ms K. Moskalenko and Ms O. Preobrazhenskaya, lawyers practising in Moscow, and Ms N. Lisman, lawyer practising in Boston (the ). The Russian Government (“the Government”) were initially represented by Ms V. Milinchuk, former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights, and subsequently by their Representative, Mr G. Matyushkin.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the criminal proceedings against him had been conducted in violation of Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (c) of the Convention, claiming that in the appeal proceedings he had not been given free legal assistance and that, moreover, he had been unable to defend himself effectively because he had communicated with the court of appeal by video link.
The application was allocated to the First Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (former Article 27 § 1 of the Convention, now Article 26) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
On 15 January 2009 a Chamber of that Section composed of the following judges: Christos Rozakis, Anatoly Kovler, Elisabeth Steiner, Dean Spielmann, Sverre Erik Jebens, Giorgio Malinverni and George Nicolaou, assisted by Søren Nielsen, Section Registrar, examined the admissibility and merits of the case (former Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, now Article 29 § 1). The Chamber joined to the merits the Government's objection concerning the applicant's victim status, declared the complaints under Article 6 of the Convention admissible, and held unanimously that there had been a violation of Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (c) of the Convention in that the applicant had not received effective legal assistance during the appeal proceedings in his criminal case. It made an award in respect of non-pecuniary damage. The remainder of the application was declared inadmissible. Judges Rozakis, Spielmann and Malinverni expressed a joint concurring opinion, which was annexed to the judgment.
On 4 May 2009 the Government requested, in accordance with Article 43 of the Convention and Rule 73, that the case be referred to the Grand Chamber. A panel of the Grand Chamber accepted the request on 14 September 2009.
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined according to the provisions of former Article 27 §§ 2 and 3 (now Article 26 §§ 4 and 5) of the Convention and Rule 24 of the Rules of Court. At the final deliberations, Ann Power, substitute judge, replaced Renate Jaeger, who was unable to take part in the further consideration of the case (Rule 24 § 3).
The applicant and the Government each filed written observations on the merits.
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, , on 20 January 2010 (Rule 59 § 3).
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Ms Moskalenko, Ms Lisman and Mr Mikhaylov.
The applicant was born in 1979. He is currently serving his sentence in the Novosibirsk Region.
On 30 April 2001 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of having murdered his father and uncle. The applicant made a written request to be provided with a legal-aid lawyer. On the same day an expert examination of fingerprints and a forensic examination were ordered and on 3 May 2001 the applicant was remanded in custody.
On 4 May 2001 legal-aid counsel, Ms P., was appointed to assist the applicant, and he was charged with aggravated murder on 10 May 2001.
From May to September 2001 a number of expert examinations were carried out. Subsequently the applicant received copies of orders for such examinations. He signed each of them confirming their receipt and indicating that he had no comments or requests.
On 30 September 2001 the detention order was lifted and replaced with an undertaking not to leave his place of residence.
In October 2001 the applicant's former cellmate in the detention facility, Mr Zh., testified that the applicant had told him in detail how he had murdered his father and another man.
On an unknown date the applicant's friend, Mr R., gave a witness statement alleging that the applicant had asked him to murder his father and that when R. refused the applicant seemingly intended to do it himself.
On 5 November 2001 the applicant was again remanded in custody.
On 20 December 2001 the  examined the criminal charges against the applicant. The applicant pleaded not guilty. The court examined seventeen witnesses including Zh. and R., and found the applicant guilty of the murder of two persons, sentencing him to eighteen years' imprisonment. In its judgment the court referred to witness statements, forensic reports and extensive material evidence.
The applicant and his lawyer appealed, alleging that Zh. and R. had given their statements under pressure from the police and claiming that the investigation had been vitiated by numerous violations of the applicant's defence rights. They also complained that they had received the expert examination orders belatedly.
On 12 May and 29 July 2002 the applicant requested to be assigned another lawyer to represent him in the appeal proceedings because Ms P. was unable to attend the hearing, as she was already engaged in another trial.
On an unknown date the applicant was informed that his participation in the appeal hearing would be ensured by video link. On 26 and 30 July 2002 he requested leave to attend the appeal proceedings in person because he did not consider that the video link would provide him with an adequate opportunity to participate in the hearing.
On 16 October 2002 the Supreme Court of the  ordered the Moscow IZ-77/3 detention centre to ensure the applicant's participation in the appeal hearing, which was to take place on 31 October 2002, by video link.
On 31 October 2002 the Supreme Court of the  examined the applicant's appeal. The applicant participated in the proceedings by video link. No defence counsel attended the hearing. The court dismissed the applicant's appeal, having found no proof that the testimony of Zh. and R. was false. As regards the alleged breach of his defence rights, the court found this to be unsubstantiated.
In the following months the applicant filed several supervisory review complaints. In letters of 24 April and 19 November 2003 the Novosibirsk Prosecutor's Office and the General Prosecutor's Office informed the applicant that they refused to entertain his complaints. The Novosibirsk Prosecutor's Office noted, in particular, that the applicant's right to take part in the appeal proceedings had been fully respected. On 2 July 2003 Judge R. of the Supreme Court refused to open supervisory review proceedings on the applicant's complaint. That decision was confirmed by the President of the Supreme Court on 5 December 2003. On 4 February 2004 another supervisory-review complaint by the applicant was returned without examination, with reference to the earlier decisions on that matter.
On 26 March 2007 the Court decided to communicate the application to the Russian Government. On 4 July 2007 the Presidium of the Supreme Court granted an application for supervisory review by the Deputy Prosecutor General and quashed the Supreme Court's appeal decision of 31 October 2002. The Presidium found that the applicant's right to legal assistance had been violated in the appeal hearing and remitted the case for a fresh examination before the appellate court.
The applicant requested to take part in the appeal hearing in person. On 10 August 2007 the Supreme Court, sitting as a bench of three judges, granted him leave to attend in person and ordered the applicant's temporary transfer from the prison in the Novosibirsk Region to a detention facility in Novosibirsk (over 3,000 km from Moscow), apparently to allow him to use the video link.
On 20 August 2007 the applicant made a new statement of appeal. He requested the Supreme Court to examine his appeal on the basis of this new statement alone and also requested leave to attend the appeal hearing in person rather than by video link.
On 29 November 2007 the Supreme Court, sitting in , examined the case. First, it considered the applicant's requests of 20 August 2007. In a separate decision on procedure it found that there were no grounds to accept the applicant's new statement of appeal and decided to examine the case on the basis of the statement by the applicant's former counsel, Ms P., from 2002. It also rejected the applicant's request to attend in person, finding that the video link would be sufficient to ensure that the applicant could follow the proceedings and make objections or other submissions, and that this form of participation would be no less effective than if he was personally present in the courtroom. The Supreme Court then introduced the applicant to Ms A., his new legal-aid counsel who was present in the Supreme Court's courtroom and then allowed them fifteen minutes of confidential communication by video link before the start of the hearing. All persons, both in the courtroom and in the detention facility, left the rooms.
The applicant rejected the assistance of Ms A. on the grounds that he needed to meet his counsel in person. The Supreme Court, having noted that the applicant did not rely on any divergence with Ms A. in his defence, did not request her replacement by another legal-aid lawyer, did not accept the Supreme Court's proposal to retain private counsel of his choosing and, taking into account the quashing of the previous appeal decision on the grounds of a lack of legal assistance, rejected the applicant's objection to the counsel's assistance. Accordingly, Ms A. represented the applicant in the appeal hearing.
On the same day the Supreme Court examined the merits of the case. It upheld the judgment of the Novosibirsk Regional Court of 20 December 2001, making one correction to the text and excluding one piece of evidence. The substantive findings and the applicant's sentence remained unchanged.
Article 51 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation (in force from 1 July 2002) provides for mandatory legal representation if the accused faces serious charges carrying a term of imprisonment exceeding fifteen years, life imprisonment or the death penalty. Unless counsel is retained by the accused, it is the responsibility of the investigator, prosecutor or the court to appoint legal-aid counsel. Article 52 of the Code provides that the accused can waive his right to legal assistance, but such waiver must be established in the written form. The waiver can be revoked at any moment.
Article 373 of the Code provides that the appellate court (суд кассационной инстанции) examines appeals (кассационные жалобы) with a view to verifying the lawfulness, validity and fairness of judgments. Under Article 377 §§ 4 and 5 of the Code, it may directly examine evidence, including additional material submitted by parties.
Article 402 of the Code (“Appeal against judgments, decisions and rulings which have come into force”) stipulates as follows:
“1.  Defendants who have been convicted or acquitted, ... and the public prosecutor shall be entitled to request review of court judgments ... which have come into force in accordance with the procedure set out in the present Chapter.
The public prosecutor's request shall be termed a supervisory-review application (представление). Other parties' requests shall be termed supervisory-review complaints (жалоба).”
Article 406 of the Code (“Examination of supervisory-review complaints or applications”) stipulates as follows:
“1.  A supervisory-review complaint or application shall be examined by a supervisory-review court within 30 days of being lodged.
The judge who examines the supervisory-review complaint or application may, where necessary, obtain ... any criminal case file ...
After examining the supervisory-review complaint or application, the judge shall decide as follows: either
(i)  to dismiss the supervisory-review complaint or application; or,
(ii)  to institute supervisory-review proceedings and to pass the supervisory-review complaint or application for consideration to the supervisory-review court ...
The President of the [competent] court may decline to accept the judge's decision to dismiss the supervisory-review complaint or application. In this case he shall set aside this decision and give a decision according to paragraph 3 (ii) [above].”
Article 412 of the Code (“Lodging of new supervisory-review complaints or applications”) stipulates as follows:
“1.  It is forbidden to lodge new supervisory-review complaints or applications with a court which has already dismissed such complaints or applications.
Where an earlier judgment, decision or ruling has been quashed on appeal or under the supervisory-review procedure, it is possible to lodge a supervisory-review complaint or application against it in accordance with the rules of the present Chapter, irrespective of the reasons why the original judgment, decision or ruling was quashed.”
Article 413 of the Code, setting out the procedure for re-opening of criminal cases, reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“1. Court judgments and decisions which became final should be quashed and proceedings in a criminal case should be re-opened due to new or newly discovered circumstances.
...
New circumstances are:
...
(2) a violation of a provision of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms committed by a court of the  during examination of a criminal case and established by the European Court of Human Rights, pertaining to:
(a) application of a federal law which runs contrary to provisions of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms;
(b)  other violations of provisions of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms;
....”
Examining the compatibility of Article 51 of the Code of Criminal Procedure with the Constitution, the  ruled as follows (decision no. 497-O of 18 December 2003):
“Article 51 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which describes the circumstances in which the participation of defence counsel is mandatory, does not contain any indication that its requirements are not applicable in appeal proceedings or that the convict's right to legal assistance in such proceedings may be restricted.”
That position was subsequently confirmed and developed in seven decisions delivered by the  on 8 February 2007. It found that free legal assistance for the purpose of appellate proceedings should be provided in the same conditions as for earlier stages in the proceedings and that it was mandatory in the situations listed in Article 51. It further underlined the obligation of courts to secure participation of defence counsel in appeal proceedings.
On 18 December 2003 the Constitutional Court of Russia dismissed a constitutional complaint by Mr R. as inadmissible. In its ruling (определение) the  held inter alia that Article 51 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which defined situations where participation of a defence lawyer in the criminal proceedings was mandatory, also applied to the proceedings before the court of appeal.
In a number of cases (decisions of 13 October 2004 and 26 January, 9 February, 6 April, 15 June and 21 December 2005, 24 May and 18 October 2006, 17 January 2007, 3 September and 15 October 2008) the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation quashed judgments of appeal courts and remitted cases for fresh consideration on the ground that the courts had failed to secure the presence of defence counsel in the appeal proceedings, although it was obligatory for the accused to be legally represented. That approach was also confirmed by the Presidium of the Supreme Court in its report concerning cases adopted in the third quarter of 2005 (Decree of 23 November 2005) and by the Decree of the Plenary of the Supreme Court of 23 December 2008, as amended on 30 June 2009. In the later document the Supreme Court emphasised that the accused could waive his right to a lawyer only in writing, and that the court was not bound by that waiver.