The case originated in an application (no. 23620/05) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Kharkivskyy Zavod Polimerkonteyner Ltd. (“the applicant company”) on 22 June 2005.
The applicant company was represented by Mr S.Y. Syrotenko, a lawyer practising in Kharkiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr I. Lishchyna.
The applicant company complained, in particular, of the continuing practice of the customs office to attribute a wrong code to its imported goods, entailing a higher customs duty, contrary to the factual findings of numerous final judgments in the applicant company’s favour.
On 25 January 2010 the applicant company’s complaint under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention concerning the non-enforcement of the domestic courts’ judgments in its favour was communicated to the Government under Rule 54 § 2 (b) of the Rules of Court. At that stage of the proceedings the Government were not invited to submit observations on the case, as it concerned an issue covered by the pilot judgment of 15 October 2009 in Yuriy Nikolayevich Ivanov v. Ukraine (no. 40450/04).
.  On 15 March 2016 the Court invited the Government to submit observations on the admissibility and merits of the applicant company’s complaint under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 concerning the customs office’s continuous disregard for the judicial decisions in the applicant company’s favour by the assignation of the wrong code to its imported goods. The remainder of the application (unrelated to the communicated complaints) was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
.  The applicant company is a limited liability company registered in Ukraine which produces containers and other packaging items.
.  In 1999 it started importing into Ukraine, on a regular basis, a fabric of the same type required for its manufacturing activities. Each time the State Customs Office assigned a classification code to its imported goods, on the basis of which the applicant company had to pay a customs tariff of 5%. The applicant company challenged each such decision before the domestic courts and sought the recovery of the overpaid duty. It claimed that, had the classification been correct, it would have had to pay only a 1% customs tariff. The goods in question remained impounded pending the outcome of the judicial proceedings.
.  Each time the courts found in the applicant company’s favour. Specifically, the case file contains eight final judgments setting aside fourteen respective decisions of the customs office of various dates between 2001 and 2006 and ordering the return to the applicant company of the overpaid tax.
.  The domestic courts stated on many occasions that the issue in question had already been examined many times and that the continued practice of the customs office of wrongly assigning the “more expensive” code to the applicant company’s imported goods undermined both the finality of those judgments and the courts’ authority.