The case originated in an application (no. 60646/13) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksandr Vasilyevich Bukreyev (“the applicant”), on 22 August 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr O. Nikitin. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 18 December 2014 notice of the complaint concerning the examination of witnesses and the fairness of the domestic proceedings was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1953 and lives in Voroshnevo.
At around 9 a.m. on 19 April 2013, while drunk, the applicant used foul language (нецензурная брань) in the presence of his neighbours, Kr. and Kor. When the police arrived, the applicant continued to use foul language, refused to accompany officer M. to the police station and tried to depart. At around 4 p.m. he was taken to the police station and formally arrested. He was accused of an offence under Article 20.1 § 2 of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”) (namely minor hooliganism, coupled with disobedience of a lawful order from a public official).
An administrative offence report was compiled. Kr. and Kor. lodged written complaints with the police and also made statements. Officer M. submitted a written report (рапорт) to his superior.
On the same date, at the trial hearing before the Kurskiy District Court of the Kursk Region on 19 April 2013 the applicant pleaded not guilty and stated that he had not used any foul language, but that on 19 April 2013 he had been at home, ill with the flu.
By a judgment of 19 April 2013 the trial court convicted the applicant and sentenced him to ten days’ administrative detention. The court stated that the applicant’s guilt had been confirmed by the written complaints and statements made by Kr. and Kor., officer M’s report to his superior, the offence report and the arrest report.
At some point on that same date, the police took the applicant to hospital where a doctor issued a certificate saying that the applicant had a mild fever of 37.5ºC and a sore throat.
The applicant lodged an ordinary appeal under Article 30.6 of the CAO.
On 5 June 2013 the Kursk Regional Court held a hearing and heard evidence from the applicant. It can be seen from the written record of the appeal hearing that the applicant lodged a request to examine witnesses Kr., Kor. and M. at the appeal hearing. The appeal judge asked the applicant why he had not lodged a similar request at the trial. The applicant replied that he had been ill on that date and had asked the trial judge to postpone the trial, to no avail. The appeal judge dismissed the applicant’s request.
By a decision of the same date, the appeal court determined that the alleged disobedience during officer M.’s attempt to arrest the applicant had taken place after the offence imputed to him of minor hooliganism in relation to, and in the presence of, Kr. and Kor., and after M’s actions aimed at putting an end to that offence. The court reclassified the charge against the applicant under paragraph 1 of Article 20.1 of the CAO, and reduced the sentence to five days’ detention.
The applicant served his sentence in July 2013.
The applicant lodged a request under Articles 30.12 and 30.16 of the CAO for a review of the above final court decisions. On 16 July 2013 the Deputy President of the Regional Court dismissed his application. On 21 August 2013 the Supreme Court of Russia dismissed a further application for review by the applicant. It held that the refusal to examine M., Kr. and Kor. “had not adversely affected the completeness and thoroughness of the determination of the charge”.
For a summary of the CAO provisions relating to the examination of administrative charges, see Butkevich v. Russia (no. 5865/07, §§ 37-48, 13 February 2018).
Article 30.6 of the CAO concerns an ordinary appeal procedure in respect of judgments issued by a first-instance court. The appeal judge must ascertain the following points and/or take the following procedural decisions:
(i) Whether the defendant or his or her representative is present at the hearing and whether other people who were summoned are present.
(ii) The reasons for any absences and whether it is appropriate to proceed with the case in their absence or to adjourn.
(iii) An examination of any applications and requests.
(iv) To conduct a review (проверять), on the basis of the available material and any newly submitted material, of the legality and wellfoundedness of the trial judgment. This is done by way of hearing evidence from the defendant and, where necessary, other people, or by way of examining material evidence.
Under Article 30.6 § 3 “the appeal judge is not bound by the grounds of appeal and shall review the case in its entirety”.