The case originated in an application (no. 65829/12) against the French Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Cameroonian national, Ms Elisabeth Tchokontio Happi (“the applicant”), on 8 October 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr F. Ormillien, a lawyer practising in Paris. The French Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs E. Belliard, Director of Legal Affairs at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant complained of the failure to enforce a final judgment in her favour.
On 12 September 2013 the Government were given notice of the application.
The applicant was born in 1972 and lives in Paris.
She has been living with her daughter and brother in a flat in the Paris area since 2003. By a decision of 12 February 2010, served on 12 March 2010, the Paris mediation commission, finding that the applicant and her relatives were housed in indecent and insalubrious conditions, earmarked their case as a priority for urgent rehousing.
As she had not received any offer of accommodation taking account of her needs and capacities six months after the date of that decision, the applicant lodged an application with the Paris Administrative Court seeking an order for the State to provide her with housing, on pain of a fine.
On 28 December 2010 the Administrative Court upheld her application and instructed the prefect of the Île-de-France region to rehouse the applicant, her daughter and her brother, on pain of a fine of 700 euros (EUR), payable to the urban development fund for the Île-de-France region, for each month’s delay from 1 February 2011 onwards. The Administrative Court found as follows:
 “It emerges from the investigation that a safety architect employed by the Paris Police Commissioner’s Office noted on 9 July 2009 that the kitchen ceiling in the flat occupied by [the applicant], her daughter and her brother was in a dangerous state as it was unstable and weak. Her request should therefore be granted as a matter of particular urgency.”
On 31 January 2012, as the applicant had still not been rehoused, the Administrative Court assessed the interim amount of the fine for the period from 1 February 2011 to 31 January 2012 and ordered the State to pay EUR 8,400 into the urban development fund for the Île-de-France region.
As matters stand, the applicant and her family have still not been rehoused.
Law no. 2007-290 of 5 March 2007 (hereafter “the DALO Act”) was enacted against the background of a housing crisis following the substantial backlog that had built up during the 1980s and 1990s (resulting from a housing supply that was insufficient or unsuited to meet the needs of lowincome households, a continuing increase in the percentage of household income spent on housing, and a rise in the number of persons without housing or inadequately housed). The Act recognises the right to decent and independent housing for all individuals residing in France lawfully and on a long-term basis as defined by a decree of the Conseil d’État and who are unable to obtain housing by their own means or to keep their existing housing. The right is guaranteed by the State and is exercised by means of an application to resolve the matter on an amicable basis followed, if necessary, by proceedings before the administrative courts (Article L. 300-1 of the Building and Housing Code – hereafter “the Code”).
The amicable resolution option allows several categories of disadvantaged persons (the list of which is laid down by law) to apply to a département-level mediation commission responsible for identifying persons to be given priority as being in urgent need of housing (Article L. 441-2-3 of the Code). The commission forwards the list to the prefect, who is then required to find housing for the persons concerned (ibid.).
Individuals whose request for housing has been given priority and recognised as urgent under the amicable resolution procedure before the mediation commission, but who have not received an offer of housing taking account of their needs and capacities within the time-limit laid down by decree, may apply to the administrative courts seeking an order for the State to house or rehouse them, possibly on pain of a fine (Article L. 44123-1 of the Code). The Law of 25 March 2009 on the mobilisation of resources for housing laid down rules governing the rate of the fine, specifying that this was to be determined on the basis of the average rent for the type of housing which the mediation commission considered suited to the needs of the persons concerned.
The fines were initially paid into the urban development funds set up in each region in order to allow the municipalities or public inter-municipal cooperation agencies to fund their land and property-related activities in the sphere of rented social housing (Article L. 441-2-3-1 of the Code). Following a recent change, they are now paid into the national housing support fund (FNAVDL) created by the 2011 Budget Amendment Act (Law no. 2011-900 of 29 July 2011). The aim of this fund is to finance, firstly, social support measures for households identified as a priority for urgent housing on the basis of the enforceable right to housing, and, secondly, appropriate rental management measures in respect of the properties allocated to those persons.
Assessing the amount of the fine to be paid entails a further intervention by the judge. The amount due may be final if the State has already honoured its obligations, or it may be partial, with a further amount being assessed at a later date.
Following this specific procedure, applicants who have been given priority and who have not obtained satisfaction may bring an action for damages against the State seeking compensation.
In the case of social housing a written lease is required, to be signed by the tenant and the landlord.
Tenants in social housing are entitled to remain in the property for an indefinite period. Landlords may terminate a lease only in exhaustively defined circumstances (including non-payment of rent or service charges, neighbourhood disturbances, income level above the threshold, accommodation insufficiently occupied over the year, or where the property has become too large).
If a tenant dies or abandons the property, and subject to certain conditions, the lease continues for the spouse, registered partner, live-in partner, ascendants, descendants or dependants who had been living with the tenant for at least a year on the date on which he or she died or abandoned the property.
Tenants in social housing may, in certain circumstances, purchase the property. This option may be exercised only once. It concerns dwellings built or acquired at least ten years previously by a social housing agency, or new housing built under the “Duflot scheme” and which complies with the minimum habitability standards laid down by decree. There are no conditions as regards the period of occupation by the tenant or his or her income. The tenant must simply submit an application to purchase the dwelling to the landlord, who forwards it to the prefect. The latter then consults the municipality in question and all the local public stakeholders involved in funding social housing (Article L. 443-7 of the Code). The sale may take place only if none of the administrative authorities object.
In an opinion of 2 July 2010 regarding the compatibility of proceedings concerning the enforceable right to housing with the right to an effective remedy guaranteed by the Convention, the Conseil d’État found as follows:
“...The mechanism introduced by the aforementioned provisions of the Building and Housing Code provides applicants who satisfy the criteria laid down by that Code with the possibility of bringing an action as a result of which the court may order that they be housed, rehoused or provided with accommodation and may impose a coercive fine. Furthermore, the decision of the département mediation commission is open to an ordinary appeal before the administrative courts. Lastly, the courts may impose a penalty on the State following an action for damages for failure to act.
Without prejudice to these remedies, the specific remedy available to applicants, under Article L. 441-2-3-1 of the Building and Housing Code, before a judge with powers to make orders and impose fines in order to overcome possible obstacles to enforcement, is effective with regard to the requirements of Article 6 § 1 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. This is so even where a fine imposed on the basis of the provision in question, in view of the criteria laid down therein, is paid by the State not to the applicant but into a regional State-controlled urban development fund that is not dedicated solely to the construction of social housing.
As the provisions in question afford the persons concerned the right of access to a court with effective powers, in accordance with the requirements of Article 6 § 1 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, it is unnecessary to determine whether the right to decent and independent housing is among those covered by Article 13 of the Convention.”
A report written by Mr Dilain and Mr Roche on behalf of the Monitoring Committee on the Implementation of Legislation, entitled “The enforceable right to housing put to the test” (Information Report no. 621 (2011/12) of 27 June 2012), found as follows:
 “Five years after the enactment of the DALO Act, the situation regarding the enforceable right to housing is, to say the least, disappointing.
It is true that all the regulatory instruments required for its implementation have been published, with the result that the Law of 5 March 2007 is now applicable on paper. However, the conditions needed in order for the DALO Act to succeed have not all been satisfied.
Although the number of applications to the mediation commissions has been lower than expected, 6,000 applications on average are lodged each month. The geographical concentration is particularly striking, with Île-de-France alone accounting for 60% of cases.
As reflected in the significant disparities in the proportion of favourable decisions in the different regions, there are still wide divergences in the activities of the mediation commissions. It appears that some base their decisions on contextual elements, contrary to the spirit and the letter of the law.
While the law is being complied with throughout most of the country, the départements where implementation is causing the most difficulty are those where the housing situation is at its most critical, namely Île-de-France, Rhône-Alpes, ProvenceAlpes-Côte d’Azur and Nord-Pas-de-Calais.
In view of the surprisingly high number of refusals of offers of housing or rehousing by persons granted priority owing to the urgency of their situation, the authors would recommend putting in place increased social support.
The number of court cases engendered by the DALO Act is on the increase but their usefulness is open to doubt. In about eight out of ten cases the proceedings brought under the Act result in a decision in the applicant’s favour. In almost all cases the judge’s order is accompanied by a financial penalty which the State pays to itself.
Given the small number of fines that are finally assessed, the effectiveness of these penalties in terms of rehousing applicants seems very limited. As a result the judges, who have a very heavy caseload, struggle to see any real added value in them and face incomprehension on the part of applicants who are disappointed at not being housed or rehoused as a direct outcome of their application. Confidence in the authorities’ actions suffers as a result.”
In its sixth report, published on 28 November 2012, the Monitoring Committee on Implementation of the Enforceable Right to Housing, noting that implementation of the Act in question was very uneven, began by calling on the President of the Republic to issue a reminder concerning the legislation. The Committee stressed that proper implementation of the legislation required various measures to which it referred in its report, but “implie[d] first and foremost that the obligation as to results be taken into account: implementation of the right to housing must mobilise society as a whole and the State, which is its guarantor, must make use of all its prerogatives in order to ensure that it is respected.”
The Committee first set out the main figures for 2011 concerning the enforceable right to housing:
“7,000 applications are made per month over the whole country.
Île-de-France accounts for 59 % of applications.
Outside the capital, seven départements have more than 100 applications per month; fourteen have between 30 and 100 applications; twenty-one départements have between 10 and 29; and fifty-one have fewer than 10 applications per month.
-  88 % of applications are for housing and 12% are for short-term accommodation. The share of applications concerning the latter is falling (15% in 2010).
-  32 % of applications are from people living alone, 34% from single-parent families, 6% from childless couples and 27% from couples with children. The refusal rate is rising (55%).
-  The number of households rehoused fell in the first half of 2012. Nationwide, 50% of favourable decisions resulted in rehousing; in Île-de-France, the figure was just 33.6%.
- There is a major problem as regards the implementation of decisions granting short-term accommodation, with only 29% of favourable decisions by the mediation commissions being implemented.”
In its report the Monitoring Committee emphasised the fact that failure to respect the right to accommodation was a “serious and manifestly unlawful infringement of a fundamental freedom”.
The Committee noted that since the entry into force of the DALO Act, most of the problems had been concentrated in Paris and the ÎledeFrance region. In Paris, the volume of favourable decisions given in scarcely six months was equivalent to over 100% of the allocation under all the different quotas put together, three times the prefecture’s quota, and more than six times the quota under the collective agreements in each département. Furthermore, some mayors in the suburbs of Paris were concerned about possible perverse effects of the DALO Act on the social mix in their municipalities. Municipalities which did not comply with the Solidarity and Urban Renewal Act did not come under pressure from the prefecture to accommodate persons qualifying under the DALO Act, whereas other municipalities like Argenteuil, Drancy and Sarcelles were obliged by the State to accommodate some of the poorest families. The Monitoring Committee recognised that some prefects were encountering difficulties in ensuring a social mix. However, in the Committee’s view, the fault lay not with the DALO Act but with the unequal distribution of social housing in the Île-de-France region.
Lastly, the committee set out four prerequisites for ensuring implementation of the enforceable right to housing: incorporating socialpolicy priorities in the allocation of rented social housing; identifying and quantifying the private dwellings that could be used; clarifying the rules and responsibilities regarding unfit housing; and placing the enforceable right to housing at the heart of State action in the Île-de-France region.
The Committee concluded its report by highlighting best practices demonstrating that it was possible to comply with the legislation.
The seventh report of the Monitoring Committee on the Implementation of the DALO Act, which was sent to the Prime Minister on 20 January 2015, confirms the trends pinpointed in the previous report.
According to the figures provided by the Directorate for Housing, Urban Development and Landscapes, the number of applications lodged since 1 January 2008 was 463,091 (at 13 February 2014). The number of applications to the mediation commissions was rising each year and had reached an average of 7,591 per month in 2013. 88% of applications concerned housing and 12% concerned stays in hostels or temporary accommodation. 7% of applicants had been rehoused prior to the mediation commission’s decision and 37% had received a favourable decision. However, the proportion of refusals had risen (55%).
In 2013 the five départements with the largest number of applications per 100,000 inhabitants were all in the Île-de-France region. They were Seine-Saint-Denis (709 applications per 100,000 inhabitants), Paris (527), Val de Marne (473), Val d’Oise (458) and Hauts-de-Seine (383).
There was a sharp drop in 2013 in the number of households rehoused following a favourable decision (26.8%, compared with 55.7% in 2012). However, there were substantial variations between regions: the figure was 71.4% in the Pays de la Loire, as against 17.3% in Île-de-France.
In total, between 1 January 2008 and 31 December 2013 the number of households granted priority and still in urgent need of rehousing was 54,394.