The case originated in an application (no. 69489/12) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four Lithuanian nationals, Ms I. Rinkevičienė (“the first applicant”), Ms E. Zakarevičienė (“the second applicant”), Ms O. Valainienė (“the third applicant”) and Ms E. Kosaitė-Čypienė (“the fourth applicant”), on 19 October 2012.
The applicants were represented by Mr R. Simaitis and Mr G. Ivoška, lawyers practising in Vilnius. The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently L. Urbaitė.
The applicants complained, under Article 8 of the Convention, that Lithuanian law had dissuaded healthcare professionals from assisting them when they had been giving birth at home.
On 20 December 2012 the application was communicated to the Government. The parties submitted observations on the admissibility and merits of the case on 6 May 2013 (the Government) and 4 July 2013 (the applicants).
The first applicant was born in 1983. She lives in Vilnius and has three children. The first time she gave birth was in 2009 in a public hospital in Vilnius. According to the applicant, the doctors therein were rude and rebuked her for her wish to give birth at home, and she felt humiliated and for a long time afterwards could not discuss her experience of giving birth at the hospital without tears coming to her eyes. For those reasons, in 2011 she gave birth to her second child at home, with the assistance of an unlicensed doula (pribuvėja), J.I.Š. That birth passed without complications and without the need for medical intervention.
After falling pregnant for a third time, and with no possibility of giving birth at home owing to the fact that criminal charges had been brought in respect of the above-mentioned doula, J.I.Š. (see paragraphs 3135 below), on 9 May 2012 the first applicant asked two public hospitals – one in Vilnius and one in Kaunas – to provide her with medical assistance during the home birth that she was planning. Both hospitals refused on the grounds that providing such assistance was prohibited under Lithuanian law – namely, under Medical Regulation MN 40:2006 (see paragraph 44 below).
On 13 June 2012 the first applicant asked the Ministry of Health to either guarantee the provision of such medical assistance during the birth of her third child or to amend the secondary legislation so that healthcare professionals could be allowed to provide such assistance. She considered that the participation of a healthcare professional in the birth was indispensable in order to guarantee the child’s and her safety. She indicated that she would give birth on 4-5 July 2012.
By a letter of 5 July 2012 the Ministry of Health replied that it had already received proposals from several non-governmental organisations that births outside hospitals be regulated. The Ministry then consulted numerous medical organisations – including the Lithuanian Midwives Association (Lietuvos akušerių sąjunga), the Lithuanian Fellowship of Midwives and Gynaecologists (Lietuvos akušerių ir ginekologų draugija), the Lithuanian Doctors Association (Lietuvos gydytojų sąjunga), the obstetrics and midwifery clinics of both Vilnius University and the Lithuanian University of Health Sciences – for their views on home birth. However, the specialists were unanimous in the conclusion that it was safest for a woman to give birth on a maternity ward, even when there was little risk of complications. It was impossible to foresee that any birth would pass without complications, and it was always possible that a woman giving birth or a newborn baby might need urgent medical assistance that could be provided only on a maternity ward.
The Ministry also pointed out that Lithuania had made great efforts to ensure that safe healthcare services were provided to women giving birth (gimdyvė), and that the conditions in maternity wards were designed to render them as close as possible to the home environment. For that purpose medical establishments were supplied with modern medical equipment; at the same time, a woman’s family members could be present during birth, and medical institutions were being encouraged to obtain the status of “newborn-friendly”. Over the previous twenty years Lithuania had achieved good results in significantly reducing the mortality rate of pregnant women, women giving birth and babies. To provide midwifery services at home, where there were not all the facilities necessary to be able to provide help to women giving birth and to the newborn, would constitute a step backwards. Similarly, to shift the legal and financial liability onto the healthcare specialist or healthcare institution in question would likewise not be acceptable. Moreover, the question of home birth concerned not only the woman’s, but also the State’s choice; at the same time, it was necessary to balance the interests of society and the rights of the individual. This view was supported by the Court’s judgment in Ternovszky v. Hungary, (no. 67545/09, § 24, 14 December 2010). Accordingly, the Ministry had no plans to initiate changes to secondary legislation that would regulate the provision of midwifery services at home.
The first applicant states in her application that on 11 July 2012 she “[gave] birth at home without qualified healthcare assistance and risked her and the baby’s life and health”.
The second applicant was born in 1979. She lives in Vilnius and has three children. She indicated in her application that she had given birth at home in 2006, 2008 and 2011, with the assistance of J.I.Š., the abovementioned doula. All three births had been “successful”.
The second applicant submitted that after she had fallen pregnant for a fourth time, and “not being able to safely give birth at home” owing to criminal charges having been brought in respect of the above-mentioned doula, J.I.Š. (see paragraph 6 above and paragraphs 31-35 below), she in April 2012 asked two public hospitals – one in Trakai and one in Vilnius – to provide her with medical assistance during the home birth that she was planning. Both hospitals refused, on the same grounds as those given in the first applicant’s case (see paragraph 6 above). Afterwards, the Ministry of Health also refused a request lodged by the second applicant for changes to be made to the relevant legislation, for reasons identical to those cited in respect of the first applicant’s case (see paragraphs 8 and 9 above).
In her application to the Court of 19 October 2012 the second applicant noted that she was “firmly resolved (tvirtai nusiteikusi) to give birth at home, irrespective of whether she would receive qualified assistance during the birth”. Her due date was 17 November 2012.
The third applicant was born in 1982. She lives in Vilnius. She noted in her application that she had given birth at home in 2009 and 2010, with the assistance of the unlicensed doula, J.I.Š. Both births had been “without complications [and] successful, and the children [were] growing up and developing healthily”.
In her application of 19 October 2012, the third applicant stated that – wishing to have more children and expecting to become pregnant as soon as possible, but also having learned of the criminal charges brought against the doula J.I.Š. – in spring 2012 she became an active member of the movement known as “gimimas.lt” (see paragraphs 26 and 31-35 below). The applicant stated to the Court that during her third pregnancy, having had positive experiences during the first two home births, she could not imagine herself giving birth outside her home, since this seemed to her “the safest, most tranquil [environment] ... for the most intimate of occasions”.
In September 2012 she asked three public hospitals in Vilnius to provide her with medical assistance during her home birth. All the hospitals refused, on the grounds that in Lithuania there was no legal basis on which to provide medical assistance during a home birth. The head of the Maternity and Obstetrics Clinics at the Vilnius University Hospital (Vilniaus universiteto Akušerijos ir ginekologijos klinika) also indicated that she did not have the right to oblige medical personnel to provide medical services outside the hospital. Nevertheless, she invited the third applicant to visit the maternity ward of those clinics in order to “get acquainted with the environment, [which is] a cosy [one] for a woman giving birth”.
On 21 September 2012 the third applicant then asked the Ministry of Health to either guarantee medical assistance at her home during the birth of her third child or to amend the relevant secondary legislation so that the healthcare professionals were permitted to provide such assistance. She also argued that if the two relevant pieces of secondary legislation were annulled by the Minister of Health (see paragraphs 42 and 44 below), there would remain no obstacles to women receiving medical assistance during home births.
This request was refused by the Ministry on 16 October 2012 for the same reasons as those given to the first and second applicants (see paragraphs 8 and 9 above). Given that in her request the third applicant insisted on relying on the Court’s judgment in Ternovszky (cited above), the Ministry of Health consulted the Ministry of Justice on the matter. The Ministry of Justice noted that the Court had found a violation in the abovementioned case because of its very particular and specific circumstances, which had led the Court to conclude that the situation in Hungary, in as much as it related to healthcare professionals providing assistance during home births, was surrounded by legal uncertainty that gave rise to arbitrariness. Nonetheless, the Court had acknowledged that, as concerned the provision of healthcare services, the States had a wide margin of appreciation, and regulation had to ensure a proper balance between societal interests and the right at stake. The Ministry of Justice pointed out that the Court’s judgment did not mean that a State was under a general obligation to establish a regulatory framework that would allow healthcare specialists to provide services to women giving birth at home. Taking into account the above, and given that Lithuanian law did not contain provisions regarding the provision of healthcare services to women giving birth at home, the Ministry concluded that a pregnant woman could not require that, upon her request, a healthcare institution or a healthcare specialist provide her with childbirth-related healthcare services outside a healthcare institution. Similarly, a healthcare institution or a specialist had no obligation to provide such services, even if a pregnant woman so wished. That being so, the Ministry also emphasised that the third applicant was welcome to visit the maternity wards in Lithuania and to choose the one which had the environment that most suited her.
In her application to the Court of 19 October 2012, the third applicant, like the second applicant, stated that she was “firmly resolved to give birth at home, irrespective of whether she would receive qualified assistance during the birth”. She was due to give birth in March 2013.
After having lodged the instant application with the Court, the third applicant also started administrative court proceedings in respect of the Ministry’s refusal to grant her request for the changes in secondary legislation (see paragraphs 17 and 18 above).
On 8 April 2013 the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court rejected the third applicant’s complaint. The court noted that there were no legal instruments explicitly regulating home births in Lithuania. Therefore, the third applicant’s assertion that the two legal instruments adopted by the Minister of Health (see paragraphs 42 and 44 below) directly prohibited home birth was erroneous and unsubstantiated. Those legal instruments only regulated birth in hospitals, not home births.
On 22 January 2014 the Supreme Administrative Court upheld the first-instance court’s decision. It rejected the third applicant’s argument that the absence of any legal regulation allowing the provision of healthcare services during home births constituted a breach of the right to respect for one’s private life. The court referred to Article 52 of the Law on the Healthcare System (see paragraph 39 below), which guaranteed a patient’s right to privacy. For the court, such legal regulation thus empowered the third applicant to give birth in a specialised medical institution of her choice, which was equipped in accordance with the requirements for such institutions, so that the health of the mother and the newborn would be protected and they could receive immediate high-quality and effective help, should any danger arise to their health or lives during childbirth. The Supreme Administrative Court held that such legal regulation maintained a balance between two constitutional values: privacy and the protection of health.
The Supreme Administrative Court also referred to the content of the Ministry of Health letter of 16 October 2012 (see paragraph 18 above), wherein that institution had reminded the third applicant that her family members could be present during the birth of her child and had offered her the opportunity to visit hospitals with maternity wards and to choose the most suitable one. Accordingly, the third applicant had the right and possibility, guaranteed by law, to choose the most suitable medical institution and to state her wishes regarding conditions of privacy and their scope (dėl privatumo sąlygų ir apimties). There was no information in the file to the effect that the third applicant had ever approached any of the maternity wards or that she had faced obstacles in choosing how to make use of that right to privacy (for example, by requesting certain services, such as a private room) and then instituted court proceedings. One also had to bear in mind the fact that privacy in respect of the third applicant’s personal life (which she had sought by demanding to be provided with medical assistance during her home birth) could not be seen as having a greater value than the health of her and the newborn child, for the purpose of which the State had established a system of personal healthcare and qualified medical assistance.
The fourth applicant was born in 1975. She lives in Vilnius. The fourth applicant stated that she had given birth at home in 2001, 2003 and 2011, with the assistance of doula J.I.Š.
In her application to the Court the fourth applicant also stated that even though she was of “reproductive age”, she did not dare to become pregnant for the fourth time, owing to the charges pending in respect of J.I.Š., “while the issue of giving birth at home remained legally unregulated in Lithuania” (kol Lietuvoje nėra teisiškai sureguliuotas gimdymo namuose klausimas).
In 2012 a non-governmental organisation for promoting childbirth at home, “gimimas.lt”, was established. In April 2012 it published an Internet press release calling on society and the State authorities, including the Ministry of Health, to discuss the question of home birth. The third and fourth applicants were among those who initiated that NGO and were its active participants.
In April 2012 the Association of Lithuanian Psychologists (Lietuvos psichologų sąjunga) asked the Ministry of Health to initiate changes in legislation to permit midwives and obstetrician-gynaecologists to provide medical assistance to women choosing to give birth outside hospital.
On 26 April 2012, at the Seimas, the Minister of Health was asked to comment about the possibility of providing medical assistance during home births. He replied that his opinion was categorical and negative; he also asked the non-governmental organisations that promoted that issue to be cautious and responsible. The Minister noted that at that time there were criminal investigations pending concerning “impostors” (apsišaukėliai) who had assisted with home births at which babies had died and mothers had suffered serious injuries. He pointed out that it was precisely owing to those criminal investigations that various requests concerning assistance for home births had started reaching the Ministry.
In April and May 2012 a group of non-governmental organisations asked the Lithuanian Midwives Association and the Lithuanian Fellowship of Midwives and Gynaecologists for their views on home birth.  In its written reply of 17 May 2012, the Lithuanian Midwives Association stated its disapproval of the prospect of midwives assisting with home births. On 19 June 2012 the Lithuanian Fellowship of Midwives and Gynaecologists replied that despite significant worldwide changes in the sphere of maternity care, the question of planned home births remained sensitive and controversial.
According to publicly available information, after the death of a baby born at home in June 2011, the police started a criminal investigation. Eventually, the authorities started examining the legality of the actions of a number of persons assisting with home births. The Government were informed by the police that in respect of those criminal proceedings the applicants only had the status of witnesses.
On an unspecified date the prosecutors started criminal proceedings under Article 202 of the Criminal Code (Unauthorised Engagement in an Economic Activity, see paragraph 48 below) in respect of doula J.I.Š., who, despite having no medical training whatsoever, between 1999 and 2011 on thirty-six occasions had assisted at home births. The scope of her actions at those home births had varied between merely examining newborn babies to performing certain childbirth-related actions.
By a judgment of 23 December 2016, the Vilnius City District Court acquitted J.I.Š., holding that she had revived the old profession of doula, which although not regulated in Lithuania, was also not forbidden by law. The court considered that since J.I.Š. had had no medical training and had not acted as an obstetrician-gynaecologist or as a midwife, or as a medical professional in general, she could not be liable under Article 202 § 2 of the Criminal Code.
On 19 July 2017 the Vilnius Regional Court overturned the lower court’s judgment and convicted J.I.Š. under Article 202 § 2 of the Criminal Code. The appellate court held that while taking part in home births J.I.Š. had been providing healthcare services that fell within the competence of an obstetrician-gynaecologist or a midwife, whereas J.I.Š. had neither a medical education nor a licence to provide such services. By acting in such a manner J.I.Š. had acted in breach of the existing legal regulations, under which the only specialists who could assist with births were obstetriciangynaecologists and midwives and birth with such assistance could take place (gimdymai priimami) only in a maternity ward. It followed that J.I.Š. had been engaged in prohibited medical activities. She was sentenced to six months of deprivation of liberty, suspended for one year.
J.I.Š. lodged an appeal on points of law.
By a ruling of 12 June 2018, an enlarged chamber (seven judges) of the Supreme Court noted that activities relating to home births, as a phenomenon, had been neither criminalised nor forbidden by law in Lithuania. Accordingly, the appellate court had erred in holding that J.I.Š. had been engaged in unauthorised professional activity, as understood under Article 202 § 2 of the Criminal Code. That notwithstanding, J.I.Š.’s activity, although it had not been prohibited (jos vykdyta veikla nėra uždrausta), had been unlawful (neteisėta). However, the Supreme Court found that the bill of indictment had failed to establish the precise amount of income that J.I.Š. had received for her activities. It was therefore impossible to establish the element of entrepreneurship, which was necessary in order to hold a person criminally liable under Article 202 § 1 of the Criminal Code. She therefore had to be acquitted.
The Constitution reads:
“The State shall take care of the health of people and shall guarantee medical aid and services for a person in the event of sickness. The procedure for providing medical aid to citizens free of charge at State medical establishments shall be established by law ...”
The Law on the Rights of Patients and Compensation for Damage to Their Health (Pacientų teisių ir žalos sveikatai atlyginimo įstatymas), as worded between 1 March 2010 and 18 October 2013, read:
“1. The patient shall have the right, in accordance with the procedure established by law, to choose a healthcare institution.
The patient shall have the right to choose a healthcare professional. The procedure for choosing a healthcare professional shall be established by the head of the healthcare institution [in question] ...”
“1. The patient has the right to obtain information about the services provided by a healthcare institution, [together with] the prices thereof and the possibilities to use them ...
The patient has the right to obtain information about the healthcare specialist who provides him or her with those services (such as his or her name, surname, and post) and information about the specialist’s professional qualifications.
The patient ... has the right to receive information about his or her state of health, diagnosis, methods of treatment applied in the healthcare institution [in question] or alternatives known to the doctor, potential risks, complications, side-effects ... and other circumstances that may have an effect on the acceptance or rejection by the patient of the proposed treatment, as well as about the consequences of rejecting the proposed treatment ...”
“1. The privacy of patients shall be inviolable. Information concerning the facts of patients’ personal existence may be collected only with those patients’ consent and if this shall be deemed necessary for diagnosing the illness, treatment or nursing ...”
The Law on Health Insurance (Sveikatos draudimo įstatymas), as worded at the relevant time, read:
“4. Persons insured with State funds ... are:
...
4) women who are on pregnancy and maternity leave, as well as unemployed women during pregnancy ..., before childbirth ... and after childbirth.”
“1. The following personal healthcare services are covered by the compulsory health insurance fund budget: preventive medical care, medical care, medical rehabilitation, nursing ...
...
The compulsory health insurance fund budget covers:
...
1) primary, secondary and tertiary personal healthcare services...”
The Law on the Healthcare System (Sveikatos sistemos įstatymas) provides that healthcare services provided to pregnant women are paid by the State (Article 47 § 2 (7)). The Law also provides that information about a person’s health is private and may not be disclosed (Article 52).
The Law on Medical Practice (Medicinos praktikos įstatymas) at the relevant time read:
“1. A doctor who has a valid licence issued in accordance with the procedure established by this Law may engage in the practice of medicine in the Republic of Lithuania.
The doctor can practise medicine only in a healthcare institution that has a licence to provide healthcare services...”
The Law on Nursery Practice and Midwifery Practice (Slaugos praktikos ir akušerijos praktikos įstatymas) at the relevant time provided:
“1. The illegal practice of nursing and midwifery – an activity, when a person:
1) is engaged in the general practice of nursing and midwifery without a valid licence ...”
“1. A midwife has the following rights:
1) to pursue the practice of a midwife;
2) to refuse to provide midwifery services if working conditions pose a real danger to the health or life of the patient or of the midwife, except for cases when indispensable medical assistance is provided;
...
4) to be engaged in nursing or midwifery, being in employment relation with a legal person that does not have a healthcare licence allowing the provision of adequate nursing and midwifery services;
5) to be engaged in the nursing or midwifery practice, not being in employment relationship with a legal person which provides healthcare services.”
The Regulation on Healthcare Procedures for Pregnant Women, Women Giving Birth and Newborn Babies (Nėščiųjų, gimdyvių ir naujagimių sveikatos priežiūros tvarka), approved by the Minister of Health by order no. 117 of 15 March 1999, read that healthcare institutions were divided into several levels. Level I healthcare institutions provided outpatient perinatal care, including consultations, physical examinations and assessments of pregnancy risk. The right to provide primary perinatal care was granted to a midwife, the obstetrician-gynaecologist and a general practitioner.
Level II A healthcare institutions (district hospitals) provided inpatient healthcare services for women giving birth who had low perinatal risk, as well as healthcare services to newborns without significant pathologyrelated issues. Level II B healthcare institutions (“multi-profile” regional hospitals) provided obstetric and neonatal consultations, as well as inpatient healthcare services in cases of high perinatal risk during pregnancy and labour that did not call for specialised consultations or inpatient care at Level III hospitals. Level III healthcare institutions (university hospitals) provided specialised consultations and inpatient obstetric and neonatal healthcare services.
Qualified medical assistance for prepartum and postpartum women and newborns could only be provided in healthcare institutions that provided Level II and Level III healthcare services – that is to say hospitals. Such hospitals were obliged to ensure that there were always obstetriciangynaecologists on duty who could provide a twenty-four-hour service, as well as the assistance of a neonatologist, anaesthesiologist and other medical personnel at any time.
As specified by the Government, in 2013 there were thirty-four Level II and Level III medical institutions in Lithuania (including one private clinic) that provided inpatient perinatal and neonatal healthcare services.
The Government also noted that three types of medical personnel were competent to provide monitoring assistance to a pregnant woman in Lithuania: a general practitioner (bendrosios pagalbos gydytojas) and an obstetrician-gynaecologist (akušeris-ginekologas) – both of these being doctors – and a midwife (akušeris) – a specialist type of nurse who provided assistance to pregnant women, women giving birth and postpartum women.
As concerns the types of medical personnel competent to provide assistance to women giving birth, postpartum woman and newborns, those were an obstetrician-gynaecologist, a neonatologist – both of these being doctors – and a midwife.
On 3 April 2006 the Minister of Health Care approved Medical Regulation MN 40:2006 on the rights, duties, competence and liability of a midwife (Akušeris. Teisės, pareigos, kompetencija ir atsakomybė). The regulation provided that a midwife could practice at a healthcare institution that had a licence to provide gynaecological services. A midwife also could provide certain services at a patient’s home, except for assisting at a regular birth (priimti normalų gimdymą).
On 1 February 2017 the Ministry of Health set up a working group in order to consider the possibility of allowing home births in Lithuania. The working group included a number of experts in the field from the Lithuanian healthcare institutions. It also included the fourth applicant as the head of the Natural Family Planning Association (Natūralaus šeimos planavimo asociacija) non-governmental organisation.
On 28 June 2018 the Seimas amended the Law on Nursery Practice and Midwifery Practice by adding point 6 to Article 12 § 1. The law, in force as of 1 January 2019, reads:
“1. A midwife has the following rights:
1) to pursue the practice of a midwife;
2) to refuse to provide midwifery services if working conditions pose a real danger to the health or life of the patient or of the midwife, except for cases when indispensable medical assistance must be provided;
...
6) under the rules established by the Minister of Health, to provide to an expectant mother the services of a midwife at home, provided there is an absence of high pregnancy risks, a list of those risks having been established by the Minister of Health.”
Following that amendment, on 3 January 2019 the Minister of Health approved the Rules on the Provision of Maternity Services at Home Births (Dėl gimdymo namuose priežiūros paslaugos teikimo tvarkos aprašo patvirtinimo). It establishes the procedure for the provision of home birth services, the requirements for healthcare institutions and midwives providing assistance at home births, and lists the medical equipment needed to provide such services. The rules specify that a pregnant woman must submit a request to a healthcare institution for assistance during her home birth; they also provide that for such assistance to be granted, it must first be established that there are no risk factors in respect of the pregnancy in question. A woman opting for a home birth may choose the midwife who will assist her. Should a risk subsequently be determined during home birth in respect of the life or health of the woman giving birth, the foetus or the newborn, or should the woman so request, the healthcare institution must organise their transfer from home to hospital, and such a transfer should take no longer that thirty minutes. The midwife is also under an obligation to visit the mother and newborn within three days of the birth.
The Criminal Code at the relevant time provided:
“1. A person who undertakes economic, commercial, financial or professional activity in the form of a business or on a large scale without holding a licence (authorisation) to engage in the activity for which [such authorisation] is required or by other unlawful means
shall be punished by [being sentenced to] community service or with a fine or by restriction of liberty or by imprisonment for a term of up to four years.
A person who engages in prohibited economic, commercial, financial or professional activity
shall be punished by imprisonment for a term of up to four years.
A legal entity shall also be held liable for acts provided in this Article.”
The relevant international and comparative law material is set out in paragraphs 62-68 of Dubská and Krejzová v. the Czech Republic ([GC], nos. 28859/11 and 28473/12, 15 November 2016).