The case originated in an application (no. 19206/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Albanian national, Mr Ramiz Dauti
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr G. Terpo and Mr R. Islami, lawyers practising in Tirana and . The Albanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms S. Meneri.
The applicant complained under Articles 6 § 1 and 13 of the Convention of a violation of his right of access to a court in order to challenge decisions given by administrative bodies.
On 23 June 2005 the President of the Fourth Section of the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it was decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant and the Government each filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1).

THE FACTS
The applicant was born in 1947 and lives in Tirana.
On 14 April 1992 the applicant suffered a serious accident at work and was unable to continue working. There is no documented information concerning the applicant’s state of health from 1992 to 2001.
The applicant was admitted to hospital on an unspecified date. On 13 March 2001 he was released from hospital with a medical report recommending that he apply for recognition of his incapacity to work (fletë drejtimi për K.E.M.P.) and for the corresponding benefits.
On 14 March 2001 the applicant applied to the District Medical Examination Commission on Capacity for Work (Komisioni Mjekësor i Caktimit të Aftësisë për Punë (K.M.C.A.P. Dibër) – “the District Commission”) seeking to have his degree of incapacity determined and to be awarded benefits. By decision of 28 September 2001, the Commission recognised the applicant’s incapacity for work with effect from 14 April 1992. However, it decided that he would be eligible for the corresponding benefits only for the period from 16 March 2001 to 30 March 2002, and granted him Category 4 incapacity status on the grounds that he was considered to have suffered an accident outside work.
On 1 October 2001 the applicant lodged an appeal with the Medical Examination Appeals Commission on Capacity for Work (K.M.C.A.P. Epror –“the Appeals Commission”) contesting the District Commission’s decision in part. He argued that, in considering that he had suffered an accident outside work, the District Commission had erroneously assessed the circumstances of the case. He claimed that he should have been granted Category 2 incapacity status instead of Category 4.
On 30 January 2003 the Appeals Commission revoked the District Commission’s decision in its entirety. It declared the applicant fit for work and ineligible for incapacity benefits.
On an unspecified date the applicant requested the Dibra District Court to verify and recognise that the accident of 14 April 1992 had occurred at his place of work.
On 30 May 2003, on the basis of witness statements and medical reports, the Dibra District Court found that the applicant had suffered an accident on 14 April 1992 during working hours. The judgment became final and binding on 16 July 2003.
On an unspecified date the applicant initiated civil proceedings with the Tirana District Court to challenge the lawfulness of the Appeals Commission’s decision.
On 9 June 2003 the District Court dismissed the applicant’s action on the grounds that, pursuant to section 35 of the Social Security Act, the decisions of the Appeals Commission were final and binding and not subject to scrutiny by the courts (see paragraph 24 below).
The applicant appealed to the Court of Appeal. He claimed a violation of his right of access to a court in order to challenge the fairness of the proceedings before the Appeals Commission. In addition, the applicant argued that by refusing to exercise jurisdiction in the matter, the District Court had discriminated against him vis-à-vis other claimants who, having challenged the unfairness of the proceedings before the Appeals Commission, had obtained redress from the courts (see paragraphs 34 and 35 below).
On 9 October 2003 the Court of Appeal upheld the District Court’s decision, confirming that the outcome of the procedure before the Appeals Commission was final and not subject to challenge before the courts. In so far as the applicant’s complaint that he had been discriminated against was concerned, it found that the District Court had based its decision on the law and not on precedents. Lastly, the court disagreed with the applicant’s argument about the alleged incompetence of the Appeals Commission’s members and found that their professional abilities were satisfactory.
On 5 March 2004 the Supreme Court’s Civil Bench dismissed an appeal by the applicant.
On an unspecified date the applicant appealed to the , challenging the lower courts’ decisions. He claimed an infringement of his right of access to a court in order to challenge the Appeals Commission’s decision before the domestic courts and obtain redress for the alleged unfairness of the proceedings before the Appeals Commission. Moreover, he contested the competence of the Appeals Commission’s members.
On 23 December 2004 the  upheld the lower courts’ decisions. The  did not address the applicant’s complaint about the lack of judicial control of the Appeals Commission’s decision. It pointed out that the Court of Appeal had nevertheless ruled on the issue of the impartiality of the Commission’s members. It had concluded that they were appointed by the Ministry of Health on the basis of their professional qualities, qualifications and experience. Hence, the applicant’s appeal was unsubstantiated.
On 10 June 2005 the applicant was issued with a medical report recommending that he apply for Category 2 incapacity status (fletë drejtimi për K.E.M.P.). On 22 July 2005 the Dibër District Commission found the applicant fully unfit for work with effect from 16 March 2001 and awarded him incapacity benefits for the period between 30 June 2005 and 30 June 2006. The Appeals Commission, following an appeal by the applicant, modified the period so that it ran from 20 November 2005 to 30 May 2006.
On 29 June 2006 the Appeals Commission extended the applicant’s incapacity status from 1 June 2006 to 1 January 2007.
By a certificate of the District Commission of 21 June 2007, the applicant’s incapacity was extended for the period from 1 January 2007 to 1 January 2008.
The Social Security Act established the Medical Commission on Capacity for Work, (KMCAP), which determines claimants’ incapacity for work. Section 35 of the Act provides that “the [Commission’s] decision shall indicate the causes of incapacity for work, its starting date and the degree of incapacity. A claimant may lodge an appeal with the Appeals Commission against the District Commission’s decision. The Appeals Commission’s decision as regards the assessment of incapacity for work shall be final.”
Section 71 provides for the establishment of the  (“the ISS”) which governs and administers social security in the country. The ISS comprises two main organs: the administrative council and the director general. The administrative council is the highest executive body and is composed of twelve members (six representatives from the Council of Ministers – from the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Labour, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Justice, the ISS and the Savings Bank –, three representatives from employers’ organisations and three representatives from the trade unions). The director general is appointed (zgjidhet) by the administrative council.
Section 77 provides that the administrative council must submit to the Council of Ministers, through the Ministry of Finance, an annual financial report (income and expenditure) and a budget sheet for the ISS.
Section 86 states that appeals against decisions on benefits may be lodged with the regional directorates. Appeals against decisions of the regional offices may be lodged with the headquarters of the ISS and subsequently with the domestic courts.
The Joint Regulation supplements, amongst other provisions, section 35 of the Social Security Act. The Commission is run by and reports to the ISS. It operates at regional level (“the District Commissions”) and at national level (“the Appeals Commission”).
The District Commissions (KMCAP e rajonit) are composed of three or five specialised medical doctors from the fields of cardiology, neurology, psychiatry, pathology, etc., who possess at least five years’ experience, in addition to the ISS doctor. They are appointed for an undefined period by the ISS regional directorates. The appointment is endorsed by the head of the health unit under whose supervision the appointed doctors work. Any change to the membership of one of the District Commissions must be approved by the ISS. Members’ work is remunerated in proportion to their attendance. The District Commission examines the claimant’s request, the medical and financial documents, the person’s incapacity for work and the level of incapacity. It decides on the cause of incapacity for work, the starting time and duration and the possibility of re-examination/review and physical and occupational training. The Commission considers persons who are unable to work to be entitled to full incapacity benefits if the level of incapacity is equal to or exceeds 67%.
The Appeals Commission (KMCAP epror) deals with appeals against decisions of the District Commissions. The Appeals Commission is composed of specialised medical doctors from the fields of cardiology, neurology, psychiatry and pathology. The membership is determined by the ISS and approved by the Ministry of Health. Members are appointed for an undefined period of time. As a rule of thumb, the Appeals Commission is chaired by the head of a health unit. Members’ work is remunerated in proportion to their attendance. Decisions are final and binding.
The joint regulation does not contain any provisions concerning the dismissal or resignation of members of either the District Commissions or the Appeals Commission.
Articles 324-333 of the Code of Civil Procedure regulate the adjudication of administrative disputes. Article 324 provides that a party may bring an action before a court with a view to revoking or amending an administrative decision. The party should argue that the decision is unlawful and that his or her own interests and rights have been violated directly or indirectly, individually or collectively. An appeal may be lodged against a court decision with a higher court.
Articles 18 and 137 of the Code of Administrative Procedure sanction the principle of judicial control over administrative decisions, provided that all domestic administrative remedies have been exhausted.
The Tirana District Court, by decision no. 1522 of 30 April 2001, upheld a claimant’s civil action seeking annulment of the decisions of the District Commission and the Appeals Commission, which had revoked the claimant’s incapacity for work after nine years of recognition (from 1991 to 2000). The court appointed an expert group to medically examine the claimant and finally rejected the Appeals Commission’s decision.
Following an appeal by the ISS, relying on section 35 of the Social Security Act, the Court of Appeal upheld the District Court’s decision on 6 November 2001. The Court of Appeal circumvented the wording of section 35 of the Social Security Act by relying on section 86 of the Act.