The case originated in an application (no. 35685/97) against the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a national of the United Kingdom,  Simon John Mills (“the applicant”), on 9 April 1997.
The applicant was represented before the Court by Mr J. Mackenzie, a solicitor practising in London. The United Kingdom Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms R. Mandal, of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
The applicant mainly complains about his court-martial proceedings, submitting that he did not have a fair hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law.
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
The application was allocated to the Third Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1 of the Rules of Court.
By a decision of 5 December 2000 the Chamber declared the application partly admissible and no observations were submitted thereafter.
On 13 February 1994 the applicant, who was a Lance Corporal in the British Army stationed at Munster in Germany, was involved in a disturbance in a bar during which another British soldier was seriously assaulted.
On 8 December 1994 he was charged (pursuant to section 70 of the Army Act 1955) with wounding with intent contrary to section 18 of the Offences Against the Person Act 1861. He was formally remanded for trial by general court-martial by his commanding officer on the same day.
The court-martial took place in Germany on 24-27 April 1995. The applicant was found guilty as charged and he was sentenced to 4 years’ imprisonment, to dismissal from the service and to reduction to the ranks.
On 3 June 1995 the conviction and sentence were confirmed by the Confirming Officer and on 8 September 1995 the applicant’s petition to the Army Board was rejected.
On 12 January 1996 the applicant applied to a single judge of the Courts-Martial Appeal Court for leave to appeal to that court and he was granted leave to appeal together with legal aid. The full Courts-Martial Appeal Court rejected his appeal on 8 November 1996.
The relevant provisions of the Army Act 1955 are set out in the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in the Findlay case (Findlay v. the United Kingdom judgment of 25 February 1997, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1997-I, §§ 32-51).
Central to the system under the 1955 Act was the role of the “convening officer”. This officer (who had to be of a specified rank and in command of a body of the regular forces or of the command within which the person to be tried was serving) assumed responsibility for every case to be tried by court-martial. He or she had the final decision on the nature and detail of the charges to be brought and the type of court-martial required, and was responsible for convening the court-martial.
The convening officer would draw up a convening order, which would specify, inter alia, the date, place and time of the trial, the name of the president and the details of the other members, all of whom he could appoint. Failing the appointment of a judge advocate by the Judge Advocate General’s Office, the convening officer could appoint one. He also appointed, or directed a commanding officer to appoint, the prosecuting officer.
Prior to the hearing, the convening officer was responsible for sending an abstract of the evidence to the prosecuting officer and to the judge advocate, and could indicate the passages which might be inadmissible. He procured the attendance at trial of all witnesses to be called for the prosecution. When charges were withdrawn, the convening officer’s consent was normally obtained, although it was not necessary in all cases, and a plea to a lesser charge could not be accepted from the accused without it. He had also to ensure that the accused had a proper opportunity to prepare his defence, legal representation if required and the opportunity to contact the defence witnesses, and was responsible for ordering the attendance at the hearing of all witnesses “reasonably requested” by the defence.
The convening officer could dissolve the court-martial either before or during the trial, when required in the interests of the administration of justice. In addition, he could comment on the proceedings of a court-martial. Those remarks would not form part of the record of the proceedings and would normally be communicated in a separate minute to the members of the court, although in an exceptional case, where a more public instruction was required in the interests of discipline, they could be made known in the orders of the command.
The convening officer usually acted as confirming officer also. A court-martial’s findings were not effective until confirmed by the confirming officer, who was empowered to withhold confirmation or substitute, postpone or remit in whole or in part any sentence.
Since the applicant’s trial, the law has been amended by the Armed Forces Act 1996 (see the above-mentioned Findlay v. the United Kingdom judgment, at §§ 52-57).