The case originated in nine applications (nos. 29957/14, 29961/14, 53980/15, 10583/16, 10796/16, 10803/16, 19980/16, 35675/16 and 38237/16) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by twelve Syrian nationals. The details of the applicants’ individual cases are set out in the Appendix.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
.  The applicants alleged, in particular, that their being returned to Syria would breach their rights guaranteed by Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention, and that they had had no effective remedies in respect of these complaints, in breach of Article 13 of the Convention. Two of the applicants, M.S.A. and R.K., also complained under Article 3 of the Convention that they had been detained in inhuman and degrading conditions in a detention centre for foreigners. All the applicants also alleged that their detention in Russia had been in breach of Article 5 of the Convention. Furthermore, one of the applicants, H.R., complained under Article 6 of the Convention that he had not been provided with a lawyer during the administrative proceedings concerning his removal, and other applicants, B.Z., H.D. and S.W., complained that their right to meet with their lawyer whilst in detention had been restricted, in breach of Article 34 of the Convention.
On various dates the Court decided to indicate to the Russian Government, under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, that the applicants should not be expelled to Syria for the duration of the proceedings before the Court. The applicants’ cases were also granted priority (under Rule 41) and confidentiality (under Rule 33), and the applicants were granted anonymity (under Rule 47 § 4).
Between 19 March 2015 and 13 September 2016 the applications were communicated to the Government.
On 16 June 2017 the Government was informed that the Court envisaged assigning the applications to a Committee of three judges. On 30 June 2017 the Government objected to the applications being examined by a Committee. After considering the Government’s objection, the Court rejected it. In accordance with Article 26 § 1 of the Convention as amended by Protocol No. 14, the applications were assigned to a Committee of three judges. It was also decided that the Committee would rule on the admissibility and merits of the applications at the same time.
The applicants are Syrian nationals. Their initials, dates of birth, application numbers and the other details of their cases are set out in the Appendix. At the time of lodging their applications the applicants were detained at detention centres for foreign nationals run by the Federal Migration Service (hereinafter “the FMS”) in different towns in Russia.
The facts of the cases, as submitted by the applicants, may be summarised as follows.
On various dates between 2012 and 2016 the applicants came to Russia on various visas and did not leave when the period of their stay had expired. They were apprehended by the police and/or officers of the FMS in various regions in Russia for breaching the applicable immigration regulations, and placed in detention centres for foreigners (see the Appendix for the applicants’ dates of detention and details of the relevant proceedings). The domestic courts in the respective regions examined their cases and found the applicants guilty of breaching various immigration regulations. Some of the applicants lodged appeals, but they were rejected by the domestic courts, whereas other applicants eventually had their expulsion orders quashed by the appeal courts. One of the applicants did not appeal against his expulsion order (see the Appendix for the details of individual cases)
.  All the applicants sought to obtain refugee status and/or temporary asylum in Russia. Some of the applicants voluntarily withdrew their requests and others’ requests were rejected, first by the FMS and then by the domestic courts which examined the appeals against the FMS’s refusals. Only Y.A.’s request for temporary asylum was granted (see the Appendix for details).
.  According to the information provided by their lawyers, while the proceedings before the Court were ongoing, six of the applicants (M.S.A., R.K., H.R., B.Z., S.W. and A.A.) left Russia of their own volition on various dates to go to third countries, where they settled (see the Appendix for details).
Between 24 January 2014 and 10 June 2014 M.S.A. and R.K. were detained in a detention centre for foreign nationals run by the FMS in Krasnoye Selo, in the Leningrad Region.
.  According to their submissions, the centre was based in an eight-storey building with windows covered with grills; five of the storeys were designed to accommodate 176 people in total. Each storey comprised around ten to eleven cells. The centre was severely overcrowded during the whole period of the applicants’ detention. In particular, according to a report of the Human Rights Ombudsman in Saint Petersburg, on 26 February 2014 the centre accommodated 400 foreign nationals.
.  Both applicants were detained in cell no. 511, located on the fifth storey, which measured around 9 square metres and was designed to accommodate six people. All places in the cell were occupied during the whole period of their detention. Thus, each detainee had no more than 1.5 square metres of personal space, despite the statutory requirement that each detainee in a detention centre for foreign nationals have at least 4.5 square metres of personal space. The cell was furnished with three bunk beds and two bedside tables. There was no dining table in the cell.
.  The food was of poor quality, with no fruit or vegetables, and included pork, which the applicants could not eat for religious reasons. No alternative food was offered instead of pork, so they were deprived of any meal when pork was served. There were no kitchen and dining facilities in the centre. Food was delivered to the centre in containers and served cold in the cells. Detainees were forced to eat on their beds because there were no tables in the cells. This shortage in food was exacerbated by arbitrary restrictions on the contents of food parcels delivered from outside. Detainees were not allowed to receive fermented milk products, homecooked food, fruit or vegetables.
.  Detainees had no free access to drinking water or devices to boil tap water. The cell where M.S.A. and R.K. were detained was only lit by one light bulb, and the detainees were not allowed to switch on the light after 10 p.m.
.  The applicants and other inmates could move around on that storey to get to sanitary facilities, but they were not allowed to leave the storey or enter other detainees’ cells. At the two ends of the common corridor there were bathrooms, each equipped with three lavatories, two washbasins and two showers. The storey was under the control of a dozen “chosen” inmates who, with the tacit consent of the centre’s administration, dictated their rules to others and created an atmosphere of fear, violence and extortion. One of the bathrooms was for their exclusive use. The other seventy to eighty inmates had to use the other bathroom.
.  Outdoor exercise was sporadic and lasted around 15-20 minutes. In winter, the applicants did not go outside, as they did not possess winter clothes. In the period April-May 2014 they were able to enjoy outdoor exercise only four times. Outdoor exercise took place in a closed yard measuring around 50 metres in length and 10 metres in width. There was gravel on the ground, and there were no benches, plants or sports equipment.
The facility did not offer any activities, and no library was available.
During the administrative hearing concerning his removal from Russia on 26 February 2016, H.R. was not represented by a lawyer.
According to the lawyer representing B.Z., H.D. and S.W., on 25 March 2015 he was not allowed to meet with them in the detention centre.
The relevant domestic law and practice relating to the expulsion and detention of foreign nationals in Russia, refugee status, and temporary asylum, and the situation of Syrian nationals in the country, is summarised in the Court’s leading judgment in the case of L.M. and Others v. Russia, nos. 40081/14 and 2 others, §§ 61– 75, 15 October 2015, and in the follow-up case of S.K. v. Russia, no. 52722/15, §§ 23-41, 14 February 2017.
A summary of the recent (issued between November 2015 and October 2016) international and national reports concerning the humanitarian situation in Syria is provided in the case of S.K.v. Russia, cited above, §§ 46-47.