The case originated in an application (no. 63501/00) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Vladimir Nikolayevich Konovalov (“the applicant”), on 12 September 2000.
The applicant was represented by Mrs L. F. Konovalova. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. A. Laptev, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged that the failure to enforce final judgments in his favour was incompatible with the Convention.
The application was allocated to the First Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
By a decision of 27 May 2004 the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1). The Chamber having decided, after consulting the parties, that no hearing on the merits was required (Rule 59 § 3 in fine), the parties replied in writing to each other’s observations.
On 1 November 2004 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). This case was assigned to the newly composed First Section (Rule 52 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1953 and lives in Slavyansk-na-Kubani in the Krasnodar Region.
The applicant is a former member of the armed forces. In 1993, after serving on the , he retired and moved to Slavyansk-na-Kubani in the Krasnodar Region. He applied to the Slavyansk Town Council for State housing aid. He was put on a waiting list but, since that had no effect, he brought proceedings against the Town Council in the .
On 31 March 1998 the  received a letter from the President of the  (no. 03-06, dated 11 March 1998). The letter, which was distributed to the presidents of all the town and district courts in the region, recommended that, in order to allow the local authorities to function properly, the courts refrain from seizing their bank accounts when giving judgments in cases brought against them by individuals for recovery of pensions and social benefits including State housing aid, and that they provide, in the operative provisions of judgments in such cases, that payments be made as soon as funds were received from an appropriate State budget (district, town, regional or federal) and in the order set out on a waiting list drawn up by the defendant authority.
On 6 April 1998 the  examined the case. The Town Council submitted at the hearing that the applicant was entitled by law to State housing aid for retired military personnel. However, for the past few years it had not received any funds from the federal budget for that purpose. The court found that the applicant, as a retired serviceman, met the statutory requirements for entitlement to State housing aid financed by the federal budget. In the operative provisions of its judgment of 6 April 1998 the court ordered:
“that the sum of 113,040 roubles be recovered from the Slavyansk-na-Kubani Town Council in the Krasnodar Region in favour of Vladimir Nikolayevich Konovalov, as a person discharged from military service and transferred to the reserve, as a grant for the purchase of housing;
that payment be made from the federal budget of the , upon receipt of funds from the budget and subject to the waiting list.
The judgment may be appealed against to the  through the  within a ten-day term.”
The authority did not appeal and the judgment of 6 April 1998 became final on 17 April 1998. On 19 May 1998 the court issued a writ of execution. According to the applicant, enforcement proceedings were initiated on the same day.
On 4 and 17 December 1998 the Ministry of Finance and the local authority responded to an enquiry from the applicant, informing him about the lack of federal funds for the payment of State housing aid to him.
As the judgment had not been executed, the applicant brought an application for index-linking of the award in line with an increase in the market prices of immovable property. At a hearing before the  the defendant town council did not object to the applicant’s claim. In a judgment of 19 April 2000 the  increased the amount awarded to the applicant in the judgment of 6 April 1998 for the purchase of housing to 377,020 Russian roubles (“RUR”). In the operative provisions of the judgment the court ordered:
“that the sum of 377,020 roubles be recovered from the Slavyansk-na-Kubani Town Council in the Krasnodar Region in favour of Vladimir Nikolayevich Konovalov as a grant for the purchase of housing;
that the payment be made from the federal budget of the , upon receipt of funds from the budget and subject to the waiting list.
The judgment may be appealed against to the  through the  within ten days.”
In a letter of 28 April 2000 the  regional prosecutor’s office informed the applicant that the local authority had not received funds from the federal budget for the payment of State housing aid to retired servicemen.
According to the applicant, enforcement proceedings in respect of the judgment of 19 April 2000 were initiated on 11 May 2000. According to the Government, the applicant lodged a writ of execution to that end with the court bailiffs on 30 October 2000. Neither party submitted a copy of the relevant documents to the Court.
The judgments of 6 April 1998 and 19 April 2000 were not executed.
On 13 October 2000 the  regional prosecutor’s office lodged two applications for supervisory review of the judgments. It requested that the judgments be quashed and a fresh examination of the applicant’s case be ordered.
In a decision of 2 November 2000 the Presidium of the  granted the application concerning the judgment of 6 April 1998, quashed that judgment on the ground that it conflicted with substantive and procedural laws and ordered a fresh examination of the case.
On 20 December 2000 the  discontinued proceedings in the case relating to the judgment of 19 April 2000.
Applications by the applicant for the decision of 2 November 2000 to be quashed by way of supervisory review were rejected by the Supreme Court, as follows from its letters of 17 January and 19 March 2001.
On 22 March 2001 the applicant informed the  that he wished to withdraw his action and requested that the proceedings for a fresh examination of his case, as ordered by the supervisory court’s decision of 2 November 2000, be discontinued. The applicant explained that he had done so because he had been assured by the head of the Town Council that he would be given a certificate to receive free housing. In a decision of 22 March 2001 the  granted his request and discontinued the proceedings. The applicant did not appeal against that decision. On 3 April 2001 the enforcement proceedings were discontinued.
In August 2001 the applicant learned that the Town Council had refused to give him the housing certificate.
Section 9 of the Enforcement Proceedings Act (Law no. 119-FZ of 21 July 1997) provides that a bailiff’s order on the institution of enforcement proceedings must fix a time-limit for the defendant’s voluntary compliance with a writ of execution. The time-limit may not exceed five days. The bailiff must also warn the defendant that coercive action will follow should the defendant fail to comply with the time-limit. Pursuant to section 13, the enforcement proceedings must be completed within two months of the receipt of the writ of execution by the bailiff.
Article 197 (“The contents of a judgment”) of the Code of Civil Procedure of 1964, in force at the material time, provided as follows with regard to the operative provisions of judgments:
“The operative provisions of a judgment should contain the conclusion of the court as to whether to allow or reject a suit fully or partly, an instruction on the distribution of costs and directions concerning the term and the procedure for appealing against the judgment.”
Article 209 of the Code (“The enforcement of a judgment”) read:
“A judgment shall be enforced after its entry into force except in cases of immediate enforcement.”
Paragraph 10 of Resolution no. 7 of the Plenary Session of the Supreme Court of the USSR of 9 July 1982 (“On court judgments”), in force at the material time, provided that courts should set forth the operative provisions of judgments particularly precisely in order to avoid ambiguity in their enforcement. The delivery of judgments whose enforcement was subject to the fulfilment or nonfulfilment of a certain condition was not allowed.
Paragraph 7 of Resolution no. 9 of the Plenary Session of the Supreme Court of the RSFSR of 26 September 1973 (“On court judgments”), in force at the material time, provided that courts should bear in mind that a judgment was an instrument for the administration of justice by which a case was finally determined, and that its operative provisions should contain exhaustive conclusions derived from established factual circumstances. Judgments should therefore contain clear and precise formulations as to, inter alia, who should do what, so that there would not be any controversy in the course of their enforcement.
The review of the Russian Federation Supreme Court’s case-law for the first quarter of 1998, approved by a resolution of the Presidium of the Supreme Court of 6 May 1998, contains a summary of the following case which applied the principle that court judgments whose enforcement is subject to fulfilment or nonfulfilment of a certain condition are not allowed. A number of servicemen brought proceedings against their military unit’s administration, which had not paid them part of their remuneration owing to a lack of funds. A court gave judgment in their favour and, at the same time, ordered that the payment be made as soon as the money was received by the military unit from the relevant State budget. The case-law review noted that in this case the court, in essence, had postponed the enforcement of its judgment for an indefinite period, which had contravened the requirements of the Code of Civil Procedure by which a time-limit for the enforcement of judgments was set by law or, in some cases, by a court. In decision no. 2n31497 of the Military Section of the Supreme Court the direction that payment should be made upon receipt of the relevant funds was removed from the judgment. The review underlined that the time-limit fixed for the enforcement of a judgment had to be specific.
In decision no. 111pv-01pr of 25 July 2001 the Presidium of the Supreme Court upheld a decision delivered by the Civil Section of the Supreme Court on 14 November 2000 in the following case.
After the completion of his military service Mr R. moved to  as his place of permanent residence. He brought proceedings against the local housing authority, which had refused to provide him with a flat to which, he claimed, he was entitled under the law as a former serviceman. In a final judgment in the case the Civil Section of the Supreme Court ordered the local housing authority to place him on the waiting list and to provide him with a flat. The defendant authority placed the applicant on the waiting list and stated that it was impossible to enforce the remaining part of the judgment since it had not received funds from the federal budget for that purpose. The applicant requested the Supreme Court to define the procedure for the further enforcement of the judgment. The Civil Section of the Supreme Court ruled in its decision of 14 November 2000 that the housing authority should provide the applicant with a flat regardless of federal financing. The deputy prosecutor general lodged an application for that decision to be quashed in supervisory-review proceedings. It was examined by the Presidium of the Supreme Court, which held that the decision had lawfully clarified that the provision of a flat to the applicant, in compliance with the judgment, should not be subject to federal financing.