In his application, the applicant complained that he had been denied an oral hearing in the administrative proceedings instituted by him, whereby he sought to have an injury sustained at his workplace recognised as a workrelated injury and to obtain benefits for his inability to work (“healthinsurance benefits”). He relied on Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1971 and lives in Zagreb. He was represented by Ms B. Šojić Mićunović, a lawyer practising in Zagreb.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 3 May 2010 the applicant, an engineer employed in a private construction company, sustained an injury while he was at work.
On 14 May 2010 he instituted proceedings before the Zagreb Office of the Croatian Fund for Health Insurance at Work (Hrvatski zavod za zdravstveno osiguranje zaštite zdravlja na radu, Područna služba Zagreb – hereinafter “the Fund”) seeking to have his injury recognised as a workrelated injury and to be granted health-insurance benefits. He alleged that he had been loading an excavator onto a truck with his colleagues. Since he had left some work-related documents in the excavator (a work log, a worksheet and fuel invoices), he had climbed it to retrieve them and fallen on his arm on his way back down.
Meanwhile, he also lodged a complaint with the labour inspectorate and an inspection was carried out. The labour inspector took a statement from the applicant’s supervisor, who said that on the occasion in question the applicant had had to wait for a truck assigned to him to be prepared for departure to a construction site. He did not know why the applicant had climbed the excavator from which he had fallen since it had been loaded onto a truck assigned to another engineer for departure to a different construction site. The applicant’s supervisor further stated that he had not reported the applicant’s injury to the labour inspectorate as the applicant had been injured in a place where he had not been authorised to be. The labour inspector did not establish in his report why the applicant had climbed the machinery from which he had fallen. He did not take a statement from the applicant either.
In the proceedings before it, the Fund requested an expert report from an in-house medical board, which established that the applicant’s injury could have been caused by falling from the machinery as described by him.
The Fund also requested observations from the applicant’s employer concerning the circumstances in which his injury had occurred. In its submissions of 26 May and 13 October 2010, the employer company stated that:
- the applicant had the necessary qualifications for his job as engineer, that he had been trained to perform his tasks safely, that there had been instructions for operating the machinery in question and that if the applicant had had to enter it for any reason, he should have known how to do it;
- on the day in question the applicant had had to wait in a room for another truck (not the one on which the excavator from which he had fallen had been loaded) to be prepared for departure to a construction site;
- the applicant had not performed any work on the machinery from which he had fallen for at least two weeks prior to the accident, so could not have left any work-related documents in it;
- the applicant had neither been authorised to be where the injury had occurred, nor had climbing the machinery in question been in any way related to his work tasks.
The employer also enclosed the labour inspector’s report in support of those allegations (see paragraph 7 above). The applicant was not asked either to comment on his employer’s observations or to give a statement on the matter.
In a decision of 29 November 2010 the Fund refused to recognise the applicant’s injury as a work-related injury and to grant him health-insurance benefits, finding that he should not have climbed the machinery since it had not been one of his work-related tasks. It based its decision on the applicant’s employer’s observations (see paragraph 9 above) and the labour inspector’s report (see paragraph 7 above), referring to section 6(1)(1) of the Occupational Health Insurance Act and section 3(1) of the Rules on the procedure for determining and recognising work-related injuries and occupational illnesses (see paragraph 19 below).
On 29 December 2010 the applicant brought an action for judicial review before the High Administrative Court (Visoki upravni sud Republike Hrvatske) against the Fund’s decision. He claimed that the Fund had failed to hear him in order to clarify why he had climbed the excavator, even though he had stated that he had left some work-related documents in it (see paragraph 6 above). In a submission of 28 December 2012 he further claimed that he had been excluded from the taking of evidence in the proceedings before the Fund. Furthermore, he again stressed that the Fund had failed to hear him regarding the circumstances of the accident and explicitly requested an oral hearing.
On 3 October 2013 the High Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s action, finding that the Fund had correctly established the facts of the case. Referring to section 34(1) to (3) of the Administrative Disputes Act in force at the material time (see paragraph 14 below), the court also dismissed the applicant’s request for an oral hearing, finding that, in view of the circumstances of the case, a hearing would not be justified.
The applicant then lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske). He complained that, by refusing to hear him in person, the High Administrative Court had violated his constitutional right to a fair hearing.
By a decision of 20 March 2014 the Constitutional Court declared inadmissible the applicant’s constitutional complaint, finding that the case did not raise any constitutional issue.
Section 34 of the Administrative Disputes Act 1978 (Zakon o upravnim sporovima, Official Gazette nos. 53/91 with subsequent amendments), which was in force between 1 July 1978 and 31 December 2011, read as follows:
“The [Administrative Court] shall decide administrative disputes in a closed session.
The [Administrative Court] may decide to hold an oral hearing on account of the complexity of the dispute or if it otherwise finds it useful for better clarification of the matter at issue.
For the same reasons, a party may request an oral hearing.”
Section 76 of the Administrative Disputes Act 2010 (Zakon o upravnim sporovima, Official Gazette nos. 20/10 with subsequent amendments), which has been in force since 1 January 2012, allows for the possibility to reopen proceedings on the basis of a judgment of the European Court of Human Rights. The text of that provision is reproduced in the case of Guberina v. Croatia (no. 23682/13, § 28, ECHR 2016).
Section 2 of the Occupational Health Insurance Act (Zakon o zdravstvenom osiguranju zaštite zdravlja na radu, Official Gazette no. 85/06 with further amendments), which was in force between 3 August 2006 and 31 December 2010, provided that compulsory occupational health insurance was administered by the Fund.
Section 4(2) provided that compulsory occupational health insurance guaranteed rights in the event of a work-related injury or occupational illness.
Section 6(1)(1) provided that a work-related injury was an injury caused by direct and short-term mechanical, physical or chemical action and an injury caused by sudden changes in body position, sudden loading of the body or other changes in physiological condition of the body if there was a causal link between the injury and the performance of tasks and/or activities on the basis of which the injured person was insured.
Section 26(1) provided that insured persons exercised rights arising from compulsory occupational health insurance after the Fund had conducted proceedings for determining and recognising work-related injuries.
Section 3(1) of the Rules on the procedure for determining and recognising work-related injuries and occupational illnesses (Pravilnik o postupku utvrđivanja i priznavanja ozljede na radu i profesionalne bolesti, Official Gazette no. 125/07 with further amendments), which was in force between 1 January 2008 and 31 December 2010, provided that an injury was not recognised as work-related if it occurred as a result of wrongful, negligent or irresponsible conduct in the workplace or when performing business activities (for example, a fight in the workplace or during daily breaks, intentionally inflicting injuries on oneself or others, and so forth).
Section 71(2) of the Constitutional Act on the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Croatia (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 99/99 with further amendments – “the Constitutional Court Act”), which has been in force since 24 September 1999, provides that a constitutional complaint will not be examined if it does not concern a violation of a constitutional right.