The case originated in an application (no. 17707/02) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Mykola Ivanovych Melnychenko (“the applicant”), on 23 April 2002.
The applicant was represented by Mr S. Holovatyy, a lawyer practising in . The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Ms V. Lutkovska, succeeded by Ms Z. Bortnovska.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his right to stand for election, as guaranteed by Article 3 of Protocol No. 1, had been infringed.
The application was allocated to the Second Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
By a decision of 4 November 2003, the Chamber declared the application admissible as regards the complaints under Article 3 of Protocol No. 1.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1). The Chamber having decided, after consulting the parties, that no hearing on the merits was required (Rule 59 § 3 in fine), the parties replied in writing to each other’s observations.
The applicant was born on 18 October 1966 in the , district of Vasylkiv, in the Kyiv region. He currently resides in the , where he has refugee status.
The applicant served in the Department of Security of the President of Ukraine. He was responsible for guarding the office of the President. In the course of his work, he allegedly made tape recordings of the President’s personal conversations with third persons relating to the President’s possible involvement in the disappearance of the journalist Georgiy Gongadze.
Mr Gongadze was a political journalist and editor-in-chief of the internet journal Ukrayinska Pravda. He was known for his criticism of those in power and for his active involvement in awareness-raising in  and abroad concerning issues of freedom of speech. He disappeared on 16 September 2000 after complaining for months of being subjected to threats and surveillance. On 2 November 2000 the decapitated body of an unknown person, later identified by forensic medical tests as Mr Gongadze, was discovered in the vicinity of the town of , in the Kyiv region. His widow has lodged an application with the Court (application no. 34056/02).
On 26 November 2000 the applicant left , as he was afraid of political persecution following the public disclosure of the aforementioned tapes.
On 28 November 2000 the Chairman of the Socialist Party of Ukraine, Mr O. Moroz, publicly announced during a session of the Ukrainian parliament, the Verkhovna Rada (Верховна Рада України), the existence of audio recordings secretly made in the office of the President and implicating the President and other high-level State officials in the disappearance of Georgiy Gongadze. According to a report by “Reporters sans frontières” published on 22 January 2001, the recorded conversations mentioned different ways of getting rid of Mr Gongadze. In one of those conversations, allegedly between the President and the Minister of the Interior, the Minister said that he knew people capable of performing this task, people whom he called “real eagles”, ready to do whatever was required. (The “real eagles” were purportedly an illegal squad of former or current members of the security forces.) This disclosure led to a major political scandal.
Two days later, on 30 November 2000, the Pechersky District Court of Kyiv instituted criminal proceedings against Mr O. Moroz for defamation with regard to the tapes.
The applicant fled . However, he still held an internal passport indicating his registered Kyiv address for administrative purposes (the “propiska”, as it was called at the time – see paragraphs 40-42 below).
The applicant applied for political asylum in the . On 27 April 2001 the Immigration and Naturalisation Service of the United States Department of Justice recognised the applicant as a refugee under the United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees of 1951 (“the Geneva Convention”). The Department of Justice issued him with a travel document and granted him the right to stay in the  indefinitely.
On 4 January 2001 the investigator at the General Prosecutor’s Office (“the GPO”) decided to initiate criminal proceedings against the applicant concerning allegations of defamation of the President of Ukraine, Mr L. Kuchma, as well as Mr V. Lytvyn and Mr Y. Kravchenko, who were at the material time Head of the Administration of the President of Ukraine and Minister of the Interior respectively. Proceedings were also initiated for forgery in respect of the official application the applicant had made for his passport, as he had failed to disclose the fact that he knew certain State secrets by virtue of his employment (see paragraph 34 below). On the same date the GPO investigator ordered a search for the applicant.
On 14 February 2001 the GPO investigator initiated further criminal proceedings against the applicant for his alleged involvement in disclosing State secrets and an abuse of power. On 15 February 2001 the applicant was to be formally charged with all four offences, jointly. On 19 October 2001 the indictment was reissued by the GPO in accordance with the new Criminal Code. The defamation charge was dropped, as the new Code had decriminalised libel. On 24 January 2002 the Pechersky District Court of Kyiv, in the applicant’s absence, issued a warrant for his arrest and detention pending trial.
On 12 January 2002 the 9th Congress of the Socialist Party of Ukraine nominated the applicant as candidate no. 15 on the Socialist Party list for election to the Verkhovna Rada.
On 22 January 2002 the Socialist Party submitted his application to the Central Electoral Commission (Центральна Виборча Комісія) for his formal registration as a candidate. In the registration request the applicant gave his propiska address as his place of residence in  for the previous five years.
On 26 January 2002 the Central Electoral Commission adopted Resolution no. 94 on the refusal to register candidates for the election on 31 March 2002 of the people’s members of the Verkhovna Rada.
This resolution was based on the verbatim record of a discussion on the applicant’s request for registration and was adopted following a proposal by Ms I. Stavniychuk, a member of the Central Electoral Commission, who claimed that registration should be refused for the following reasons:
The Central Electoral Commission therefore adopted Ms I. Stavniychuk’s proposal and refused the registration of thirteen potential candidates, including the applicant. In particular, it decided:
On 30 January 2002 the Socialist Party lodged an appeal with the Supreme Court of Ukraine against the Central Electoral Commission’s Resolution no. 94 of 26 January 2002. It sought to have the resolution declared unlawful and annulled.
On 8 February 2002 the Supreme Court of Ukraine dismissed the appeal for the following reasons:
On 21 November 2002 the applicant informed the Court that he resided in the , where he had refugee status. As his case had received much media attention, this was common knowledge in .
Article 25 of the 1966 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which  is a party, guarantees the right to vote and to stand for public office for citizens of a country.
As regards the participation of refugees in elections in their country of origin, the Human Rights Committee in its General Comment 25 (1996) on Article 25 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, while noting that Article 25 prohibited arbitrary discrimination between citizens, considered that a registration requirement, itself dependent on residence, would be justifiable. Thus, States do have a right to limit voting in general to those citizens habitually resident in their territory. This Comment also stated that:
Relevant extracts from the Guidelines on Elections of 5-6 July 2002 read as follows (footnotes omitted):
Principles of Europe’s electoral heritage (Draft Explanatory Report)
There is no uniform State practice with regard to participation in elections by expatriate citizens. Although many States do not impose any residence requirement (for example, the United Kingdom, Ireland, Cyprus, Finland, Italy, France, Greece, Poland, the Netherlands, the Czech Republic, Spain, Portugal, Estonia, Latvia, Croatia, Moldova, Switzerland, Austria and Turkey), other States continue to impose such a requirement for presidential elections (for example, Germany, Bulgaria, “the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia”, Azerbaijan, Albania and Russia) or parliamentary elections (Malta and Iceland – presidential systems; Liechtenstein, Belgium, Luxembourg, Denmark, Norway and Sweden – non-presidential systems) or for both types of election (for example, Hungary, Slovakia, Armenia, Romania, Georgia, Lithuania and Ukraine).
Relevant extracts from the Constitution of Ukraine read as follows:
Article 8
Article 9
Article 22
Article 24
Article 38
Article 64
Article 76
Article 77
Relevant extracts from the Law on the Central Electoral Commission of Ukraine of 17 December 1997 read as follows:
Section 1 
Status of the Central Electoral Commission
Section 14 
Powers of the Central Electoral Commission
Relevant extracts from the Civil Code read as follows:
Article 17 
Place of residence
State secrecy in relation to passport applications
Relevant extracts from the Law on elections read as follows:
Section 8
The right to be elected
Section 41
Conditions for the registration of a candidate for election to parliament 
who is on the electoral list of a party
Section 47
Refusal to register a candidate for election to parliament
Relevant extracts from the Code of Civil Procedure read as follows:
Article 243-16 
Jurisdiction over complaints or appeals
Article 243-17
Lodging a complaint or appeal
Article 243-20
The decision of the [Supreme] Court
The relevant part of this Law reads as follows:
The instrument of ratification for the protocol was deposited on 4 April 2002 with immediate effect. The instrument of ratification for the convention was deposited on 10 June 2002 and came into force on 8 September 2002.
Relevant extracts from the ruling of the Constitutional Court of 14 March 2002 read as follows:
Relevant extracts from the judicial practice of the Supreme Court read as follows:
Judgment of the Supreme Court of 25 March 2002 in the case of Mr Victor Chayka
Judgment of the Supreme Court of 13 February 2002 in the case of Mr Yuri Buzdugan
Judgment of the Supreme Court of 25 March 2002 in the case of Mr Oleksandr Vasko
Judgment of the Supreme Court of 25 March 2002 in the case of Mr Stepan Khmara
The relevant extracts from the recommendation of 28 December 2001 on the completion of property declarations by election candidates read as follows:
According to the Koretsky Institute of State and Law (National Academy of Sciences), an eminent legal institution, a passport was an official document certifying the identity of its owner, confirming Ukrainian citizenship and registering his or her permanent place of residence. A person was deemed to have been resident in  for the preceding five years if he or she held a passport containing a propiska for the preceding five years. Neither the Constitution nor the Law on elections required information about actual residency, but only information about formal residency on the basis of the propiska in the passport. The Civil Division of the Supreme Court followed this opinion in Case no. 6-110y98 (decision of 10 June 1998):
A person is deemed to have been resident in  for the preceding five years if he or she possesses a Ukrainian citizen’s passport that contains a propiska for the preceding five years. The propiska constitutes the fact of registration of the permanent place of residence.”