The case originated in an application (no. 6373/03) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Romanian nationals, Mr Gheorghe Dumitrescu and Mrs Maria Mihaela Dumitrescu (“the applicants”), on 10 February 2003.
The applicants were represented by Ms Michaela Claude-Dumitrescu. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Răzvan-Horaţiu Radu.
The first applicant, acting in the name and in his capacity as the legal representative of his daughter (the second applicant), complained under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention that the length of the proceedings before the domestic courts to which she was a party was excessive.
On 3 May 2007 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 3 of the Convention).
The applicants, who are father and daughter, were born in 1947 and 1995 respectively and live in Cepari.
On 4 June 2000 the second applicant was grievously injured in a car accident. She suffered total paralysis of her lower limbs and was admitted to hospital where, according to the first applicant, she remained for 709 days.
On an unknown date during pre-trial investigations the
Of the fourteen hearings held between 17 January and
On 7 December 2001 the Court of First Instance convicted T.M. of having negligently caused bodily harm, sentenced her to a conditional prison sentence of three months, held her personally liable and awarded both pecuniary and non-pecuniary damages to the second applicant and to her mother. It also ordered T.M. to pay the mother a monthly sum pending her daughter’s recovery.
On 26 March 2002 the  (“the ”) rejected an appeal by the mother, considering that the Court of First Instance had correctly reduced the damages on the ground of contributory negligence by the second applicant and lack of surveillance by the parents.
On 25 June 2002 the Piteşti Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”) upheld a subsequent appeal lodged by both the second applicant’s mother and T.M. and quashed the previous judgment, sending the case back for retrial. The court noted that the insurance company had not been summoned.
During the retrial the six hearings held between 26 September 2002 and 9 January 2003 were adjourned at the request of either T.M. or the insurance company.
On 23 January 2003 the Court of First Instance sentenced T.M. to a conditional prison sentence of three months, held her jointly liable with the insurance company and awarded both pecuniary and non-pecuniary damages to the second applicant and to her mother, including a monthly sum pending the second applicant’s recovery.
On 8 May 2003 the  rejected an appeal by the second applicant’s mother and, finding that her daughter had been exclusively at fault, allowed an appeal by the opposing parties, held T.M. personally liable and reduced the amount of damages.
On 20 November 2003 the Court of Appeal upheld subsequent appeals lodged by the second applicant’s mother and by the public prosecutor, quashed the previous judgment and sent the case back for retrial. The court considered that both parties to the accident had been at fault and that the  had not pronounced on all the complaints raised by the second applicant’s mother.
After the retrial, on 3 March 2004 the  allowed the action lodged by the second applicant’s mother in part and awarded both pecuniary and non-pecuniary damages, finding T.M. jointly liable up to a certain sum and exclusively liable for the remainder.
On 27 May 2004 the Court of Appeal gave a final decision rejecting as unfounded an appeal by the second applicant’s mother. The court considered that the quantum of damages had been correctly assessed.