The case originated in an application (no. 43918/08) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Ms Hatice Duman (“the applicant”), on 12 September 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr F. Ertekin, a lawyer practising in . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 8 February 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1974 and is currently serving her sentence in Gebze Prison.
On 9 April 2003 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of membership to MLKP (Marxist-Leninist Communist Party), an illegal organisation.
On 13 April 2003 she was taken before the public prosecutor and the investigating judge who subsequently ordered her pre-trial detention.
On 23 July 2003 the public prosecutor at the  filed a bill of indictment against the applicant and eight other persons charging them with attempting to undermine the constitutional order of the State, membership of, or aiding and abetting to an illegal organisation.
Following the abolition of the State Security Courts by Law no. 5190, the criminal proceedings were resumed by the .
During the proceedings, the  decided to prolong the applicants’ pre-trial detention and rejected her request to be released pending trial a number of times on the basis of the reasonable grounds of suspicion that she had committed the offence, the severity of the criminal charge against her and the state of the evidence in the case file.
At the hearing of 1 April 2009, the , once more, rejected the applicant’s claim that her detention had been unreasonably lengthy and that she should be released pending trial.
The applicant challenged the above-mentioned decision by lodging an objection with the higher division of the .
In the course of the proceedings for the review of her detention, the applicant alleges that neither she nor her lawyer was given an opportunity to make any oral submissions against the lawfulness of her continued detention in a hearing and that they were not notified of the observations submitted by the public prosecutor.
On 17 April 2009 the 13th Chamber of the  rejected the applicant’s objection against the prolongation of her detention, taking into account the nature of the criminal charge and the establishment of reasonable suspicion that she had committed the alleged crime.
On the basis of the evidence before it, on 4 May 2011 the Istanbul Assize Court convicted the applicant of attempting to undermine the constitutional order, pursuant to Article 146 § 1 of the former Criminal Code, and sentenced her to life imprisonment.
According to the latest information provided in the case file, the applicant has lodged an appeal against the judgment with the Court of Cassation, before which the proceedings are currently pending.