The case originated in an application (no. 45285/12) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkmen and Russian national, Ms Dzheren Annadurdievna Hadzhieva (“the applicant”), on 27 June 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr K. Kanev, head of the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Dimova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, a breach of Articles 8 and 13 as a result of the failure by the authorities to provide her with assistance following her parents’ arrest in December 2002, and the absence of an effective remedy in this connection.
On 8 December 2014 these complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
Mr Yonko Grozev, the judge elected in respect of Bulgaria, withdrew from sitting in the case (Rule 28 § 3). Accordingly, the President of the Fifth Section appointed Ms Maiia Rousseva to sit as an ad hoc judge (Article 26 § 4 of the Convention and Rule 29 § 1).
On 17 December 2014, the Russian Government were informed of their right to intervene in the proceedings in accordance with Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1. They chose not to avail themselves of this right.
The applicant was born in 1988 and lives in Varna.
As is apparent from the documents in the file, the applicant moved from Turkmenistan to Bulgaria in late 2001 together with her parents. In the summer of 2002 she obtained temporary residency status. Before the move, the applicant’s father had been the deputy chair of the Central Bank of Turkmenistan and later a member of a political movement which was critical of the domestic political regime. It appears that, because of her father’s political activity, members of her family were subjected to persecution in Turkmenistan and that in 2006 the applicant’s aunt was tortured and murdered in prison.
The applicant started studying at a secondary school with an intensive foreign languages curriculum in the autumn of 2002. Her father opened his own construction business in Bulgaria.
On 22 October 2002 the Turkmen authorities charged both of the applicant’s parents with aggravated embezzlement of public funds amounting to 40,000,000 United States dollars, allegedly committed between 25 July 2002 and 3 September 2002. The Turkmen prosecutor ordered their detention in relation to those charges and filed a request for their extradition with the Bulgarian authorities.
The following circumstances are undisputed between the parties.
On 4 December 2002 the applicant, aged fourteen at the time, was alone at home. At around 11 a.m. about ten police officers arrived at the family apartment. On entering the apartment the officers informed the applicant that they had come to arrest her parents. She called her parents on the telephone. It appears from the documents before the domestic courts that at that time, the parents were out shopping accompanied by their legal representative, who returned home with them. This took some time because of heavy traffic. In the meantime the officers prohibited the applicant from moving around the apartment and interrogated her in the absence of a social worker and a psychologist, despite having seen her identity document, which indicated her age.
The applicant’s parents were arrested as soon as they arrived home. The record of a court hearing in the domestic proceedings for damages (see paragraphs 27-41 below) indicates that the parents’ legal representative was present during the arrest. The lawyer stated that the police officers had not allowed the parents to collect personal belongings from the flat but that, as far as he could recall, they had allowed the applicant to hand them some personal items from the flat. He did not know where the police officers had taken the applicant’s parents but said that he thought that they had been taken to the Regional Investigation Office. In any event, he had visited them the following day but could not remember exactly where. The legal representative also stated that during the next few days his task had been to circulate between the two different prisons where the applicant’s parents were detained in order to organise their defence. He stated that he could not describe the state of the applicant at the time of the arrest, his task having been to defend her parents. He did not know what had happened to the applicant and had not seen her after her parents’ arrest.
An order for the applicant’s parents’ detention for twenty-four hours was issued by the police on 4 December 2002 and they were placed in police custody for that period. Upon their application for judicial review of that detention order, the Varna Regional Court set it aside the following day, finding it flawed as it did not indicate any legal grounds for the detention. Immediately upon their release from police custody the applicant’s parents were served with a prosecutor’s order for their detention for seventy-two hours in connection with the extradition request (see paragraph 10 above). They were detained on the spot.
On 6 December 2002, at two separate hearings, the Varna Regional Court extended their detention for a period of thirty days. The applicant’s father was taken to Varna Prison and her mother to Sliven Prison.
During and after the court hearings on 6 December 2002 the applicant’s parents were represented by the same lawyer who had been present during their arrest and was a friend and neighbour of the family.
The parties dispute what took place at the hearing when the judge enquired about the care measures in place in relation to the applicant. According to the latter, when her mother was asked by the judge through an interpreter whether there was anyone who could take care of her child, her mother replied by shaking her head. In Bulgaria nodding one’s head signifies “no” and shaking it means “yes”. According to the applicant, the judge, having interpreted the mother’s response as “yes”, noted in the record of the hearing: “The child has someone to take care of her”.
The Government, in contrast, pointed to the record of the hearing, which indicated that the applicant’s mother had replied that there was someone who could take care of her child. In their view, this was evidence of the mother’s reply. In addition, they cited an excerpt of the court’s record where the applicant’s mother had addressed the court in the following terms: “I am very surprised as I have worked as an associate professor, with a doctorate in science, for ten years, and for some reason, they want to accuse me of something that happened out there, and I’ve been living here for a whole year. We came here so that my children could study in Varna, in a democratic country, because Turkmenistan is a dictatorship; a fascist regime has begun. There is someone to take care of my child.” According to the court record of the hearing, the mother’s statement had been preceded by an intervention by the prosecutor, who had indicated that it was necessary to comply with the requirements of Article 152 § 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, so that if the family had no relatives or friends to care for the child, the municipality had to be informed with a view to placing her in a child-care centre, kindergarten or boarding facility (интернат).
On an appeal by the applicant’s parents, the Varna Court of Appeal lifted the detention orders in two separate decisions on 17 December 2002. The applicant’s parents were released on bail and returned home to the applicant the same day.
The request for their extradition to Turkmenistan was ultimately refused on 22 May 2003 by the Varna Regional Court. During those proceedings they were represented by the same lawyer. The refusal became final on 30 May 2003 as it had not been appealed against. The court found that the criminal proceedings against the applicants’ parents were connected to the father’s political activities and that the extradition request had been made with the aim of persecuting and punishing him for his political beliefs.
It is alleged that the applicant’s parents were arrested so rapidly that they did not manage to leave any money for her, or to give her any instructions as to whom to turn to or how to go about caring for herself. The officers did not tell the applicant for how long they were taking her parents away, where they would be taken or for what reason. According to the applicant, they indicated that they would either lock her parents in prison or deport them to Turkmenistan. Both prospects caused the applicant anguish as she had heard that prisons were horrible both in Turkmenistan and in Bulgaria. She also feared that her parents might be subject to the same treatment in Bulgaria that members of her family had endured in Turkmenistan.
According to the applicant, no one took care of her after her parents’ arrest. She only found 15 levs (about 7 euros (EUR)) in the apartment, which she used for bus tickets to go to school and for food. The money ran out fast and during the last days of her parents’ absence she did not have anything to eat. She suffered insomnia and, when she could sleep, had nightmares. Before her parents’ arrest, her mother had been the one to wake her up in the morning.
She permanently dreaded being herself sent back to Turkmenistan, where her relatives were in prison and her grandparents had been made homeless for having opposed the regime.
She alleged that she had gone several times to the police’s office for foreigners, looking for her parents. She had also tried to telephone people in Turkmenistan to ask for help. Both steps proved unsuccessful.
The applicant had to ask people in the street how to reach her school as, before the arrest, her father had always taken her there. At some stage during her parents’ detention a stray dog bit the applicant on the leg. She did not know what to do or how to seek help. Her mother took her to hospital on 18 December 2002, the day after she was released from detention, fearing that the wound might have become infected.
The Government alleged that it had not been proven that the applicant had been left alone, without an adult carer, during the period in question. The Government stressed that the applicant’s parents had been represented throughout by the same legal representative, who was, moreover, a neighbour and friend. When questioned in the context of the domestic proceedings in the applicant’s case about the exchanges in court on 6 December 2002, the lawyer indicated that he had no recollection of them (see paragraph 35 below).
On 7 March 2006 the applicant, with her parents’ agreement, brought proceedings for damages under section 45 of the Contracts and Obligations Act before the Varna Regional Court. She directed her claim against the Varna regional office of the Ministry of the Interior, the Prosecution Service, the Ministry of Justice and the Supreme Judicial Council, and sought to establish the responsibility of the authorities that had left her unattended during her parents’ detention in December 2002, in breach of the Child Protection Act.
In a decision of 27 March 2006 the court invited her to specify the grounds of her claim and to indicate the specific actions, the particular respondent and the type of damage caused to her. She specified that she was seeking compensation for non-pecuniary damage stemming from the authorities’ failure to organise support and care for her during her parents’ detention.
On 10 April 2006 the court reclassified her claim under section 49 of the Contracts and Obligations Act. It further invited her to specify the names of the officials against whom she had directed her claim, and to show that she had paid the court fees of about EUR 10,000, corresponding to 4% of the total amount of damages sought. The applicant lowered the value of her claim on 9 May 2006, paid the corresponding court fees in the amount of about EUR 6,135 and submitted additional proof to the court.
On 15 May 2006 the Varna Regional Court terminated the proceedings as it found that the applicant had failed to correct the irregularities in her claim as directed by the court on 10 April 2006.
The applicant appealed on 12 May 2006 to the Varna Court of Appeal, submitting that the respondents were the legal entities specified in her legal claim of 7 March 2006 as amended, given that they had been represented by different individuals at different points in time. The appellate court upheld the lower court’s decision on 4 October 2006.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law, submitting that her claim was directed against the different institutions as legal persons, as she could not know the names of the individual officials who had failed to provide her with care. She also described her condition after her parents’ detention. On 14 February 2007 the Supreme Court of Cassation quashed the lower court’s decision, finding that it had wrongly instructed the applicant to specify individual respondents. It remitted the case to the first-instance court, the Varna Regional Court, for a fresh examination.
On 25 October 2007 the applicant further specified her claim before the Varna Regional Court, in particular describing her circumstances in the immediate aftermath of her parents’ arrest and the continuing psychological trauma which she had suffered as a result. She submitted that during the hearing on 6 December 2002 on the extension of her parents’ detention, the judge had wrongly interpreted her mother’s response to the question posed regarding her care.
A psychiatric and psychological report was prepared in the context of the court proceedings in 2008. The report established that the applicant was depressed and at times aggressive. This was attributed to the shock she had experienced in relation to her parents’ detention and the ensuing uncertainty. She showed signs of accumulated tension, fear, worries, disappointment and anger towards the officials who had abandoned her to her own devices following her parents’ arrest. She had no interest in her daily life or in the future and had become withdrawn as a result of her loss of confidence in the justice system. Two additional medical expert reports were prepared in 2008. They found that the applicant was suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder, which was probably the result of what she had gone through after her parents’ arrest. The doctors stated in court that no improvement was likely in her case and that her condition was expected to become chronic. Another medical report ordered by the court in 2009 confirmed that the applicant was suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder and that, while she had been a healthy and energetic child prior to her parents’ arrest, she had experienced frequent bouts of depression thereafter and had succumbed to overwhelming feelings of self-pity, insecurity and futility of effort and engagement.
The applicant’s parents’ lawyer, who had attended the hearings relating to their detention in 2002, testified on 22 February 2008 that he did not know what had happened to the applicant during her parents’ arrest; nor could he remember anything about the circumstances relating to the question and answer in court on 6 December 2002 concerning her care. On 24 October 2008, during the same proceedings, the applicant’s teacher testified that she could not remember the applicant being absent from or having gone hungry at school. The girl had not complained to her about anything at the time.
The Varna Regional Court rejected the applicant’s claim on 27 July 2009, finding that it had not been proven that she had been left alone while her parents had been detained in December 2002. The court also held that, in the three days following the court hearing on 6 December 2002, the applicant’s mother had not sought to have the record of the hearing rectified, even though it was legally possible to do so.
Furthermore, the court held that on 6 December 2002 the Varna Regional Court had accepted that the mother had replied in the affirmative to the judge’s question regarding whether there had been anyone to care for the applicant. That question had been transmitted to the applicant’s mother with the assistance of an interpreter. Consequently, the court concluded that it had not been incumbent on the criminal justice system to act in any other way in order to protect the applicant.
The court further accepted fully the conclusions of the psychological reports on the applicant’s state of chronic post-traumatic stress disorder after the December 2002 events. However, it found that the only evidence supporting the applicant’s claim that she had been left alone in December 2002 was her parents’ testimony and that there were no other pieces of evidence in support of this assertion. Given that the mother had stated during the hearing on her detention that someone had been taking care of the child, the conditions set out in Article 152 of the Code of Criminal Procedure had not been met and, therefore, the institutions involved in the criminal proceedings had not been obliged to pursue steps towards taking the applicant into care.
The applicant appealed to the Varna Court of Appeal. She again challenged the findings of the lower court about her mother’s reply during the court hearing on 6 December 2002. She also submitted that her mother had not been in a position to see the record of the hearing, given that she had been taken back immediately to the remand prison. She further asserted that the authorities had been under an obligation to verify at the time of the arrest on 4 December 2002 and immediately afterwards whether care had been available to her, and that in any event they should not have waited two days to enquire about her situation for the first time during the court hearing. She submitted that her current state of health was the direct result of the shock and stress she had endured in connection with the arrest and the lack of provision of care. She paid about EUR 3,000 in court fees.
The appellate court confirmed the lower court’s decision on 10 December 2010. It found that, even if the applicant had been left alone after the arrest, responsibility for that could not be attributed to the police, the prosecuting authorities or the court, given that her mother had stated that there had been someone to take care of her. In addition, the post-traumatic stress disorder from which it had been established that she suffered could have been the result of additional factors not directly related to her parents’ arrest.
The Supreme Court of Cassation rejected an appeal on points of law by the applicant in a final decision of 18 January 2012, finding no grounds for allowing the appeal to be pursued.
The applicant was granted humanitarian status on 10 March 2004 and refugee status on 15 September 2007.
This treaty (hereinafter “the UN Convention”), adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 20 November 1989, has binding force under international law on the Contracting States, including all of the member States of the Council of Europe. Article 3(i) of the UN Convention states:
“In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private social welfare institutions, courts of law, administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.”
Section 4 of the Child Protection Act (“the Act”) provided at the time of the events that child protection had to be carried out through: (1) assistance, support and services rendered in the child’s family environment; (2) placement of the child with relatives or close family members; (3) placement of the child with a foster family; (4) placement of the child in a specialised institution; or (5) police protection. Pursuant to section 6 of the Act as in force at the time, child protection had to be implemented by the State Agency for Child Protection and the Social Assistance Offices.
Subsection 2 of section 7 of the Act provided at the material time that any person who had knowledge that a child was in need of protection, where this knowledge had been obtained in the course of the fulfilment of his or her professional duties, had an obligation to report the case to the nearest Social Assistance Offices.
Article 152 of the Code of Criminal Procedure as in force at the time of the events regulated the taking of suspects into police custody. Paragraph 6 of that Article provided that a detained person’s children were to be taken into care, via the respective municipality, if they had no relatives able to look after them.
Section 49 of the Obligations and Contracts Act 1951 provides that a person who has entrusted another with carrying out a job is liable for the damage caused by that other person in the course of or in connection with the performance of the job. Liability under that provision – as, indeed, under all provisions governing tort – is premised upon the wrongfulness of the impugned conduct (реш. № 567 от 24 ноември 1997 г. по гр. д. № 775/1996 г., ВС, петчленен състав). In accordance with section 110 of the Obligations and Contracts Act, the limitation period for tort claims is five years.