.  The case originated in an application (no. 7446/12) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Tomislav Remetin (“the applicant”), on 5 July 2011.
.  The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
.  The applicant alleged, in particular, a lack of appropriate procedural response on the part of the domestic authorities, as required under Articles 3 and 8 of the Convention, to acts of violence against him by a group of private individuals.
.  On 13 November 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
.  The applicant was born on 8 September 1989 and lives in Dubrovnik.
.  On 4 March 2008, at around 7.00 p.m., the Dubrovnik Police Station (Policijska uprava Dubrovačko-neretvanska, Policijska postaja Dubrovnik; hereinafter: the “police”) received an anonymous call informing the police that a mass fight was planned in the vicinity of the Naval High School in Dubrovnik (Pomorsko-tehnička škola u Dubrovniku). Three police officers were immediately sent to the scene.
.  When the police officers arrived at the scene there was no fighting going on but inside the school they found the applicant with an injury on his forehead. He was immediately taken to hospital and examined by a doctor. The applicant’s medical record of 4 March 2008 reads:
“Diagnosis
VLC reg supraorbicularis lat dex
Medical history and status
Allegedly took part in fighting and sustained a cut of three centimetres above the right brow bone. He did not lose consciousness, he recollects the event, he did not vomit. No neurological symptoms.
The wound was treated, no sign of fracture.
An antibiotic is recommended, bandage every third day in clinic.
Follow-up by a surgeon if necessary.”
.  On the same date the applicant was interviewed by the police. He stated that he had been standing in front of the school together with his classmates and that all of a sudden he had been hit on the head with a rock, which had knocked him to the ground. His friends had helped him to stand up and carried him inside the school. He himself had not been involved in any fighting and had had no idea that something might happen.
.  On 23 May 2008 the applicant lodged a criminal complaint with the Dubrovnik Municipal State Attorney’s Office (Općinsko državno odvjetništvo u Dubrovniku; hereinafter: the “State Attorney’s Office”) against unknown perpetrators, under Articles 99 and 331 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 54 below), alleging that on 4 March 2008 he had been injured by a group of hooligans in front of his school. One of them, who he could not identify, had thrown a rock at his head hitting him on the forehead. Blood had immediately started to run and one of his friends had to carry him inside the school.
.  The applicant submitted the medical record of 4 March 2008 and explained that his father had erased part of the text on the medical record which suggested that he had taken part in a fight because he had not wanted to have something untrue noted on the record.
.  On 29 May 2008 the State Attorney’s Office forwarded the applicant’s criminal complaint to the police and requested a report on the matter.
.  In the period between 5 and 30 June 2008 the police interviewed several people, including the doctor who had drafted the medical report of 4 March 2008. He considered that the applicant’s injury should be classed as a minor bodily injury. The police also questioned V.Č. and I.N., two of the applicant’s schoolmates, who confirmed his version of events.
.  The police also obtained a medical opinion of 6 June 2008 recommending that the applicant undergo further neurological examination.
.  On 2 July 2008 the police informed the State Attorney’s Office of the results of their preliminary investigation. The relevant part of the police report reads:
“... a group of boys from Mokošica, headed by P.H., in which G.V. and M.P. and several other unidentified individuals were involved, went to the front of the Naval High School on 4 March 2008 in order to take revenge [for a previous fight between a student from the Naval School and P.H.]. When the students from the school saw the group of boys from Mokošica they ran away or headed back into the school, while a group of students attempted to leave the schoolyard passing by the [group of boys from Mokošica]. At that point the boys from the Mokošica group started to throw rocks at them and one rock hit Tomislav Remetin on his head, causing him a minor bodily injury, namely a cut on his forehead. Then some students from Lapad, among whom was A.N., started to throw rocks back. During this clash one rock hit M.P. from the group of boys from Mokošica on his head, causing him a cut on his forehead, which was a minor bodily injury.”
.  In connection with the attack, on 20 November 2008 the applicant underwent another medical examination. The doctor found no damage to his brain but an inflammation of his sinuses and referred him for further treatment.
.  On 18 May and 6 July 2009 the applicant’s father was allowed to inspect the case file kept by the State Attorney’s Office.
.  On 27 December 2010 the applicant asked for information concerning his case from the police on the grounds that he wanted to lodge an application with the Court.
.  On the same date he lodged a civil claim for damages with the State Attorney’s Office on account of his physical and mental suffering caused by the attack. He pointed out that the police report had identified a number of individuals who had taken part in the attack and that a number of people had been interviewed. He further argued that he, and his father, had already orally requested that the police and the State Attorney’s Office provide copies of the relevant documents from the case file but that their request had been denied. He therefore asked for copies of all the relevant reports on the grounds that he wished to lodge an application with the Court.
.  The police replied on 28 December 2010 and 12 January 2011 informing the applicant that he should submit his request for information to the State Attorney’s Office.
.  On 8 February 2011 the State Attorney’s Office informed the applicant that he could come and inspect the case file if he so wished. The State Attorney’s Office also pointed out that the police had not identified the persons who had injured him, which meant that the case was being treated as a criminal complaint against an unknown perpetrator, and that it has been all the time open to the applicant to lodge a criminal complaint against any individual he suspected of committing the offence.
.  On 22 February 2011 the applicant asked the State Attorney’s Office to allow him to copy the relevant documents from the case file because he wanted to institute proceedings before the Court, pointing out that by the letter of 8 February 2011 he had only been allowed to inspect, and not copy, the case file.
.  By letters of 4 July and 27 July 2011 the State Attorney’s Office informed the applicant that he could come on 14 July and 19 August 2011 to inspect and copy the case file.
.  In the meantime, on 5 July 2011, the applicant lodged an application with the Court. He did not go to the State Attorney’s Office to inspect the case file.
.  On 19 December 2010, at around 4.35 a.m., the police were informed that there was a fight in bar C. in Dubrovnik. Two police officers were immediately sent to the scene.
.  At the scene the police officers found several people, including the applicant and M.K., with visible injuries.
.  On the same date the applicant was examined by a doctor, who found that he had several cuts on his head and shoulder, which were characterised as minor bodily injuries.
.  The police also interviewed the applicant and several other people. The applicant stated that he had been drinking in bar C. with his friend M.K. At one point a man had approached them and head-butted the applicant for no reason. After that, several other people had started to throw glasses and bottles at the applicant and, after he had fallen to the floor, to kick him. He managed to escape from the bar but then he realised that he had left his t-shirt, shoes and necklace behind in the bar. He had therefore returned to search for his things but was again attacked by the same group, who continued throwing bottles and glasses at him and, once he had fallen to the floor, to kick him. He managed to escape from the bar again and was then attended to by the police and other emergency services.
.  On 22 December 2010 the police indicted the applicant and seven other people in the Dubrovnik Minor Offences Court (Prekršajni sud u Dubrovniku) on charges of breach of the public peace and order. There is no information on the outcome of these proceedings.
.  On 27 December 2010 the applicant asked for information concerning his case from the police on the grounds that he wanted to lodge criminal complaints before the domestic authorities and an application with the Court.
.  The police replied on 28 December 2010 and 12 January 2011 informing the applicant that he should submit his request for information to the Dubrovnik Minor Offences Court.
.  On 12 January 2011 the applicant again asked the police to provide him with all relevant documents in their possession, arguing that the police had been trying to cover up the attack, which he claimed had been perpetrated by the group from the Mokošica neighbourhood.
.  On the same date the police replied, reiterating their previous advice that the case file had been forwarded to the Dubrovnik Minor Offences Court.
.  On 16 March 2011 the applicant lodged a criminal complaint with the State Attorney’s Office against G.M., M.T. and P.S., alleging that they had attacked him and his friend M.K. in bar C. He pointed out that they were part of a group from the Mokošica neighbourhood and that he had already been attacked by individuals from the same group on 4 March 2008. However, there had been no response by the domestic authorities to this attack. Lastly, he stressed this was a group of “skinheads” which had been terrorising the whole city.
.  On 29 March 2011 the State Attorney’s Office invited the applicant for an interview and requested that the police provide all the information they had concerning the offence.
.  On 1 April 2011 the police replied that they had instituted minor offences proceedings in the Dubrovnik Minor Offences Court concerning the events in question.
.  On 13 April 2011 the State Attorney’s Office questioned the applicant and the record of his statement, together with the criminal complaint, was forwarded to the police on 14 April 2011 with an order for further investigation into the matter.
.  On 26 April 2011 the State Attorney’s Office questioned M.K., who confirmed the applicant’s version of events and described how he himself had also been attacked.
.  On 17 May 2011 the police reported to the State Attorney’s Office that they had questioned several people and were searching for other witnesses to the events.
.  On 19 May 2011 the State Attorney’s Office urged the police to speed up their work.
.  On 20 May 2011 the police submitted a report to the State Attorney’s Office.
.  On 30 May 2011 the State Attorney’s Office asked an investigating judge of the Dubrovnik County Court (Županijski sud u Dubrovniku) to conduct a judicial investigation concerning the applicant’s complaints.
.  In the period between 13 and 14 June 2011 the investigating judge questioned the applicant and several other individuals and commissioned a medical expert report concerning the applicant’s injuries.
.  The medical expert submitted his report on 14 July 2011. The relevant part of the report reads:
“The medical records indicate that Tomislav Remetin sustained cuts on the area of his left brow and right shoulder, and abrasions on the right elbow.
Each of these injuries itself and all the injuries taken together represent a minor bodily injury. ... ”
.  On 28 July 2011 the State Attorney’s Office rejected the applicant’s criminal complaint against P.S. on the grounds that there was no reasonable suspicion that he had committed any offence against the applicant. The applicant was instructed that he could take over the criminal prosecution against P.S. as subsidiary prosecutor.
.  On the same date, the State Attorney’s Office indicted G.M. and M.T. in the Dubrovnik Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Dubrovniku) on charges of violent behaviour. The relevant part of the indictment reads:
“... on 19 December 2010, at around 3.00 a.m., in Dubrovnik, in bar C., based on a previous agreement, for no particular reason and in order to act violently, together with other unidentified persons, G.M. approached Tomislav Remetin, who was sitting at the bar, and head-butted and punched him several times on the head, after which M.T., together with other unidentified persons, continued to punch [Tomislav Remetin] all over his head and body, also throwing bottles and glasses at him, which made Tomislav Remetin leave the bar in fear, and after he had returned for his things, G.M. approached him again and punched him several times on the head, while other unidentified persons also started to punch and kick [Tomislav Remetin], and, after Tomislav Remetin fell to the floor, continued to hit him, which caused Tomislav Remetin [to suffer] cuts on the area of his left brow and right shoulder, and abrasions on the right elbow, which are minor bodily injuries, and subjected him to helplessness and feelings of anguish and inferiority ...”
.  On 1 September 2011 the president of the trial panel of the Dubrovnik Municipal Court to whom the case had been assigned asked the president of the Dubrovnik Municipal Court to exempt him from the case on the grounds of his friendship with the applicant’s father. The president of the court agreed to exempt him from the case on 9 September 2011.
.  On 19 June 2012 the Dubrovnik Municipal Court, in a separate set of proceedings, issued a penal order in respect of an individual, M.N., on charges of making death threats against the applicant with the aim of intimidating him to withdraw his criminal complaint. It would appear that these proceedings are still pending.
.  The first trial hearing before the Dubrovnik Municipal Court, scheduled for 22 January 2013, was adjourned due to the absence of a defence lawyer.
.  Another hearing, scheduled for 27 March 2013, was also adjourned because the applicant wished to retain a lawyer to represent him in the proceedings.
.  A further hearing was held on 26 June 2013 at which the trial court heard the applicant’s evidence and questioned another witness. It also commissioned a medical expert report.
.  The medical expert submitted his report on 1 August 2013. He found that the applicant had sustained a number of cuts on his face around the left eye and right shoulder, as well as abrasions of the right arm. He found no other objectively identified injuries.
.  According to the available information no further procedural actions were taken and the proceedings are still pending before the Dubrovnik Municipal Court.
.  The relevant provisions of the Croatian Constitution (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 56/1990, 135/1997, 8/1998, 113/2000, 124/2000, 28/2001, 41/2001, 55/2001, 76/2010, 85/2010) provide:
“No one shall be subjected to any form of ill-treatment ...”
“Everyone has the right to respect for and legal protection of his or her private and family life, dignity, reputation and honour.”
.  The relevant provisions of the Criminal Code (Kazneni zakon, Official Gazette nos. 110/1997, 27/1998, 50/2000, 129/2000, 51/2001, 111/2003, 190/2003, 105/2004, 84/2005, 71/2006, 110/2007, 152/2008) provide:
“(1)  Criminal proceedings in respect of criminal offences shall be instituted by the State Attorney’s Office in the interest of the Republic of Croatia and its citizens.
(2)  In exceptional circumstances the law may provide for criminal proceedings in respect of certain criminal offences to be instituted on the basis of a private prosecution or for the State Attorney’s Office to institute criminal proceedings following [a private] application.”
“...
(3)  Accomplices are two or more people who, based on a mutual decision, commit an offence, in that every one of them takes part in committing the offence or by other means decisively contributes to committing the offence.
(4)  An instigator or aider and abettor is an accessory who, without control over the commission of the offence, contributes by instigation or aiding and abetting.”
“(1)  Anyone who inflicts grievous bodily harm on another or seriously impairs another’s health shall be sentenced to imprisonment for a term from six months to three years.
...
(4)  An attempt to commit the offence under paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be punishable.”
“(1)  Whoever degrades another person by subjecting them to violent abuse, ill-treatment or particularly offensive behaviour in public shall be sentenced to imprisonment for a term from three months to three years.
(2)  If the offence was committed as part of a group..., the perpetrator shall be sentenced to imprisonment for a term from six months to five years.”
.  The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Zakon o kaznenom postupku, Official Gazette nos. 110/1997, 27/1998, 58/1999, 112/1999, 58/2002 and 62/2003; hereinafter the “1997 Code of Criminal Procedure”) provided:
“(1)  Criminal proceedings shall only be instituted and conducted upon the order of a qualified prosecutor. ...
(2)  In respect of criminal offences subject to public prosecution the qualified prosecutor shall be the State Attorney and in respect of criminal offences that may be prosecuted privately the qualified prosecutor shall be a private prosecutor.
(3)  Unless otherwise provided by law, the State Attorney shall undertake a criminal prosecution where there is a reasonable suspicion that an identified person has committed a criminal offence subject to public prosecution and where there are no legal impediments to the prosecution of that person.
(4)  Where the State Attorney finds that there are no grounds to institute or conduct criminal proceedings, the injured party may take his place as a subsidiary prosecutor under the conditions prescribed by this Act.”
.  Articles 47 to 61 regulated the rights and duties of private prosecutors and of injured parties acting as subsidiary prosecutors. A private prosecutor (privatni tužitelj) was an injured party who brought a private prosecution in respect of criminal offences for which such a prosecution was expressly allowed by the Criminal Code (these were offences of a lesser degree). An injured party acting as a subsidiary prosecutor (oštećeni kao tužitelj) was a person taking over criminal proceedings in respect of criminal offences subject to public prosecution where the relevant prosecuting authorities, for whatever reason, had decided not to prosecute (Article 55). When acting as a subsidiary prosecutor, the victim had all rights in the proceedings which the State Attorney’ Office would have had as public prosecuting authority, save for those vested in the State Attorney’s Office as a state body.
Pursuant to Article 58, the State Attorney’s Office was authorised, on a discretionary basis, to take over a prosecution from a subsidiary prosecutor at any point before the end of the trial.
. Relevant procedures concerning the submission of and decisions on criminal complaints were provided in Articles 171 to 174, the relevant parts of which read:
“(1)  All state bodies and legal entities are obliged to report any criminal offence subject to automatic prosecution about which they have been informed or about which they have otherwise learned.
...”
“(1)  Criminal complaints shall be submitted to the competent State Attorney in writing or orally.
...
(3)  If a criminal complaint was submitted before a court, the police or a State Attorney who was not competent in the matter, they shall forward the criminal complaint to the competent State Attorney.”
“(1)  The State Attorney shall reject a criminal complaint by a reasoned decision if the offence in question is not an offence subject to automatic prosecution, if the prosecution is time-barred or an amnesty or pardon have been granted, or other circumstances excluding criminal liability or prosecution exist, or there is no reasonable suspicion that the suspect has committed the offence. The State Attorney shall inform the victim about his decision ... within eight days (Article 55) and if the criminal complaint was submitted by the police, he shall also inform the police.
(2)  If the State Attorney is not able to ascertain the reliability of the submissions from the criminal complaint, or if he does not have sufficient information to ask for a judicial investigation, or if he has been otherwise informed that an offence has been committed, and particularly if the perpetrator is unknown, the State Attorney shall, if he is not able to do it himself, ask the police to collect all relevant information and to take other measures concerning the offence (Articles 177 and 179).
...”
.  Article 185 provided for urgent investigative actions in cases with an unknown perpetrator. The relevant parts of this provision read:
“(1)  If the perpetrator is unknown, the State Attorney can ask the police to carry out certain investigative actions if, given the circumstances of the case, it would be expedient to take such actions before the investigation is opened. If the State Attorney considers that the investigative actions should be conducted by an investigating judge..., he shall ask the investigating judge to take such actions.
...”
.  On 18 December 2008 a new Code of Criminal Procedure was enacted (Official Gazette, nos. 152/2008, 76/2009, 80/2011, 121/2011, 91/2012, 143/2012, 56/2013; hereinafter: the “2008 Code of Criminal Procedure”). The 2008 Code of Criminal Procedure fully came into force on 1 September 2011, but did not apply to criminal proceedings instituted under the 1997 Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 55 above), for which that Code remained applicable.
.  Under the 2008 Code of Criminal Procedure, the position of the victim as a subsidiary prosecutor remained the same, in that she or he has the right to take over a prosecution from the State Attorney if the State Attorney has declined to prosecute, and may act in the proceedings with all the procedural rights which the State Attorney would have as a competent prosecutor. The State Attorney can take over a prosecution from a subsidiary prosecutor at any point before the end of the trial (Articles 55 and 58).
.  Judicial investigation was replaced by prosecutorial investigation, save for those situations in which a State Attorney had rejected the criminal complaint and the victim had taken over the prosecution as a subsidiary prosecutor. In the latter case, a subsidiary prosecutor retained the ability to ask the investigating judge to order an investigation or a hearing for the taking of evidence (Articles 219 § 1, 225 and 225).
.  An investigation may be conducted against a known or unknown perpetrator (Article 218 § 1). Under Article 213 § 2 a State Attorney may also, in cases in which an investigation is not mandatory (such as in the present case), carry out certain investigative actions which are expedient or necessary in the circumstances. Furthermore, Article 214 § 1 provides that a State Attorney, in cases where the perpetrator is unknown, may question witnesses if that would be expedient for of the identification of the perpetrator or if there is a risk that the evidence may vanish.
.  Further amendments to the 2008 Code of Criminal Procedure were introduced on 15 December 2013 (Official Gazette no. 145/2013). In so far as relevant for the case at issue, they excluded the possibility of opening the investigation against an unknown perpetrator (Article 217 § 1) but allowed for certain investigative actions to be taken in such cases (Article 214).
.  The relevant provision of the State Administration System Act (Zakon o sustavu državne uprave, Official Gazette nos. 75/1993, 92/1996, 48/1999, 15/2000, 127/2000, 59/2001, 199/2003, 79/2007), reads as follows:
Section 13
“Damage caused to a citizen, legal entity or any other party by an illegal or improper act on the part of a State administration body, local administration body or any legal entity with public powers in the exercise of its authority shall be redressed by the Republic of Croatia.”
.  In its decision no. Kž-98/1993 of 23 September 1993, the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske) dealt with the problem of the responsibility of accomplices in a situation in which it was not clear which one of them actually committed the acts constituting the offence. The relevant part of the decision reads:
“... it is obvious that the deprivation of life occurred as a result of a series of actions taken by the accused in order to carry out that act. The Supreme Court therefore considers that the actions of the accused – shooting at the victim – was the proximate cause of the deprivation of life, which makes the accused B. and J. accomplices, irrespective of which one of them actually shot the victim.”