The applicant alleged that, while the victims of the crime of which he had been convicted had been examined in the course of his original trial, following the quashing of his conviction on appeal he had not been allowed to examine those victims again in the course of the retrial conducted before a different trial judge, who eventually convicted him.
The applicant was born in 1968 and lives in Odessa.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant has legal education. Prior to the events which triggered legal proceedings against him he had provided legal services to a businessman, Mr Sh., who had run a market in Mariupol. In January 2006 Sh. was arrested for allegedly soliciting a bribe for allocation of a pitch in the market to a third party.
According to the charges against the applicant on which he was eventually convicted, he offered to act as an intermediary for Sh. and his life partner Ms M. in giving 10,000 United States dollars (USD) in bribes to the investigator and the judge in charge of Sh.’s case to make sure that Sh. received a light, non-custodial sentence. Sh. and M. complained to the authorities. The latter provided them with the banknotes, the serial numbers of which were recorded, and a video camera to record their interactions with the applicant. Undercover video-recording was authorised by a judge of the Donetsk Regional Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”).
M. gave money to the applicant at the office of the applicant’s wife, a notary. Immediately following that the applicant was arrested and the money was seized from him.
Throughout the proceedings the applicant insisted that the money he had sought and received had not been for a bribe but to pay for the services of an out-of-town lawyer (from Donetsk or Kyiv) who was to defend Sh.
The applicant was charged with attempted fraud, as the authorities did not find any evidence that the applicant had actually offered money to any official or actually intended to do so, and incitement to bribery.
In the course of the pre-trial investigation the investigator formally recognised Sh. and M. as victims, a procedural status distinct under domestic law from that of witnesses (see paragraphs 24 and 25 below). They gave statements setting out the above-mentioned account of events on which charges against the applicant were based (see paragraph 6 above). Confrontations were conducted between them and the applicant.
The applicant stood trial before the Mariupol Zhovtnevy District Court. His position was that the money he had received had been to hire a lawyer for Sh. He argued that, after his arrest, the criminal case for bribery against Sh. had not progressed, indicating that Sh. and M. had used allegations against the applicant as a way of getting Sh. himself out of legal trouble in connection with the bribery charges. The video of his interactions with M. presented to the court was a montage of different conversations manipulated to imply that the applicant was asking for bribe money and to edit out his statements to the effect that the money had been needed to retain a lawyer.
Sh. and M. were examined and, according to the trial court’s records, reaffirmed their pre-trial statements. The applicant submitted, without elaboration, that in fact those witnesses’ testimonies had contradicted their pre-trial statements.
On 21 October 2010 the trial court convicted the applicant of attempted fraud and incitement to bribery and sentenced him to four years’ imprisonment. The court relied in particular on the victims’ statements, police reports documenting the handover of banknotes to M. and their seizure from the applicant and the video-recording of the interactions between M. and the applicant.
On 12 March 2010 the Court of Appeal quashed the trial court’s judgment and remitted the case for retrial before a different trial judge. The reason was a number of irregularities in the documentation of the videorecording: in particular the trial court had failed to obtain a copy of the Court of Appeal’s order authorising the undercover recording (see paragraph 6 above) and the brand of the video tape provided by the police to M. did not match the brand of the tape on which the recording had actually been conducted.
In the course of the retrial the trial court examined the videorecording of the interactions between the applicant and M. and conducted a detailed examination of the circumstances under which it had been made, of the chain of custody and verified the applicant’s allegation that the recording had been manipulated to imply his guilt. It pointed to an expert opinion to the effect that it could not be ruled out that the videorecording was a copy which might have been edited. It also noted that the Court of Appeal’s order authorising the recording remained classified and so could not be examined by the trial court. On these grounds the trial court decided to rule the video-recording inadmissible and remove it from the evidence.
The court also examined the following witnesses:
(i)  S., a lawyer, who stated that the applicant had discussed Sh.’s case with him but that there had been no discussion of any plans to hire an outof-town lawyer;
(ii)  four police and prosecution service officers who had been involved in criminal proceedings against Sh. They testified that the applicant had advised Sh. in connection with that matter, had been in contact with them on various technical issues but that they had never been offered any bribes;
(iii)  K., the applicant’s acquaintance, who testified that the applicant had asked him to lend USD 10,000 to Sh. and M., because they were in need of money to “settle the question of liability for bribery” (на урегулирование вопроса привлечения к ответственности за взяточничество). The witness had initially considered lending the money and taking Sh. and M.’s shares in the company as security. However, he had eventually concluded that such collateral would not be sufficient and refused to lend;
(iv)  the applicant’s wife in whose notary office the applicant had been arrested, and her employee. They stated that M. had visited the office and had spoken to the applicant.
In the course of the retrial the trial court repeatedly summoned the victims and ordered the police to escort them to the court hearings but they failed to appear for unknown reasons. At the hearing held at 10.50 a.m. on 11 October 2010 the court noted that its order to the police to bring Sh. and M. to the court had not been executed for unknown reasons. The court adjourned the hearing until 3.45 p.m. Resuming the hearing at that time, the court noted that Sh. and M. had submitted a letter asking the court to examine the case in their absence.
The court solicited the parties’ opinions as to whether they considered it possible to read out the victims’ previous statements. The applicant’s lawyer responded that, by law, the victims were entitled to refuse to testify (see paragraph 25 below) and, therefore, he considered it possible to read out their previous statements. The lawyer, however, insisted that investigator B., who was in charge of the pre-trial investigation in the case, be called.
The court proceeded to read out the victims’ and B.’s statements.
When commenting on them the applicant stated that there were discrepancies in B.’s statements. He and his lawyer insisted that B. be ordered to appear and make his case in court, in particular to explain why he had decided to recognise Sh. and M. as victims. The applicant also stated that it was puzzling that the victims, absent in the morning, had managed to submit by 3.30 p.m. a letter asking that the case be examined without them. It was possible that the victims had been pressured to sign that letter. He insisted that they be examined in court. The court rejected that application, stating that the proceedings had already lasted for a long time and all the relevant circumstances had been exhaustively examined and established. The court considered the examination of the evidence complete and invited the parties to proceed with closing arguments.
On 31 December 2010 the trial court again convicted the applicant of the same charges and imposed the same sentence. The court referred in particular to:
(i)  the victims’ pre-trial statements, as reaffirmed in the course of pretrial confrontations with the applicant and in the course of the first trial (see paragraphs 10 and 12 above);
(ii)  police reports documenting the handover of banknotes to M. and their seizure from the applicant;
(iii)  the witness evidence set out in paragraph 16 (i) to (iii) above. In light of that evidence the court concluded, in particular, that there was no evidence for the applicant’s explanation that he had received money to hire a lawyer for Sh.
In his appeals to the Court of Appeal and the High Specialised Court for Civil and Criminal Matters (see next paragraph) the applicant argued, in particular, that the trial judge had unjustifiably rejected the applicant’s application for the victims to be examined to clear up contradictions in their statements and had unjustifiably relied on the statements of victims even though she herself had not heard them.
On 24 December 2010 the Court of Appeal and on 16 June 2011 the High Specialised Court for Civil and Criminal Matters upheld the trial court’s judgment. The courts held that the applicant’s guilt was sufficiently proven, pointing to the evidence cited in the trial court’s judgment (see paragraph 21 above).
Article 49 of the 1960 Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CPC”), which governed the criminal proceedings against the applicant, provides:
“A person who has suffered non-pecuniary, physical or property damage from a crime may be recognised as a victim [потерпілий] ...
A citizen who has been recognised as a victim shall be entitled to give evidence in the case ...”
Domestic law (Articles 49 and 70 of the CPC and Articles 384 and 385 of the Criminal Code) distinguished the status of victims and other witnesses in that other witnesses had to testify when summoned and were criminally liable for refusal to testify while the victims had the right to testify but could refuse to do so and were not criminally liable for such a refusal. However, if a victim chose to testify, he or she was liable for perjury, like any other witness.
Article 87 of the CPC required that transcript of the trial be kept in the case file and that the transcript contain, in particular, a detailed record of all witness testimony given in the course of the trial.
Article 374 of the CPC provided that, if a judgment was quashed on appeal and remitted for retrial on account of an error committed by the trial court, the case was to be tried by a different judge.