The case was referred to the Court by a Portuguese national, Mrs Maria Celeste Vieira Veloso de Oliveira (“the applicant”), on 25 August 1997 and by the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) on 22 September 1997, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 § 1 and Article 47 of the Convention. It originated in an application (no. 25711/94) against the Swiss Confederation lodged with the Commission under Article 25 by the applicant on 22 October 1994.
The Commission’s request referred to Articles 44 and 48 as amended by Protocol No. 9 as regards Switzerland and to the declaration whereby Switzerland recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46). Mrs Oliveira’s application to the Court referred to Article 48 of the Convention. The object of the request and of the application was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 4 of Protocol No. 7.

2.  In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 35 § 3 (d) of Rules of Court B, the applicant designated the lawyer, Mr A. von Albertini who would represent her (Rule 31). He was given leave by the President of the Chamber to use the German language (Rule 28 § 3). Having originally been designated in the proceedings before the Commission by the initials C.M.L.-O., the applicant subsequently agreed to the disclosure of her name. 
The Chamber to be constituted included ex officio Mr L. Wildhaber, the elected judge of Swiss nationality (Article 43 of the Convention), and Mr R. Bernhardt, the Vice-President of the Court (Rule 21 § 4 (b)). On 25 September 1997, in the presence of the Registrar, the President of the Court, Mr R. Ryssdal, drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr F. Gölcüklü, Mr A.N. Loizou, Mr B. Repik, Mr P. Kūris, Mr E. Levits, Mr P. van Dijk and Mr M. Voicu (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 § 5).
As President of the Chamber (Rule 21 § 6), Mr Bernhardt, acting through the Registrar, consulted Mr P. Boillat, the Agent of the Swiss Government (“the Government”), the applicant’s lawyer and Mr E.A. Alkema, the Delegate of the Commission, on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 39 § 1 and 40). Pursuant to the order made in consequence, the Registrar received the applicant’s and the Government’s memorials on 23 February and 30 March 1998 respectively. On 17 April the Delegate of the Commission submitted his written observations.
On 27 February 1998 the Chamber decided to dispense with a hearing in the case, having satisfied itself that the condition for this derogation from its usual procedure had been met (Rules 27 and 40).
Mrs Oliveira, a Portuguese citizen, was born in 1967 and currently lives in Zürich (Switzerland).
On 15 December 1990, while she was driving on a road covered with ice and snow in Zürich, her car veered onto the other side of the road hitting one car and then colliding with a second driven by M., who sustained serious injuries.
On 19 March 1991 the Zürich police magistrate’s office (Polizeirichteramt) sent the file to the district attorney’s office (Bezirksanwaltschaft) for further investigation as to whether the applicant had negligently inflicted serious physical injury contrary to Article 125 § 2 of the Swiss Criminal Code (see paragraph 16 below).
On 5 April 1991 the Zürich District Office (Statthalteramt) sent the file to the district attorney’s office for further investigations as to whether any offences had been committed under the Federal Road Traffic Act (see paragraph 17 below).
On 3 June 1991 the district attorney’s office returned the case file concerning the party injured in the accident to the police magistrate’s office. It contained a medical certificate stating that the injuries were serious. On 12 August 1991 the police magistrate found that there was no case for the injured party to answer (Einstellungs-Verfügung). On 13 August 1991 he convicted the applicant of an offence under sections 31 and 32 of the Federal Road Traffic Act of failing to control her vehicle, as she had not adapted her speed to the road conditions (Nichtbeherrschen des Fahrzeuges infolge Nichtanpassens der Geschwindigkeit an die Strassenverhältnisse) and sentenced her to a fine of 200 Swiss francs (CHF). He found in particular that on 15 December 1990 the road had been covered with ice and snow and that the applicant's car had veered onto the other side of the road hitting one car before colliding with a second.
On 25 January 1993 the district attorney’s office issued a penal order (Strafbefehl) fining Mrs Oliveira CHF 2,000 for negligently causing physical injury contrary to Article 125 of the Swiss Criminal Code in respect of the injuries sustained by M. as a result of the collision between his vehicle and the applicant’s.
The applicant challenged that order in the Zürich District Court (Bezirksgericht), which on 11 March 1993 reduced the fine to CHF 1,500. It held in particular:
“The police magistrate who imposed the fine (Bussenverfügung) referred to by the applicant had to examine the situation within the context of proceedings concerning a minor criminal offence (Übertretungsstrafverfahren), so that by virtue of the non bis in idem principle there is no doubt that no further prosecution for a minor criminal offence can be brought on the basis of the same incident. However, the fact that investigations in this type of proceedings are summary and limited in scope means that offenders on whom only a fine has been imposed may, if a more thorough investigation is needed in view of legal or factual considerations, also be prosecuted on the same facts for a serious crime or other major offence. In such cases, the original decision and sentence are quashed.”
The court went on to quash the CHF 200 fine imposed on 13 August 1991 and said that any part of that fine that had already been paid was to be deducted from the fine it was imposing, the latter fine thus being reduced to CHF 1,300.
The applicant appealed to the Zürich Court of Appeal (Obergericht), which on 7 October 1993 dismissed the appeal holding, inter alia:
“It is necessary to consider what conclusions are to be drawn from the police magistrate’s error regarding the question in issue. It is clear that in his decision of 13 August 1991 he made a finding only in respect of the applicant’s failure to control the vehicle, but not in respect of the resulting physical injuries suffered by the victim… However, in determining whether the Highway Code had been followed, the police magistrate had the power and duty to consider all the facts before him and to rule on them exhaustively under the criminal law; his failure to remit the case file, even though possibly serious physical injuries had been caused by negligence, does not necessarily mean that the decision of the police magistrate is invalid – that decision stands. It has not been submitted, and does not appear from the file, that the decision in issue contains serious defects requiring that it be quashed in its entirety in any event.”
The Court of Appeal subsequently upheld the decision to deduct CHF 200 from the CHF 1,500 fine, considering that the applicant ought not to be punished more severely than she would have been if both offences had been dealt with together in a single set of proceedings.
Mrs Oliveira appealed against that decision on grounds of nullity (Nichtigkeitsbeschwerden) to the Court of Cassation (Kassationsgericht) of the Canton of Zürich and to the Federal Court. On 27 April 1994 the Court of Cassation declined to consider her appeal.
The applicant then filed a public-law appeal with the Federal Court against that decision.
On 17 August 1994, the Federal Court dismissed both the applicant's public-law appeal and her appeal on grounds of nullity. In its latter decision the Federal Court held that it had to be assumed that when on 13 August 1991 the police magistrate had imposed a fine on Mrs Oliveira, he had been unaware that M. had sustained serious injuries, as otherwise he would have had no jurisdiction to impose a fine and would have had to return the file to the district attorney’s office. The Federal Court concluded that the District Court had nevertheless avoided the effects of punishing an offender twice for the same offence by taking into account the CHF 200 fine imposed by the police magistrate when “determining the amount of the new fine” (bei der Bemessung der neuen Busse).
Article 125 of the Swiss Criminal Code provides:
“1.  Anyone who negligently causes damage to the physical integrity or health of another shall, on a complaint, be liable to imprisonment or a fine. 
If the injury is serious, the offender shall be prosecuted even in the absence of a complaint.”
Subsection 31(1) of the Federal Road Traffic Act provides, inter alia, that drivers shall remain in control of their vehicles at all times so as to fulfil their obligations to drive carefully. Under section 32, drivers must adapt the vehicle's speed to conditions.
Mrs Oliveira applied to the Commission on 22 October 1994. She complained of a breach of Article 4 of Protocol No. 7.
The Commission declared the application (no. 25711/94) admissible on 13 January 1997. In its report of 1 July 1997 (Article 31), it expressed the opinion that there had been a violation of that provision (twenty-four votes to eight). The full text of the Commission’s opinion and of the two dissenting opinions contained in the report is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.
In their memorial, the Government invited the Court to hold that there had been no violation of Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 in the instant case.
In her memorial, the applicant requested the Court
“1.  To find that judgments delivered in criminal proceedings under the sovereign authority of the Swiss Confederation by the single judge at the Zürich District Court, by the Court of Appeal, by the Court of Cassation of the Canton of Zürich and by the Swiss Federal Court have infringed, to the applicant’s detriment, provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights, in particular Protocol No. 7 to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, and that accordingly the respondent Government have failed to fulfil their obligation to comply with the provisions of the Convention.
To order the respondent Government, pursuant to Article 50 of the Convention taken together with Rule 52 § 1 of Rules of Court B, to pay the applicant just satisfaction in the sum of 60,340 Swiss francs.”