The case originated in an application (no. 22662/10) against the Republic of Armenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Karine Khachaturyan (“the applicant”), on 19 February 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Grigoryan, a lawyer practising in Yerevan at the relevant time. The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, and subsequently by Mr Y. Kirakosyan, Representative of the Republic of Armenia before the European Court of Human Rights.
On 19 May 2014 the Government were given notice of the complaints concerning the expropriation of the applicant’s property and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Russian Government did not make use of their right to intervene in the proceedings (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention).
The applicant was born in 1958 and lives in Moscow.
Since 1995 the applicant had owned a flat measuring 42.7 sq. m. situated on the second floor of a block of flats at 85 Byuzand Street in the centre of Yerevan (hereinafter - “the first flat”). She also co-owned with her daughters a flat measuring 46.3 sq. m. situated on the first floor of the same building (hereinafter - “the second flat”).
On 25 January 2007 the Government adopted Decree no. 108-N (hereinafter - “the Decree”) approving the expropriation zones of territories situated within the administrative boundaries of Yerevan to be taken for State needs and approving the procedure for recording the description of property situated in those territories and the format of the description record. The building at 85 Byuzand Street was not included in the list of addresses of property to be taken for State needs which was appended to the Decree.
On 5 October 2007 H.B., a private entrepreneur authorised by the Mayor of Yerevan to acquire property to be taken for State needs located at, inter alia, Byuzand Street, lodged two claims with the Kentron and NorkMarash District Court of Yerevan (“District Court”). In particular, H.B. lodged one claim against the applicant seeking to deprive her of ownership of the first flat and another claim against the applicant and her daughters seeking to deprive them of ownership of the second flat. In his claims H.B. relied, inter alia, on the Decree to state that he had the right to acquire the given property.
On 29 December 2007 the District Court granted both abovementioned claims. In the judgment concerning the first flat, the District Court found that it was included in the Decree as property to be taken for State needs and that it should become H.B.’s property against compensation of AMD 9,556,500 (approximately EUR 17,400).
As regards the judgment in respect of the second flat, the District Court stated therein that the second flat was included in the Decree as property to be taken for State needs and should be alienated to H.B. This judgment entered into force and became final.
On 11 April 2008 H.B. lodged another claim against the applicant and her daughters seeking to terminate their right to ownership, recognise his own title in respect of the second flat and evict them.
On 26 May 2008 the District Court granted H.B.’s claim of 11 April 2008. The relevant parts of the District Court’s judgment read as follows:
“... The [District Court], having examined the civil case upon [H.B.’s] claim ... against [the applicant], [the applicant’s daughters] seeking termination of their right to ownership, recognition of ownership rights and eviction ...
The [District Court] finds it established that by the judgments ... of 29.12.2007 the [District Court] granted [H.B.’s] claims against [the applicant] and [the applicant’s daughters] ... and obliged [the applicant] and [her daughters] to alienate to [H.B.]the residential house situated at 85 Byuzand Street and measuring 46.3 sq. m. which was owned by them.
This judgment has entered into force.
Considerable time has elapsed after the judgment but the respondents have not handed over the property to [H.B.].
... the court decides
To grant the claim;
Terminate the ownership rights of [the applicant], [the applicant’s daughters] in respect of the address 85 Byuzand Street;
To recognise [H.B.’s] ownership in respect of the address 85 Byuzand Street;
To evict [the applicant], [the applicant’s daughters] from the address 85 Byuzand Street.
...”
On 20 June 2008 the applicant lodged an appeal against the judgment of 29 December 2007 concerning the first flat. She complained, in particular, that the District Court had failed duly to notify her about the proceedings and that the Decree referred to in the judgment did not concern her property.
On 29 July 2008 the Mayor of Yerevan granted H.B. permission to demolish the first flat and this was done shortly thereafter.
On 6 November 2008 the Civil Court of Appeal quashed the judgment of 29 December 2007 concerning the first flat and remitted the case for a fresh examination on the ground that the applicant had not been duly notified about the proceedings. The Court of Appeal did not address the arguments raised in the appeal as to the merits.
On 22 April 2009 the District Court rejected H.B.’s claim of 5 October 2007 on the ground that the first flat was not listed in the Decree as a unit of property to be taken for State needs. At the same time, the District Court ruled that the compensation of AMD 9,556,500 transferred to its deposit account by H.B. was to be returned to him.
H.B. lodged an appeal stating, inter alia, that the absence of a mention of the exact address of property to be taken for State needs could not per se be an obstacle for its expropriation. He further argued that, according to the scheme of the description of the given property which was drawn up after the Decree came into force, the building at 85 Byuzand Street fell within the territory surrounding the property that he had a right to acquire according to the Decree.
In reply to H.B.’s submissions the applicant insisted that the address of the first flat had not been expressly mentioned in Appendix 1 to the Decree which contained an exhaustive list of addresses of various property units to be taken for State needs. She further argued that the Decree could not be supplemented by the scheme referred to by the plaintiff since it did not constitute its integral part, had not been officially published and in any event it could not contain an address which was not included in Appendix 1 to the Decree.
In the course of the proceedings before the Court of Appeal H.B made attempts to reach a friendly settlement with the applicant, offering her a flat in the new building to be constructed, but she rejected his offers.
On 15 October 2009 H.B. made written submissions to the Court of Appeal stating that the applicant was not willing to reach a friendly settlement and asked for the judgment of 22 April 2009 to be quashed and his claim of 5 October 2007 granted. He further stated that the applicant’s ownership in respect of the first flat had already been terminated by the District Court judgment of 26 May 2008 and therefore the applicant’s argument that it was not mentioned in the Decree as property to be taken for State needs was groundless.
On 20 October 2009 the Civil Court of Appeal upheld the judgment of 22 April 2009. In doing so, however, the Court of Appeal referred, inter alia, to the District Court’s judgments of 29 December 2007 and 26 May 2008 concerning the second flat. The Court of Appeal concluded that these final and binding judgments were to be regarded as res judicata for the dispute concerning the first flat and therefore it would not address the arguments raised in the appeal.
On 16 November 2009 the applicant lodged an appeal against the District Court’s judgment of 26 May 2008 complaining in particular about the fact that the applicant had not been duly notified of the date and time of the hearing. The applicant also requested that the missed time-limits for lodging the appeal be restored, taking into account that the existence of the judgment had come to her knowledge only at the hearing before the Court of Appeal of 16 October 2009.
On 20 November 2009 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law against the decision of 20 October 2009 reiterating that she had been deprived of ownership in respect of the first flat in violation of the law. She submitted that the District Court’s judgments of 29 December 2007 and 26 May 2008 referred to by the Court of Appeal concerned another flat measuring 46.3 sq. m. in the same building, the second flat, and that these judgments had no connection whatsoever to the first flat, which she solely owned according to a distinct certificate of ownership and which was the subject of dispute in the proceedings.
On 23 November 2009 the Civil Court of Appeal declared the appeal inadmissible and refused to restore the missed time-limits. It stated in this regard that the case file did not contain any information on the applicant’s place of registration or residence and that the District Court had summoned the defendants, including the applicant, several times at the address mentioned in the case file, which was 85 Byuzand Street, but the postal receipts had been returned. This decision was subject to appeal to the Court of Cassation within two weeks. The applicant did not lodge an appeal on points of law.
On 28 December 2009 the Court of Cassation declared the appeal on points of law dated 20 November 2009 inadmissible for lack of merit. In doing so, the Court of Cassation reinstated the reasoning of the Court of Appeal reflected in its decision of 20 October 2009 as regards the existence of a final and binding judgment between the same parties over the same dispute. The Court of Cassation did not address the above arguments submitted by the applicant in her appeal on points of law.
According to Article 31, everyone shall have the right to dispose of, use, manage and bequeath his property in the way he sees fit. No one can be deprived of his property, save by a court in cases prescribed by law. Property can be expropriated for the needs of society and the State only in exceptional cases of paramount public interest, in a procedure prescribed by law and with prior equivalent compensation.
According to Article 3 § 1, the constitutional basis for alienation of property for the needs of society and the State is the prevailing public interest.
According to Article 3 § 2, the constitutional requirements for alienation of property for the needs of society and the State are the following:
a) alienation must be carried out in accordance with a procedure prescribed by the law,
b) prior adequate compensation should be provided for property subject to alienation.
According to Article 7 § 1, alienation of property for the needs of society and the State is carried out in case of recognition by the Government of the existence of a prevailing public interest.
According to Article 7 § 2 (a), (b) and (c), the government decree on recognition of prevailing public interest should mention the prevailing public interest for which the property is to be alienated, the acquirer of the property and the units of property subject to alienation (the addresses or location or other information which identifies the given property).
According to Article 11 § 1, adequate compensation should be paid to the owner of property subject to alienation. The market value of the property plus an additional 15% is considered to be an adequate amount of compensation.
The Decree acknowledges that there is a prevailing public interest in the implementation of town-planning projects in the territories mentioned in its Appendix 1.
Appendix 1 to the Decree sets out the list of units of property and addresses within the administrative boundaries of Yerevan to be taken for State needs.