The applicants complained that the criminal investigation into the death of their son had lacked diligence and had been ineffective. They relied on Article 6 of the Convention.
The first applicant, Ms Mihaela Spătaru, was born in 1952 and the second applicant, Mr Gheorghe Spătaru, was born in 1945. The applicants live in Braşov and were represented by Mr T. Țărcan, a lawyer practising in Brașov.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
Around 11 p.m. on 20 July 2006 the Arad Police Department (“the Police Department”) were notified that the applicants’ son had been found dead on a national road outside the town of Chişineu-Criş and that there were signs of an accident.
On the same date the Police Department initiated a criminal investigation into the circumstances of the applicants’ son’s death. They carried out an on-site investigation. According to the on-site investigation report, the Police Department took photographs of the area where the applicants’ son’s body had been found, took measurements, noted down the exact location and position of the body, and collected several items found at that location. They also noted that no eyewitnesses to the accident had been identified.
On an unspecified date the Police Department took several measures designed to identify the perpetrator and the vehicle that he or she had been driving. Among other things, they informed all the local and border police officers, as well as those from the nearby towns, villages and counties, about the incident and shared the information available to them in order to be able to gather information on the identity of the possible perpetrator and on his or her vehicle; they contacted the local Vehicle Registration Office in order to determine the make and type of the vehicle involved in the event on the basis of the various items gathered at the scene; and they ordered that shops selling and buying vehicle parts be checked in order to identify any recent transactions that could lead to the identification of the vehicle.
On 21 July 2006 the Police Department instituted criminal proceedings in rem for involuntary manslaughter and for leaving the scene of an accident without permission from the police. Their decision was confirmed on 24 July 2006 by the Chişineu-Criş Prosecutor’s Office (“the Prosecutor’s Office”). On the same date the Police Department commissioned a forensic autopsy report and a forensic toxicology report in respect of the applicants’ son.
On 22 July 2006 the Arad Forensic Service (“the Forensic Service”) produced the autopsy report. It concluded that the applicants’ son’s death had been violent and had resulted from an internal haemorrhage caused by thoracic-abdominal trauma involving multiple rib fractures, lung injuries and the rupture of internal organs. The injuries could have been caused by being hit with hard objects or compression suffered following a car accident.
On 24 July 2006 the Forensic Service produced the toxicology report concerning the alcohol level in the applicants’ son’s blood. It concluded that his blood alcohol level was 0.09%.
Between 8 February 2007 and 24 January 2008, the Police Department and the local Vehicle Registration Office attempted to identify the type of the vehicle that had hit the applicants’ son on the basis of items collected at the scene where the body had been found. On the latter date the Police Department produced a report, which noted that the type of the vehicle in question could not be determined.
On 7 September 2006 and 22 January 2007, following enquiries by the first applicant, the Police Department and the Prosecutor’s Office, respectively, informed her about the evolution of the investigation.
On 15 and 26 January 2007 the authorities took statements from the victim’s brother in an attempt to determine why the victim had been at the location where he had been found dead.
On 4 February 2007, 30 November 2011 and 2 December 2013, the second applicant complained to the Prosecutor’s Office about the manner in which the investigation had been conducted. He argued, among other things, that the authorities had made futile attempts to identify the type and make of the vehicle, that they had not clarified whether brake marks had been found near the victim’s body, and that they had not explored the possibility that his son had been killed in a different location and that his body had been moved afterwards to the location where it had been found.
On 9 February 2007 and 8 January 2014 the Prosecutor’s Office informed the second applicant about the general steps and decisions taken in the case during the investigation.
On 19 November 2007 the Police Department took steps to determine the type and make of the vehicle that had hit the applicants’ son on the basis of a tyre mark found on his body. According to a report produced on the same date by the Police Department, their efforts were unsuccessful.
On 31 August 2010 the Police Department classified the case in the category of cases where the perpetrator was unknown. Subsequently, they informed the first applicant of that decision.
Following a request by the applicants in November 2011 for information about the investigation, the case was reviewed by the Prosecutor’s Office, but no new evidence was uncovered that could have led to the identification of the perpetrator.
On 22 August 2014 a prosecutor attached to the Prosecutor’s Office closed the investigation in the case on the ground that the statute of limitations for criminal liability had expired. The applicants’ subsequent challenge against that decision was dismissed by a more senior prosecutor attached to the Prosecutor’s Office on 23 September 2014.
The applicants appealed to the domestic courts against the decisions of the Prosecutor’s Office. They argued that their son had been the victim of a murder disguised as a traffic accident and not of involuntary manslaughter.
On 25 November 2014 the Chişineu-Criş District Court (“the District Court”) held that the criminal investigation into the circumstances of the applicants’ son’s death should be reopened. It held that the investigation had been superficial and had not sought to uncover the truth. The Police Department had gathered evidence during the first few days of the investigation – namely the on-site investigation report, the photographs and the autopsy report – without subsequently examining any other significant evidence. Given the available description of the scene of the incident and the other elements found at that location, it could not be presumed that it had been an accident. Therefore, the authorities had been wrong in classifying the incident as a case of involuntary manslaughter and not as murder.
The District Court held that the authorities had failed to investigate and determine immediately after the incident where the victim had been travelling to and from, how he had arrived at the location where he had been found, whether he had still been alive when he had arrived in the area, whether he had been involved in a fight, and whether he had been drinking alcohol nearby. With the passing of time all this information could prove difficult to clarify.
The District Court further held that the authorities had had a duty to identify all the persons the victim had had contact with prior to his death as revealed by the available testimonies. In addition, it would have been very useful to have determined the victim’s time of death in order to know whether he had died long before his death had been reported to the police.
The District Court considered that a criminological expert report should be produced in the case in order to determine, among other things, the circumstances of the incident, the speed of the vehicle that had collided with the victim, the victim’s position at the time of impact, the area where the impact had taken place, the type of vehicle that could have collided with the victim given the various items found in the area where the body had been found, the type and size of the tyres, and the plausibility of the different hypotheses in the case given the victim’s position and the tyre mark found on his body.
On 6 January 2015 the Prosecutor’s Office referred the case to the Arad Prosecutor’s Office to carry out a murder investigation.
On 17 February 2015 the Arad Prosecutor’s Office commissioned the criminological expert report ordered by the District Court (see paragraph 24 above).
On 14 July 2015 the Timişoara Inter-county Laboratory for Criminological Expert Reports produced the report as instructed. It concluded that it would not be possible to determine the circumstances of the incident until the vehicle that had hit the victim had been found. Nor was it possible to determine the speed of the vehicle and the location of the impact. It was possible that the impact between the vehicle and the victim had taken place on the road. The victim’s position at the moment of impact could not be determined with certainty, but it could not be ruled out that the victim had been standing on the road, knocked down and then run over by the vehicle’s wheels. The vehicle involved in the incident and the size and type of its tyres could not be identified from the available evidence and it could not be determined whether the vehicle had been driving forwards or backwards.
On 19 August 2015 a prosecutor attached to the Arad Prosecutor’s Office closed the investigation in the case on the grounds that the conditions for the offence of murder had not been met. It held that the criminological expert report had not excluded the possibility that the victim had been standing on the road at the moment of impact, knocked down and then run over by the vehicle’s wheels. The prosecutor considered that in these circumstances there was nothing to suggest that the classification of the offence should be changed from involuntary manslaughter to murder.
On 6 October 2015 the more senior prosecutor attached to the Arad Prosecutor’s Office dismissed the applicants’ subsequent challenge against the lower prosecutor’s decision and upheld it.
The applicants appealed to the domestic courts against the decisions of the Arad Prosecutor’s Office. They argued that the investigation had been incomplete and had failed to clarify the circumstances of the case.
By a final judgment of 26 November 2015, the Arad County Court dismissed the applicants’ appeal as ill-founded and upheld the decisions by the Arad Prosecutor’s Office.
The relevant provisions of the former and current Romanian Civil Code, Code of Civil Procedure, and Code of Criminal Procedure concerning the type of proceedings available to victims of traffic offences and/or to their relatives in order to determine the criminal and civil liability of persons suspected of such offences are set out in Nicolae Virgiliu Tănase v. Romania ([GC], no. 41720/13, §§ 66-70, 25 June 2019).