The case concerns the alleged violation of the presumption of the applicant’s innocence on account of a final civil court finding that the applicant was driving under the influence, following his acquittal by the criminal courts for the same offence.
The applicant was born in 1974 and lives in Athens. He was represented by Mr V. Sarakis, a lawyer practising in Athens.
The Government were represented by their Agent’s delegate, Mrs A. Dimitrakopoulou, Senior Legal Advisor at the State Legal Council.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 2 July 2005, the applicant, while driving his car, was involved in a car accident. Mr D.S., the passenger in the applicant’s car, was injured. The police were called in the scene and the applicant was ordered to undergo a breathalyser test. The first test showed an alcohol level of 0.67 mg/l in the applicant’s breath and the second test showed an alcohol level of 0.57 mg/l.
On 24 October 2007 the applicant was acquitted of driving under the influence of alcohol, an offence provided for in Article 42 of Law no. 2696/1999 (judgment no. 93819/24.10.2007 of the C Section of the Athens One-Member Misdemeanour Court). As, according to the information provided by the Government, in this type of acquittal decisions no minutes are kept by the court’s registrar and only an extract (απόσπασμα), attesting the applicant’s acquittal, is available, the reasons for this decision are not known. No remedies were exercised against that judgment which, thus, became final.
On 18 June 2007, D.S. lodged an action with the Athens One-Member Court of First Instance against the applicant and the insurance company in which the applicant’s car was insured “X. S.A.” (henceforth “the insurance company”). By this action, D.S. claimed that he had been injured in the car accident that took place on 5 July 2005 which had been caused by the applicant. He requested the amounts of 18,317.65 euros (EUR) as pecuniary damage and of EUR 150,000 as non-pecuniary damage.
On 30 October 2007 the insurance company lodged an incidental action (παρεμπίπτουσα αγωγή) against the applicant. By this action, it claimed that the insurance contract it had concluded with the applicant excluded damages and bodily injuries caused by the car driver if the latter was under the influence of alcohol or drug substances as provided for by Article 42 of the Traffic Code; that the applicant had been in a state of inebriation at the time of the car accident and, therefore, the damages caused to D.S. were excluded from insurance. It requested the court to recognise that the applicant, as owner of the insured car and driver of it at the moment of the accident, ought to reimburse to it any amount that it would be ordered to pay to D.S.
The Athens One-Member Court of First Instance issued judgment no. 2331/2008 by which it merged the two actions. It partly granted D.S.’s action, ordering the applicant and the insurance company to pay to him EUR 26,081.65 and EUR 850 for costs and expenses and dismissed the rest of D.S.’s claims. It also rejected the insurance company’s incidental action against the applicant, holding that there was no causal link between the consumption of alcohol by the applicant and the accident caused.
On 25 August 2008 the insurance company lodged an appeal against the first-instance decision with the Athens Court of Appeal. By his observations before the appellate court, D.S. lodged a counter-appeal. The Athens Court of Appeal issued judgment no. 4800/2010 by which it concluded that the insurance company should pay to D.S. the amount of EUR 23,191.62, as well as EUR 1,000 for costs and expenses. The domestic court further held that the applicant was driving under the influence of alcohol and that that fact was causally linked with the accident caused, given that it had limited his ability to drive safely. More specifically, it held the following:
“... In the present case, it was proved that the...driver of the...car, at the time of the accident, was under the influence of alcohol, as alcohol amounting to 0.67 mg/l of exhaled air at the first measurement and 0.57 mg/l of exhaled air at the second measurement was detected in him with the method of a breathalyser. That fact, in conjunction with his admission that he had consumed alcohol (two drinks and a glass of wine) in a bar where he was having fun with his friends until the early morning of that same day, and with the above-mentioned reckless driving behaviour he showed by his speed, exceeding by far the permitted limit of 50 km/hour, the ignorance of danger and the overestimation of his skills, lead to the conclusion that indeed, the above-mentioned driver was under the influence of alcohol. [That fact], contrary to what he argues, is causally linked to causing the accident, given that it limited his skill to drive safely and contributed to him driving recklessly and speedily, as mentioned above, [to a degree] that did not allow him to have full control of his vehicle and to be able to make the necessary manoeuvres in order to avoid an accident ...”
The appellate court held that the above-mentioned conclusion was not contradicted by decision no. 93819/2007 of the Athens One-Member Misdemeanour Court which had acquitted the applicant, as the civil courts were not bound by the decisions of the criminal courts, which they assessed freely along with the rest of evidence. Based on that reasoning, the appellate court held that the applicant’s conduct fell within the exemption clauses provided for by the insurance contract. As to the basis for civil liability, the judgment referred to the joint ministerial decision no. K4/585/1978 which, for its part, referred to the relevant article of the Traffic Code and formed part of the general insurance conditions that were annexed to the insurance contract (see paragraph 19 below). Therefore, the applicant should reimburse to the insurance company the amount the latter would pay D.S.
On 21 January 2011 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law with the Court of Cassation. He argued, inter alia, that the decision of the appellate court violated his right to be presumed innocent following his acquittal by the criminal courts for the same facts.
By its decision no. 215/2013, the Court of Cassation rejected the appeal on points of law. As regards the acquittal decision of the criminal courts invoked by the applicant, the Supreme Administrative Court held that Article 6 § 2 of the Convention did not result in the civil courts being bound by res judicata of criminal courts. In the circumstances of the present case, the Athens Court of Appeal had taken into account the acquittal decision of the criminal court. It had formed its conclusions without making any interpretation as regards the reasons for the applicant’s acquittal and without expressing its views, directly or indirectly on the applicant’s criminal responsibility. Therefore, it had not put into question the presumption of the applicant’s innocence, as protected by Article 6 § 2 of the Convention.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution read as follows:
Article 93
“1. Courts are distinguished into administrative and civil and criminal courts, and they are organized by special statutes.”
Article 94
“2. Civil courts shall have jurisdiction on private disputes, as well as on cases of non-contentious jurisdiction, as specified by law.”
Article 96
“1. The punishment of crimes and the adoption of all measures provided by criminal laws belong to the jurisdiction of ordinary criminal courts.”
The relevant provision of the Civil Code reads as follows:
Article 330
“Unless otherwise specified, the debtor is liable for any wilful or negligent failure of the fulfilment of the contractual obligation, either attributed to him or to his legal representatives. Negligence exists when the diligence required in transactions is not paid.”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure read as follows:
Article 321
“The definitive judgments of civil courts that one cannot lodge an application to set a judgment by default aside (ανακοπή ερημοδικίας) and an appeal shall be final and shall constitute res judicata.”
Article 339
“Pieces of evidence shall include the confession, the on-site inspection, the expert’s report, the documents, the parties’ testimonies, the witnesses, the judicial presumptions and affidavits.”
Article 340
“...
Except for cases explicitly defined in law, the court shall freely assess the evidence and shall decide according to its conscience whether the submissions are true. The decision shall state the reasons that led the judge to form his view.”
Article 28 of the Criminal Code reads as follows:
“By negligence shall act anyone who, due to the lack of attention he owed in the circumstances and could pay, either did not foresee the criminal result caused by his act, or foresaw it as possible, but believed that it would not happen.”
Article 42 of the Traffic Code in its relevant parts provides as follows:
“1. No driver may drive a road vehicle under the influence of alcohol, toxic substances or medication that, according to their directions, may affect the driver’s ability. The driver submitted to a check shall be considered as being under the influence of alcohol when the alcohol’s percentage in his body is over 0.50 grams per blood litre, if measured by a blood test, or 0.25 mg per litre of exhaled air, if measured by a breathalyser ...”
Article 25 of the joint ministerial decision no. K4/585/1978 reads in its relevant parts as follows:
“...
Damages caused by a car driver who was under the influence of alcohol or drug substances, within the meaning and under the conditions of Article 42 of the Traffic Code, shall be excluded from insurance.”
Following different decisions by various sections of the Court of Cassation, the issue of whether civil courts are bound by the acquittal decisions of the criminal courts was referred to the full Plenary of the Court of Cassation. By decision no. 4/2020 issued on 15 July 2020, the Plenary of the Court of Cassation held that the decisions of the criminal courts, either acquitting or convicting the defendant, are not binding for the civil courts and vice versa.
In particular, it repeated that Articles 93 to 96 of the Constitution provide for the separation of domestic courts into civil, criminal and administrative. The decisions issued in the context of one jurisdiction are assessed freely by the courts of another jurisdiction unless the law provides otherwise. The opposite conclusion would lead to the criminal courts being bound by the decisions of the civil courts, in case the latter had issued a decision first. Apart from that being against the Code of Criminal procedure regarding the assessment of evidence, it would lead to violation of the presumption of the defendant’s innocence, given that his conviction would be certain beforehand when the civil courts had already concluded on his responsibility.
That conclusion was reinforced by two more elements; firstly by the different nature of the procedure and of the responsibility. The interpretation of negligence in criminal law is different from the one in civil law. In criminal law, the admission of negligence takes into account not only what one “had to do” but also what he personally could do. On the contrary, in civil law, negligence is more objective and is defined in Article 330 of the Civil Code as the “diligence that is required in transactions”. It follows, thus, that the same person may be acquitted by the criminal courts because the element of what he personally could do is missing, but be considered by the civil courts as bearing responsibility because the measures he took were insufficient or inexistent based on the objective diligence.
Secondly, the above-mentioned conclusion was reinforced by the different rules on the distribution of the burden of proof. In criminal courts, the inquisitorial system is applicable and judges and prosecutors have to examine ex officio all evidence pointing towards the innocence or the criminal responsibility of the defendant. On the contrary, in civil courts the parties to the proceedings have the responsibility to adduce all evidence and the presumption of innocence is activated only if the parties adduce the acquittal decision of the criminal court to the civil court. In addition, each jurisdiction requires a different degree of judicial conviction. In criminal trial the principle in dubio pro reo prevails, whereas in civil trial, the judge needs to form full and certain opinion in order to admit that one bears civil responsibility.
It follows that the acquittal decision of criminal courts results from other (less severe) conditions, whereas the relevant decision of a civil court is the result of full judicial conviction. However, the civil court must take into account the acquittal decision as a strong piece of evidence but can depart from it with a fully reasoned decision.
The Court of Cassation reiterated the Court’s case-law on the presumption of innocence holding that, under the Convention, following acquittal by a criminal court, the establishment of civil liability to pay compensation arising out of the same facts on the basis of a less strict burden of proof is not precluded. However, the reasoning of the civil courts must not question the acquittal by the criminal courts by, inter alia, referring that the defendant was acquitted due to doubts, or that he was acquitted by majority, or that the public prosecutor disagreed. The civil court must remain within the borders of the civil trial avoiding any considerations related to the criminal offence that are not relevant for the civil trial so as not to give the impression that it examines also the criminal offence. The use of expressions must be made carefully so as not to question the acquittal by the criminal court. Finally, the assessment as to whether the presumption of innocence has been violated is made in concreto according to the facts of the case and of the reasoning used by the civil court.
Recital 17 of the Preamble of Directive (EU) 2016/343 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2016 on the strengthening of certain aspects of the presumption of innocence and of the right to be present at the trial in criminal proceedings”, reads as follows:
“(17). The term ‘public statements made by public authorities’ should be understood to be any statement which refers to a criminal offence and which emanates from an authority involved in the criminal proceedings concerning that criminal offence, such as judicial authorities, police and other law enforcement authorities, or from another public authority, such as ministers and other public officials, it being understood that this is without prejudice to national law regarding immunity.”
Article 4 of the Directive, in its relevant parts, reads as follows:
Article 4
Public references to guilt
“1.   Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that, for as long as a suspect or an accused person has not been proved guilty according to law, public statements made by public authorities, and judicial decisions, other than those on guilt, do not refer to that person as being guilty. This shall be without prejudice to acts of the prosecution which aim to prove the guilt of the suspect or accused person, and to preliminary decisions of a procedural nature, which are taken by judicial or other competent authorities and which are based on suspicion or incriminating evidence.
...”