The case originated in an application (no. 27853/09) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Latvian national, Ms X (“the applicant”), on 8 May 2009. The President of the Grand Chamber authorised, of his own motion, the non-disclosure of the applicant’s identity (Rule 47 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by Mr R. Strauss, a lawyer practising in Riga. The Latvian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Līce.
The applicant alleged that, on account of the decision by the Latvian courts to order her daughter’s return to Australia, in application of the Hague Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction, she had been the victim of an infringement of her right to respect for her family life within the meaning of Article 8 of the Convention.
The application was assigned to the Third Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1). On 15 November 2011 a Chamber of that Section, composed of Josep Casadevall, President, Corneliu Bîrsan, Alvina Gyulumyan, Egbert Myjer, Ineta Ziemele, Luis López Guerra and Kristina Pardalos, judges, and Santiago Quesada, Section Registrar, declared it admissible and adopted a judgment. By a majority, it found that there had been a violation of Article 8 of the Convention. A dissenting opinion by Judges Myjer and López Guerra was annexed to the judgment, delivered on 13 December 2011.
On 13 March 2012 the Government requested that the case be referred to the Grand Chamber, in accordance with Article 43 of the Convention. This request was accepted by the panel of the Grand Chamber on 4 June 2012.
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined according to the provisions of Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24. At the final deliberations, Nicolas Bratza and Nina Vajić continued to sit following the expiry of their terms of office, in accordance with Article 23 § 3 of the Convention and Rule 24 § 4.
The applicant and the Government filed additional observations (Rule 59 § 1). In addition, third-party comments were also received from the Finnish and Czech Governments, and from the non-governmental organisation Reunite International Child Abduction Centre, the President having authorised them to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3).
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, , on 10 October 2012 (Rule 59 § 3).
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Ms Līce and Mr Strauss.
The applicant was born in 1974 and now resides in . She is a Latvian national, who, in 2007, also acquired Australian nationality.
After meeting T. and beginning a relationship with him at the beginning of 2004, she moved into his flat at the end of that year, although she was still married to another man, R.L., whom she divorced on 24 November 2005.
On 9 February 2005 the applicant gave birth to a daughter, E. The child’s birth certificate does not give the father’s name, and no paternity test was carried out. The applicant, who was still living with T., subsequently received single-parent benefits. In spite of the deterioration in their relationship, the applicant continued to live with T. as a tenant.
On 17 July 2008 the applicant left Australia for Latvia with her daughter, then aged three years and five months.
On 19 August 2008 T. submitted an application to the Family Court in  to establish his parental rights in respect of the child. In support of his claim, he testified in a sworn affidavit that he had been in a relationship with the applicant since 2004 and the latter had always indicated that he was the father of the child, the rental agreement with the applicant for the flat was a sham and had been a mutual decision, and he had made false statements to the social security services in order to enable the applicant to receive single-parent benefit. T. asserted that the applicant had left Australia with the child without his consent, in violation of Article 3 of the Hague Convention, and had gone to an unknown place of residence in . In support of his claim, he submitted e-mail correspondence with members of his family.
The applicant, although apparently invited by various means to attend the hearing or follow it by telephone, was not present.
By a judgment of 6 November 2008, the Australian Family Court recognised T.’s paternity in respect of E. and held that the applicant and T. had had joint parental responsibility for their child since her birth. The judge added that examination of the case would be continued once the child had been returned to , while stating as follows:
“... however, it is not of course for me to say whether the child’s presence in  is the consequence of a wrongful removal or retention. With all due respect, it is for the Latvian judge to rule on that question.”
The applicant did not appeal against that decision.
On 22 September 2008 the Ministry of Children and Family Affairs, which was the Latvian Central Authority responsible for implementing the Hague Convention, received from their Australian counterpart a request from T. seeking the child’s return to Australia on the basis of that Convention. The return request was accompanied by a sworn affidavit setting out the applicable Australian law and certifying, without prejudice to the issue of paternity, that on the date on which the child had been removed from  T. had exercised joint parental authority over her within the meaning of Article 5 of the Hague Convention.
On 19 November 2008 the Riga City Zemgale District Court (“the District Court”) examined the request in the presence of both T. and the applicant.
At the hearing the applicant contested T.’s request. She explained that he had no grounds for being recognised as the father, since she had still been married to another man at the time of the child’s birth and T. had never expressed a wish to have his paternity recognised prior to her departure from . She alleged that as T. had become hostile and sometimes aggressive towards her she had requested that persons who had visited her in  be called as witnesses. The applicant also submitted that T. had initiated the proceedings only in order to benefit from them in criminal proceedings that had allegedly been brought against him in .
The representative of the Bāriņtiesa, a guardianship and curatorship institution established by Riga City Council, called for T.’s request to be dismissed, arguing, on the one hand, that the applicant had been a single mother when the child was removed from Australia and, on the other, that the child had developed ties with Latvia.
By a judgment of 19 November 2008, the District Court granted T.’s request and ordered that the child be returned to  immediately and, in any event, not later than six weeks after its decision. In its reasoning, noting that the Australian courts had established that the applicant and T. exercised joint parental responsibility, the court held, firstly, that the Latvian courts could neither reverse that decision, nor interpret and apply the Australian law. It further held that, in application of Articles 1 and 14 of the Hague Convention, the Latvian courts did not have jurisdiction to rule on T.’s parental responsibility for the child, but only on the child’s departure from Australia and her possible return. It considered that the child’s removal had been wrongful and had been carried out without T.’s consent. As to the application of Article 13 of the Hague Convention, it held, in the light of photographs and copies of e-mails between the applicant and T.’s relatives, that he had cared for the child prior to her departure for Latvia. While noting that witness statements referred to arguments between the parties and to the fact that T. had behaved irascibly towards the applicant and the child, it held that this did not enable it to conclude that T. had not taken care of the child. Lastly, the court dismissed as unfounded the allegation that the child’s return posed a risk of psychological harm.
The applicant lodged an appeal, arguing that when they had left Australia she had been the child’s sole guardian in law and in practice and, further, that her daughter’s return to Australia would expose the child to psychological harm. In support of the latter point, she submitted a certificate prepared by a psychologist at her request after the first-instance court’s judgment. This certificate, based on an examination of E. on 16 December 2008, stated:
“Although it is clear from the examination that her development is adequate in terms of knowledge and language, the child is unable, on account of her age, to say which place of residence she prefers ... Bearing in mind the child’s age and her close emotional ties to her mother, which is normal for her age, her emotional well-being is primarily based on and closely linked to [the applicant’s] psychological balance ... The child needs the daily presence of her mother and to live with her permanently in the same place. Given her age – three years and ten months – an immediate separation from her mother is to be ruled out, otherwise the child is likely to suffer psychological trauma, in that her sense of security and self-confidence could be affected.”
The applicant also maintained on appeal that Latvian was the child’s mother tongue, that she had attended pre-school activities in Latvia, that she had no ties in  and that she needed her mother’s presence. She alleged that T. had never helped them financially and had ill-treated them. In addition, she criticised the lower court for refusing to request information from the Australian authorities about T.’s criminal profile, previous convictions and the charges of corruption allegedly brought against him. She also contended that, were she to return to Australia, she would be unemployed and would have no income, and criticised the District Court for failing to provide for protection measures in the event of return.
On 6 January 2009, on an application by the applicant, the District Court ordered a stay of execution of the decision of 19 November 2008 ordering the child’s return pending completion of the appeal proceedings. Relying on the Preamble to the Hague Convention, it held that the child’s best interests had to take priority over an immediate return, that the child was attached to her mother and that, according to the psychological report submitted by the applicant, a sudden interruption of contact with her mother would traumatise her.
On 26 January 2009, after a hearing in the presence of both the applicant and T., the Riga Regional Court (Rīgas Apgabaltiesa) upheld the first-instance judgment. It held that T.’s request had complied with the Hague Convention, noting the short time-limits set out in it and observing that no formality or analysis was necessary in order to recognise the Australian court’s decision. In addition, it held that the lower court had correctly found, on the basis of all the relevant evidence, especially the letters and photographs that had been submitted, that T. had cared for the child. With regard to the argument by the applicant and the representative of the Bāriņtiesa concerning the alleged lack of information about the child’s situation in the event of her return to Australia, it considered that
“there are no grounds for doubting the quality of welfare and social protection provided to children in Australia, given that, according to the [sworn affidavit], Australian legislation provides, inter alia, for the security of children and [their] protection against ill-treatment within the family”.
With regard to the applicant’s allegations, it held as follows:
“[The Court] dismisses ... the allegation that [T.] ill-treated [the applicant] and the child, as well as [the allegation] that he was liable to a prison sentence for [criminal charges brought against him] as no evidence has been submitted which could, even indirectly, support the allegations.
Neither can the conclusion of the [psychological assessment] of 16 December 2008 serve as evidence against returning the child to the requesting State. Although the conclusion stated that the child was in need of her mother and that immediate termination of contact between the mother and the child should be ruled out, the issue raised before this Court does not concern custody rights ... Pursuant to Article 19 of the Hague Convention, a decision under this Convention concerning the return of a child shall not be taken to be a determination on the merits of any custody issue.
[The Court] considers that ... [the child] ... has not reached an age or level of maturity which would allow her to formulate an opinion concerning a return to .”
On 5 February 2009 a bailiff instructed the applicant to comply with the decision ordering her to return the child by 19 February 2009 at the latest. The applicant refused to do so.
On an unspecified date a bailiff lodged an application with the District Court for execution of the order to return the child. At the same time the District Court, having received a request from the applicant for a stay of execution of the return order for a period of six to twelve months, scheduled a hearing on 16 April 2009.
On 6 March 2009, at T.’s request, the Latvian Central Authority asked the Bāriņtiesa to verify the child’s living conditions and to inform the applicant of T.’s request to see the child.
On 14 March 2009 T. met the applicant and E. unexpectedly near a shopping centre. Taking advantage of this situation, he took E. and drove her to Tallinn (Estonia), then began the return journey to Australia. On 16 March 2009 the Latvian Central Authority, in response to a request from its Estonian counterpart and with a view to authorising T. to take a flight to Helsinki, supplied information concerning T.’s right to return to  with his daughter.
A complaint subsequently filed by the applicant for abduction was dismissed, as was a disciplinary appeal against the Latvian Central Authority; the applicant’s request for a stay of execution of the return order became devoid of purpose.
In September 2009 the Australian Family Court set aside all prior decisions relating to the parents’ rights and ruled that T. had sole parental responsibility for the child. While prohibiting the applicant from making any public statement about matters concerning the child or T., it authorised her to visit her daughter under the supervision of a social worker. The court also prohibited her from speaking to the child in Latvian and ruled that, until the child reached the age of eleven, the applicant was restrained from visiting or communicating by any means with any childcare facility, pre-school or school attended by her daughter, or with a parent of any other child attending the same institution.
Before the Grand Chamber, the Government, referring to an article published in the Latvian press in October 2011 which contained, in particular, statements by the applicant’s sister, indicated that the applicant had returned to live in Australia, had found accommodation and was working in a State welfare institution. They also noted that she was in regular contact with her daughter, meeting her twice a week in a welfare centre, and that she had been able to see her without a social worker being present.
The relevant provisions of the Hague Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction state as follows:
“The States signatory to the present Convention,
Firmly convinced that the interests of children are of paramount importance in matters relating to their custody,
Desiring to protect children internationally from the harmful effects of their wrongful removal or retention and to establish procedures to ensure their prompt return to the State of their habitual residence, as well as to secure protection for rights of access,
Have resolved to conclude a Convention to this effect, and have agreed upon the following provisions –
...
Article 1
The objects of the present Convention are –
a)  to secure the prompt return of children wrongfully removed to or retained in any Contracting State; and
b)  to ensure that rights of custody and of access under the law of one Contracting State are effectively respected in the other Contracting States.
...
Article 3
The removal or the retention of a child is to be considered wrongful where –
a)  it is in breach of rights of custody attributed to a person, an institution or any other body, either jointly or alone, under the law of the State in which the child was habitually resident immediately before the removal or retention; and
b)  at the time of removal or retention those rights were actually exercised, either jointly or alone, or would have been so exercised but for the removal or retention.
The rights of custody mentioned in sub-paragraph a) above, may arise in particular by operation of law or by reason of a judicial or administrative decision, or by reason of an agreement having legal effect under the law of that State.
Article 4
The Convention shall apply to any child who was habitually resident in a  immediately before any breach of custody or access rights. The Convention shall cease to apply when the child attains the age of 16 years.
Article 5
For the purposes of this Convention –
a)  ’rights of custody’ shall include rights relating to the care of the person of the child and, in particular, the right to determine the child’s place of residence;
b)  ’rights of access’ shall include the right to take a child for a limited period of time to a place other than the child’s habitual residence.
...
Article 11
The judicial or administrative authorities of Contracting States shall act expeditiously in proceedings for the return of children.
If the judicial or administrative authority concerned has not reached a decision within six weeks from the date of commencement of the proceedings, the applicant or the Central Authority of the requested State, on its own initiative or if asked by the Central Authority of the requesting State, shall have the right to request a statement of the reasons for the delay. ...
Article 12
Where a child has been wrongfully removed or retained in terms of Article 3 and, at the date of the commencement of the proceedings before the judicial or administrative authority of the Contracting State where the child is, a period of less than one year has elapsed from the date of the wrongful removal or retention, the authority concerned shall order the return of the child forthwith.
The judicial or administrative authority, even where the proceedings have been commenced after the expiration of the period of one year referred to in the preceding paragraph, shall also order the return of the child, unless it is demonstrated that the child is now settled in its new environment.
Where the judicial or administrative authority in the requested State has reason to believe that the child has been taken to another State, it may stay the proceedings or dismiss the application for the return of the child.
Article 13
Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding Article, the judicial or administrative authority of the requested State is not bound to order the return of the child if the person, institution or other body which opposes its return establishes that –
a)  the person, institution or other body having the care of the person of the child was not actually exercising the custody rights at the time of removal or retention, or had consented to or subsequently acquiesced in the removal or retention; or
b)  there is a grave risk that his or her return would expose the child to physical or psychological harm or otherwise place the child in an intolerable situation.
The judicial or administrative authority may also refuse to order the return of the child if it finds that the child objects to being returned and has attained an age and degree of maturity at which it is appropriate to take account of its views.
In considering the circumstances referred to in this Article, the judicial and administrative authorities shall take into account the information relating to the social background of the child provided by the Central Authority or other competent authority of the child’s habitual residence.
Article 14
In ascertaining whether there has been a wrongful removal or retention within the meaning of Article 3, the judicial or administrative authorities of the requested State may take notice directly of the law of, and of judicial or administrative decisions, formally recognised or not in the State of the habitual residence of the child, without recourse to the specific procedures for the proof of that law or for the recognition of foreign decisions which would otherwise be applicable.
...
Article 16
After receiving notice of a wrongful removal or retention of a child in the sense of Article 3, the judicial or administrative authorities of the Contracting State to which the child has been removed or in which it has been retained shall not decide on the merits of rights of custody until it has been determined that the child is not to be returned under this Convention or unless an application under this Convention is not lodged within a reasonable time following receipt of the notice.
Article 17
The sole fact that a decision relating to custody has been given in or is entitled to recognition in the requested State shall not be a ground for refusing to return a child under this Convention, but the judicial or administrative authorities of the requested State may take account of the reasons for that decision in applying this Convention.
...
Article 19
A decision under this Convention concerning the return of the child shall not be taken to be a determination on the merits of any custody issue.
Article 20
The return of the child under the provisions of Article 12 may be refused if this would not be permitted by the fundamental principles of the requested State relating to the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
...”
The Explanatory Report on the 1980 Hague Child Abduction Convention, prepared by Elisa Pérez-Vera and published by The Hague Conference on Private International Law (HCCH) in 1982, seeks to throw into relief the principles which form the basis of the 1980 Convention and to supply to those who must apply the Convention a detailed commentary on its provisions. It appears from this report that, in order to discourage the possibility for the abducting parent to have his or her action recognised as lawful in the State to which the child has been taken, the Convention enshrines, in addition to its preventive aspect, the restoration of the status quo, by an order for immediate return of the child, which would make it possible to restore the situation that had been unilaterally and wrongfully changed. Compliance with custody rights is almost entirely absent from the scope of this Convention, as this matter is to be discussed before the relevant courts in the State of the child’s habitual residence prior to removal. The philosophy of the Hague Convention is to fight against the multiplication of international abductions, based always on a wish to protect children by acting as interpreter of their real interests. Accordingly, the objective of prevention and immediate return corresponds to a specific conception of “the child’s best interests”. However, as the child’s removal may be justified for objective reasons which have to do either with his or her person, or with the environment with which he or she is most closely connected, the Convention allows for certain exceptions to the general obligations on the States to ensure an immediate return (§ 25). Since the return of the child is the basic principle of the Convention, the exceptions to the general duty to secure it form an important element in understanding the exact extent of this duty, and it is possible to distinguish exceptions which derive their justification from three different principles (§ 27). Firstly, the authorities of the requested State are not bound to order the return of the child if the person requesting the return was not actually exercising custody rights or where his or her behaviour shows acceptance of the new situation (§ 28). Secondly, the first paragraph, (b), and second paragraph of Article 13 contain exceptions which clearly derive from a consideration of the interests of the child, to which the Convention gives a definite content. Thus, the interest of the child in not being removed from his or her habitual residence without sufficient guarantees of stability in the new environment gives way before the primary interest of any person in not being exposed to physical or psychological danger or being placed in an intolerable situation (§ 29). Lastly, there is no obligation to return a child when, in terms of Article 20, his or her return “would not be permitted by the fundamental principles of the requested State relating to the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms” (§ 31). The explanatory report, which sets out those exceptions, also emphasises the margin of appreciation inherent in the judicial function.
In 2003 the HCCH published Part II of the Guide to Good Practice under the Hague Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction. Although primarily intended for the new Contracting States and without binding effect, especially in respect of the judicial authorities, this document seeks to facilitate the Convention’s implementation by proposing numerous recommendations and clarifications. The Guide repeatedly emphasises the importance of the Explanatory Report to the 1980 Convention, known as the Pérez-Vera Report, in helping to interpret coherently and understand the 1980 Convention (see, for example, points 3.3.2 “Implications of the transformation approach” and 8.1 “Explanatory Report on the Convention: the Pérez-Vera Report”). In particular, it emphasises that the judicial and administrative authorities are under an obligation, inter alia, to process return applications expeditiously, including on appeal (point 1.5 “Expeditious procedures”). Expeditious procedures should be viewed as procedures which are both fast and efficient: prompt decision-making under the Convention serves the best interests of children (point 6.4 “Case management”). The Guide to Good Practice specifies that delays in enforcement of return orders, or their non-enforcement, in certain Contracting States are matters of serious concern, and recommends that States Parties ensure that there are simple and effective mechanisms to enforce orders for the return of children within their domestic systems, noting that the return must actually be effected and not just ordered (point 6.7 “Enforcement”).
The relevant provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, signed in  on 20 November 1989, read as follows:
Preamble
“The States Parties to the present Convention,
...
Convinced that the family, as the fundamental group of society and the natural environment for the growth and well-being of all its members and particularly children, should be afforded the necessary protection and assistance so that it can fully assume its responsibilities within the community,
Recognizing that the child, for the full and harmonious development of his or her personality, should grow up in a family environment, in an atmosphere of happiness, love and understanding,
...
Have agreed as follows:
...
Article 7
The child shall be registered immediately after birth and shall have the right from birth... to know and be cared for by his or her parents.
...
Article 9
States Parties shall ensure that a child shall not be separated from his or her parents against their will ...
Article 14
States Parties shall respect the right of the child to freedom of thought, conscience and religion.
States Parties shall respect the rights and duties of the parents and, when applicable, legal guardians, to provide direction to the child in the exercise of his or her right in a manner consistent with the evolving capacities of the child.
...
Article 18
States Parties shall use their best efforts to ensure recognition of the principle that both parents have common responsibilities for the upbringing and development of the child. Parents or, as the case may be, legal guardians, have the primary responsibility for the upbringing and development of the child. The best interests of the child will be their basic concern.
...”
The concept of the child’s best interests, derived from the second principle of the Declaration on the Rights of the Child of 20 November 1959, was reproduced in 1989 in Article 3 § 1 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child:
“In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private social welfare institutions, courts of law, administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.”
In its General Comment No. 7 (2005) on Implementing child rights in early childhood, the Committee on the Rights of the Child wished to encourage recognition by States Parties that young children are holders of all rights enshrined in this Convention and that early childhood is a critical period for the realisation of these rights. The best interests of the child are examined, in particular, in section 13, which is worded as follows:
“13.  Best interests of the child. Article 3 sets out the principle that the best interests of the child are a primary consideration in all actions concerning children. By virtue of their relative immaturity, young children are reliant on responsible authorities to assess and represent their rights and best interests in relation to decisions and actions that affect their well-being, while taking account of their views and evolving capacities. The principle of best interests appears repeatedly within the Convention (including in articles 9, 18, 20 and 21, which are most relevant to early childhood). The principle of best interests applies to all actions concerning children and requires active measures to protect their rights and promote their survival, growth, and well-being, as well as measures to support and assist parents and others who have day-to-day responsibility for realizing children’s rights:
(a)  Best interests of individual children. All decision-making concerning a child’s care, health, education, etc. must take account of the best interests principle, including decisions by parents, professionals and others responsible for children. States parties are urged to make provisions for young children to be represented independently in all legal proceedings by someone who acts for the child’s interests, and for children to be heard in all cases where they are capable of expressing their opinions or preferences;
...”
For a more in-depth discussion, see Neulinger and Shuruk v. Switzerland [GC], no. 41615/07, §§ 49-55, ECHR 2010.
The relevant provisions of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union provide:
Article 7
Respect for private and family life
“Everyone has the right to respect for his or her private and family life, home and communications.
Article 24
The rights of the child
Children shall have the right to such protection and care as is necessary for their well-being. They may express their views freely. Such views shall be taken into consideration on matters which concern them in accordance with their age and maturity.
In all actions relating to children, whether taken by public authorities or private institutions, the child’s best interests must be a primary consideration.
Every child shall have the right to maintain on a regular basis a personal relationship and direct contact with both his or her parents, unless that is contrary to his or her interests.”
Council Regulation (EC) No 2201/2003 of 27 November 2003 concerning jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and the matters of parental responsibility (known as “the Brussels II bis Regulation”) reads, in particular, as follows:
“...
(12)  The grounds of jurisdiction in matters of parental responsibility established in the present Regulation are shaped in the light of the best interests of the child, in particular on the criterion of proximity. This means that jurisdiction should lie in the first place with the  of the child’s habitual residence, except for certain cases of a change in the child’s residence or pursuant to an agreement between the holders of parental responsibility.
(13)  In the interest of the child, this Regulation allows, by way of exception and under certain conditions, that the court having jurisdiction may transfer a case to a court of another Member State if this court is better placed to hear the case. However, in this case the second court should not be allowed to transfer the case to a third court.
...”
The Constitution
Article 89
“The State shall recognise and protect fundamental human rights in accordance with this Constitution, laws and international agreements binding upon Latvia.”
Article 110
“The State shall protect and support marriage – a union between a man and a woman, the family, the rights of parents and rights of the child. The State shall provide special support to disabled children, children left without parental care or who have suffered from violence.”
Section 64419 of the Latvian Civil Procedure Act, as in force at the material time, regulates matters concerning the unlawful removal of children across borders into . It provides that the courts are to rule on any application of this type after a court hearing in which the parties participate and to which a representative of the Bāriņtiesa has been invited. In addition, the courts are to ascertain the point of view of the child if he or she is capable of formulating it.
In ruling on the application, the court may take any evidence of its own motion. It may use the most appropriate procedural means and the most rapid methods of establishing the facts, so that a decision can be reached within a period of six weeks after the submission of the application.
Where the court determines that the child has been unlawfully removed to or retained in  and where one of the following conditions is met, the court orders the return of the child to the country of his or her residence:
(a)  the period following the unlawful removal of the child to Latvia or detention in Latvia does not exceed one year from the time the relevant person or institution discovered the whereabouts of the child; or
(b)  the period following the unlawful removal of the child to Latvia or detention in Latvia does exceed one year but the child has not adapted to life in Latvia.
Where the court determines that the child has been unlawfully removed to or retained in  and where one of the following circumstances exists, it may decide not to permit the return of the child to the country of his or her residence:
(a)  more than one year has passed since the relevant person or institution has discovered or had the practical possibility of discovering the whereabouts of the child, but during this period neither has brought proceedings before the relevant institution to seek the return of the child to the country of his or her residence;
(b)  the child has adapted to life in Latvia and his or her return is not in the best interests of the child.
The above-mentioned paragraphs are applicable in so far as they comply with the Hague Convention and Regulation (EC) No 2201/2003 of the Council of the European Union.
Section 61B defines parental responsibility as “all the duties, powers, responsibilities and authority which, by law, parents have in relation to children”.
Section 61C provides that each of the parents of a child who is not 18 has parental responsibility for the child. It has effect subject to court orders.
Section 111B(4) provides as follows:
“For the purposes of the [Hague] Convention:
(a)  each of the parents of a child should be regarded as having rights of custody in respect of the child unless the parent has no parental responsibility for the child because of any order of a court for the time being in force; and
(b)  subject to any order of a court for the time being in force, a person:
(i)  with whom a child is to live under a parenting order; or
(ii)  who has parental responsibility for a child under a parenting order; should be regarded as having rights of custody in respect of the child; and
(c)  subject to any order of a court for the time being in force, a person who has parental responsibility for a child because of the operation of this Act or another Australian law and is responsible for the day-to-day or long-term care, welfare and development of the child should be regarded as having rights of custody in respect of the child; and
(d)  subject to any order of a court for the time being in force, a person:
(i)  with whom a child is to spend time under a parenting order; or
(ii)  with whom a child is to communicate under a parenting order;
should be regarded as having a right of access to the child.”