The case originated in nine applications against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”). The applicants’ details are provided in the Appendix to this judgment.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 2 February 2018 notice of the complaints under Article 6 of the Convention was given to the Government and the remainder of the applications was declared inadmissible.
The Russian Government objected to the examination of certain applications by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The Government of Moldova did not exercise their right under Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 of the Rules of Court to intervene in the present case in relation to application no. 46354/11.
The applicant, an unemployed Moldovan national, was temporarily residing in Moscow in April 2011. He appeared before a justice of the peace charged with a traffic offence under Article 12.15 § 4 of the Code of Administrative Offences (CAO) for driving on the wrong side of the road. The offence was punishable by a fine of 5,000 Russian roubles (RUB – approximately 122 euros (EUR) at the time) and/or licence suspension of between four and six months. On 7 April 2011 the justice of the peace held a trial hearing and heard evidence from the applicant, who pleaded not guilty. The court also heard evidence from officer A., who had witnessed the traffic offence and, as appears from the available material, had then compiled the offence record against the applicant. By a judgment of the same date, the justice of the peace found the applicant guilty and suspended his driving licence for four months.
According to the applicant, the justice of the peace only read out publicly the operative part of the judgment and no full copy was ever made available (to others) in the court registry or otherwise.
The applicant appealed to the Timiryazevskiy District Court of Moscow and sought the appointment of legal aid counsel. Soon afterwards, he left Russia and returned to Moldova. According to the applicant, he was not notified in advance of the date and time of the appeal hearing at his address in Moldova.
On 22 April 2011 the District Court upheld the judgment. The applicant was absent from the appeal hearing. The appeal decision reads as follows:
“The defendant has not attended the appeal hearing. He was notified of the appeal hearing properly, as confirmed by a signed receipt (расписка) in the case file (page 45). The court thus finds it possible to examine the case in his absence ... Having examined the case file, the court concludes that he was rightly found guilty of the offence ...”
The applicant (who was unemployed at the time) appeared before a justice of the peace charged under Article 12.26 § 1 of the CAO for refusing to undergo an alcohol test. The offence was punishable by a fine of RUB 30,000 (approximately EUR 730 at the time) and licence suspension of eighteen months to two years.
At the trial, in reply to a question from the justice of the peace, the applicant stated that he “need[ed] no counsel”. Thereafter, the justice of the peace informed him of his right against self-incrimination and right to retain counsel. The applicant then acknowledged the acts imputed to him and pleaded guilty. By a judgment of 18 September 2013 the justice of the peace sentenced him to a fine of RUB 30,000 and suspended his driving licence for eighteen months.
The applicant appealed to the Volskiy District Court of the Saratov Region, pleading not guilty. At a hearing on 21 October 2013, in reply to a question from the judge, the applicant stated that he “need[ed] no counsel”. On the same date the court upheld the judgment.
The applicant sought a review of the above decisions. On 26 December 2013 they were upheld by the Saratov Regional Court and on 13 February 2014 by the Supreme Court of Russia.
The applicant, who was apparently unemployed at the time, was accused of a traffic offence under Article 12.26 of the CAO. Having heard his representative (Mr Vologin), on 26 May 2015 a justice of the peace sentenced the applicant to a fine of RUB 30,000 and suspended his driving licence for twenty-one months. The applicant drafted a statement of appeal and lodged it with the Volskiy District Court of the Saratov Region. Having heard Mr Vologin, on 24 July 2015 the District Court upheld the judgment. The applicant then sought a review of the above decisions and lodged related statements of appeal that he had drafted. After considering the appeal in a written procedure, on 25 August and 7 December 2015 the Saratov Regional Court and Supreme Court of Russia upheld the decisions.
The applicant (who was unemployed at the time) appeared before a justice of the peace charged with an offence under Article 12.7 § 2 of the CAO punishable (alternatively) by up to fifteen days’ detention, a fine of RUB 30,000 or one to two hundred hours’ community service. He was accused of driving his vehicle on 3 November 2016 without a licence (it having been suspended in earlier separate proceedings). Disagreeing with the accusation, the applicant made a note in the offence record indicating that he had not been driving his vehicle but had been waiting for his child outside it.
According to the Government, at 11 a.m. on 23 November 2016 the justice of the peace made a telephone call to the applicant’s number. A report of this telephone conversation was admitted to the case file, but has not been provided to the Court. According to the applicant, he received a telephone call informing him that the trial hearing was listed for 24 November 2016.
On 23 November 2016 the justice of the peace examined the offence record and other written material submitted by the police. He found the applicant guilty and sentenced him to a fine of RUB 30,000. The justice of the peace heard no oral representations from any officials or witnesses. The relevant parts of the trial judgment read as follows:
“[The defendant’s] guilt is confirmed by the following [case material]: the offence record ...
[The applicant] has not attended the trial hearing; he was informed of the date and place of that hearing in a proper manner. He has not submitted any objection or request for adjournment ... The justice of the peace thus finds it possible to examine the case in the defendant’s absence.”
The applicant appealed to the Volskiy District Court of the Saratov Region arguing, inter alia, that he had been informed by telephone that a hearing was listed for 24 November 2016 (and not 23 November 2016). The applicant maintained his version of events and pleaded not guilty.
It appears that on 29 December 2016 the District Court held a hearing and heard evidence from the applicant and a traffic police officer. The latter stated that he had seen the applicant’s vehicle move and then stop, and that the applicant had then got out of the vehicle. Thereafter, a report acknowledging his removal from the vehicle (протокол об отстранении от управления транспортным средством) and an offence record had been compiled. On 29 December 2016 the District Court upheld the trial judgment, stating as follows:
“The justice of the peace listed a hearing for 23 November 2016. The defendant did not then attend that hearing. A telephone notification was (had been) made to the available telephone number as regards the place and time of the hearing. Therefore, the defendant had been properly informed.”
On 31 January 2017 the Saratov Regional Court upheld the lower courts’ judgments. On 10 April 2017 the Supreme Court of Russia upheld them on review.
The applicant appeared before a justice of the peace charged under Article 12.8 § 1 of the CAO with drink driving. The offence was punishable by a fine of RUB 30,000 and licence suspension of eighteen months to two years. According to the Government, the applicant was assisted at the trial by “defender” Dz. (see also paragraph 33 below), who “was only absent from the hearing on 29 April 2016”. By a judgment of 29 April 2016 a justice of the peace sentenced the applicant to a fine of RUB 30,000 and suspended his driving licence for eighteen months. The applicant appealed. On 24 May 2016 the appellate court held a hearing, at which the applicant was assisted by Mr Vologin. On the same date the court upheld the judgment.
The applicant, who was apparently unemployed at the time, was accused of a traffic offence under Article 12.7 § 2 of the CAO. Having heard evidence from the applicant and Mr Vologin, by a judgment of 31 January 2017 a justice of the peace sentenced the applicant to a fine of RUB 30,000. The applicant drafted a statement of appeal and lodged it with the Volskiy District Court of the Saratov Region. On 2 March 2017 the court upheld the judgment. The applicant then drafted statements of appeal for further review and lodged them with the Regional Court and then the Supreme Court of Russia. After considering the case in a written procedure, on 4 April and 14 June 2017 those courts upheld the lower courts’ decisions.
The applicant was accused of a traffic offence under Article 12.26 of the CAO. At a hearing before a justice of the peace on 29 March 2016 he pleaded not guilty. Another hearing was listed for 6 April 2016. He was notified of the trial hearing but chose not to attend. Prior to the hearing the applicant’s representative (Mr Vologin) telephoned the court to say that he was “on his way to the court”. By a judgment of 6 April 2016 the justice of the peace sentenced the applicant to a fine of RUB 30,000 and suspended his driving licence for eighteen months. In its judgment the court stated that in Mr Vologin’s telephone message to the court he had not specified when and where he had been “on his way” from or lodged any formal request for adjournment for any valid reason.
Mr Vologin drafted and lodged a statement of appeal on behalf of the applicant. Having heard Mr Vologin and some witnesses, on 21 June 2016 the Volskiy District Court of the Saratov Region upheld the judgment. The appellate court noted that Mr Vologin had not lodged a formal request for adjournment or obtained a written authority form from the applicant (having announced his involvement in the case in an oral submission at the first hearing before the justice of the peace). The applicant then drafted statements of appeal for further review and lodged them with the Regional Court and then the Supreme Court of Russia. After considering the case in a written procedure, on 14 July and 28 September 2016 those courts upheld the lower courts’ decisions.
The applicant appeared before a justice of the peace charged with an offence under Article 12.7 § 2 of the CAO punishable by up to fifteen days’ detention, a fine of RUB 30,000 or one to two hundred hours’ community service. He was accused of driving his vehicle on 3 November 2016 without a licence (it having been suspended in earlier separate proceedings).
The applicant pleaded guilty at the trial. By a judgment of 21 June 2016 the justice of the peace convicted him and imposed a fine of RUB 30,000.
The applicant appealed to the Volskiy District Court of the Saratov Region. It appears that he chose not to attend the appeal hearing. On 15 July 2016 the District Court upheld the judgment.
The applicant appeared before a justice of the peace charged under Article 12.26 § 1 of the CAO for refusing to undergo a breathalyser test. He was assisted by Mr Vologin.
It appears that both the applicant and his representative attended the trial hearings. For unspecified reasons, neither of them attended the last hearing on 24 March 2017. By a judgment of that date the justice of the peace sentenced the applicant to a fine of RUB 30,000 and suspended his driving licence for twenty-two months. The applicant appealed to the Engels District Court of the Saratov Region.
On 27 April 2017 the District Court held a hearing, at which a public prosecutor made representations. It appears that the applicant chose not to attend. It was indicated in the appeal decision that the appellate court had proceeded to a full re-examination of the case under Article 30.6 of the CAO.
On the same date the court upheld the judgment.
Article 25.1 of the CAO provides that a person who is being prosecuted for an administrative offence has a right to study the case file, adduce evidence and “have legal assistance from a defender”.
Article 25.5 of the CAO provides that a “defender” (защитник) may take part in the proceedings for the purpose of providing legal assistance to the defendant. A defender may be an advocate (адвокат) or “another person”.
For a summary of other relevant provisions of domestic law and practice, see Mikhaylova v. Russia (no. 46998/08, 19 November 2015), and Karelin v. Russia (no. 926/08, 20 September 2016).