The case originated in an application (no. 46926/09) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Anzhelika Rafaelevna Bakrina (“the applicant”), on 3 July 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr R. Faizov, a lawyer practising in Kazan. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 1 July 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1978 and lives in Kazan.
.  On 24 November 2006 the Novo-Savinovskiy District Court of Kazan (Ново-Савиновский районный суда города Казани) acquitted the applicant on four counts of drug-dealing, convicted her on one count and sentenced her to eight years’ imprisonment and a fine.
.  On 13 February 2007 the Supreme Court of Republic of Tatarstan (Верховный суд Республики Татарстан) upheld the judgment on appeal with minor changes.
.  On 2 July 2008 the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Tatarstan in supervisory review proceedings annulled the judgment on the applicant’s request, because she was formally indicted outside the prescribed statutory time-limits.
.  On 15 October 2008 the Novo-Savinovskiy District Court of Kazan acquitted the applicant on the same grounds after re-calculation of the applicable time-limits for investigative actions.
.  On 18 November 2008 the Supreme Court of the  upheld the judgment on appeal.
.  On 18 February 2009 the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Tatarstan in supervisory review proceedings annulled the judgments on the prosecutor’s request. The annulment was reasoned by three main arguments: 1) in the opinion of the supervisory court all of the evidence was collected within the statutory time-limits, 2) the lower courts having examining all the evidence during the hearings did not mention them in the judgments and only gave reasons for dismissing them, and 3) formal indictment of the applicant outside of the statutory time-limits should not have led to acquittal in any event. The case was sent for reconsideration.
.  On 9 October 2009 the applicant was convicted, sentenced to five years’ imprisonment, suspended for five years, and fined.
The relevant domestic law governing supervisory review in criminal proceedings at the material time has been summarised in the case Berdzenishvili v. Russia (dec.), no. 31697/03, ECHR 2004-II (extracts).