The case originated in an application (no. 45017/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Yuriy Sergeyevich Nekhoroshev (“the applicant”), on 19 November 2004.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were initially represented by Mr P. Laptev, the former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights, and subsequently by their Representative, Mrs V. Milinchuk.
On 12 October 2006 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1931 and lives in .
In November 2001 the applicant, a retired military officer, brought proceedings against the Military Service Commission of Moscow (Военный комиссариат г. Москвы – “the Commission”) for recalculation of his pension as from 1993 to take account of the fact that he served in the extreme north of Russia which made him eligible for a higher pension.
On 3 December 2002 the Tverskoy District Court of Moscow granted the applicant’s claim, adjusted his pension by a coefficient 1.4 and awarded him 221,913.54 Russian roubles (RUB) in arrears.
The Commission did not lodge an ordinary appeal against the judgment and it became binding and enforceable on 16 December 2002.
On 26 December 2002 the defendant enforced the judgment in a part concerning the lump sum of RUB 221,913.54. The monthly pension payments were calculated based on a coefficient of 1.4 in accordance with the judgment of 3 December 2002 during the period from December 2002 until August 2004.
On 3 December 2003 the Commission filed an application for supervisory review, claiming that the civil-law provisions on which the court based its judgment were not relevant to the applicant.
On 18 May 2004 the applicant was informed about the initiation of the supervisory-review procedure.
On 20 May 2004 the Presidium of the Moscow City Court held a supervisory-review hearing. It held that the first-instance court had erroneously applied the substantive law. On that ground it quashed the judgment of 3 December 2002 and remitted the matter for a fresh examination. Before the announcement of the judgment the applicant was asked to wait outside the courtroom. At the same time the respondent remained there. The decision of the court was announced to the applicant by the bailiff. The applicant received a copy of the final decision on 6 August 2004.
On 28 February 2005 the Tverskoy District Court of Moscow dismissed the applicant’s claim for recalculation of his pension. At the same time, the court rejected the Commission’s claim for recovery of the sum already paid to the applicant in arrears pursuant to the judgment of 3 December 2002, since such recovery was not possible under the domestic law. On 10 June 2005 the Moscow City Court upheld the judgment on appeal.
Article 362. Grounds for quashing or altering judicial decisions by appeal courts
“1.  The grounds for quashing or altering judicial decisions by appeal courts are:
...
(4)  violation or incorrect application of substantive or procedural legal provisions.”
Article 376. Right to apply to a court exercising supervisory review
“1.  Judicial decisions that have become legally binding, with the exception for judicial decisions by the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation, may be appealed against ... to a court exercising supervisory review, by parties to the case and by other persons whose rights or legal interests have been adversely affected by these judicial decisions.
Judicial decisions may be appealed against to a court exercising supervisory review within one year after they became legally binding...”
Article 381. Examination of an application for supervisory review
“2. Having examined an application for supervisory review, the judge issues a decision on –
(1)  obtaining the case file if there exist doubts as to the lawfulness of the judicial decision...
If a decision to obtain the file has been made, the judge may suspend enforcement of the judicial decision until the supervisory-review proceedings have been completed...”
Article 384. Decision on remitting the case for examination on the merits 
by a supervisory-review court
“1.  A judicial decision on remitting the case for examination on the merits by a supervisory-review court must contain:
(7)  a reasoned description of the grounds for remitting the case for examination on the merits...”
Article 387. Grounds for quashing or altering judicial decisions 
by way of supervisory review
“Judicial decisions of lower courts may be quashed or altered by way of supervisory review on the grounds of substantial violations of substantive or procedural legal provisions.”
Article 390. Competence of the supervisory-review court
“1.  Having examined the case by way of supervisory review, the court may ...
(2)  quash the judicial decision issued by a court of first, second or supervisory-review instance in whole or in part and remit the matter for a fresh examination; ...
(5)  quash or alter the judicial decision issued by a court of first, second or supervisory-review instance and issue a new judicial decision, without remitting the matter for a fresh examination, if substantive legal provisions have been erroneously applied or interpreted.”
“22.  ... The [one-year] time-limit for lodging an application for supervisory review of judicial decisions that became legally binding before 1 February 2003, shall run from 1 February 2003.”