The case originated in an application (no. 51249/11) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Stevan Oravec (“the applicant”), on 30 July 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr D. Omrčen, a lawyer practising in Osijek. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged that a decision ordering his detention issued on 10 June 2011 had not been lawful, and that the proceedings concerning his detention had not complied with the requirements of Article 5 §§ 3 and 4 of the Convention.
On 9 February 2015 the above complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1978 and lives in Osijek.
On 27 April 2011 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of trafficking illegal substances. On the same day an investigating judge of the Osijek County Court (Županijski sud u Osijeku) heard his evidence and ordered his pre-trial detention under Article 102 § 1 (3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (risk of reoffending). The decision also stated that the detention could not exceed forty-eight hours.
On 28 April 2011 another investigating judge of the Osijek County Court summoned the applicant, who said that he would be remaining silent because he wanted to be represented by a lawyer, D.O. The judge issued a decision on opening an investigation against him and two other suspects, G.D. and I.D., on charges of trafficking illegal substances. He also ordered his detention for one month, referring to Article 104 § 1 and Article 102 § 1 (3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The applicant’s detention was ordered because G.D. had said that he had been buying illegal drugs from him. Furthermore, he was unemployed and another set of criminal proceedings on similar charges was pending against him. Following an appeal lodged by the applicant, on 3 May 2011 the decision on his detention was upheld by a three-judge panel of the Osijek County Court.
On 24 May 2011 the investigating judge ordered the applicant’s immediate release because G.D. had retracted his previous statement that he had been buying illegal drugs from him. Furthermore, the applicant had submitted documents showing that he had his own candle-making business. The applicant was released that same day. However, following an appeal lodged by the Osijek County State Attorney’s Office (Županijsko državno odvjetništvo u Osijeku), on 26 May 2011 a three-judge panel of the Osijek County Court quashed that investigating judge’s decision and ordered him to re-examine the case.
On 31 May 2011 the investigating judge confirmed his previous decision. On 1 June 2011 the Osijek County State Attorney’s Office lodged an appeal, which was not communicated to the applicant or his counsel. It was argued that the risk of the applicant reoffending continued to exist for several reasons. Firstly, G.D. had given a detailed statement describing how he and I.D. had been buying illegal drugs from the applicant, and the evidence showed that the applicant had had frequent telephone contact with G.D. and I.D. Furthermore, G.D.’s retraction of his previous statement had been unconvincing. Secondly, the applicant had already been convicted of a similar offence, and another set of criminal proceedings concerning charges of trafficking illegal substances were pending against him. Thirdly, the evidence indicated that the applicant had been suspected of selling illegal substances over a longer period of time. Fourthly, he was unemployed and had no lawful means of subsistence.
On 10 June 2011 a three-judge panel of the Osijek County Court, composed of Judges D.K., A.B. and M.J., held a closed session in the parties’ absence. They reversed the investigating judge’s decision and ordered the applicant’s pre-trial detention under Article 102 § 1 (3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The decision did not set any time-limit for the detention.
On 14 June 2011 the applicant was again placed in pre-trial detention.
On 17 June he lodged an appeal with the Supreme Court against the decision of 10 June 2011. Judge M.R., acting as a single judge of the Osijek County Court, declared it inadmissible on 27 June 2011 on the grounds that it was not amenable to further appeal. This decision was upheld on 1 July 2011 by a three-judge panel of the same court, composed of Judges R.Š., A.R. and N.S.
On 6 July 2011 the Osijek County State Attorney’s Office indicted the applicant in the Osijek County Court on charges of trafficking illegal substances.
On 8 July 2011 a three-judge panel of the court extended the applicant’s detention under Article 102 § 1 (3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure. An appeal lodged by him against that decision was dismissed by the Supreme Court on 20 July 2011.
On 12 July 2011 the applicant lodged two constitutional complaints, about the decisions of 10 June and 1 July 2011 respectively (see paragraphs 10 and 12 above).
On 15 July 2011 the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske) declared the constitutional complaint about the decision of 10 June 2011 inadmissible, on the grounds that on 8 July 2011 a new decision extending the applicant’s detention had been adopted. It also declared his constitutional complaint about the decision of 1 July 2011 inadmissible, endorsing the lower courts’ reasoning (see paragraph 12 above).
On 18 October 2012 the Osijek County Court dismissed the indictment against the applicant because the prosecutor had withdrawn the charges against him. On 14 June 2012 the Supreme Court ordered his release.
On 15 April 2013 the applicant submitted a request for settlement with the Ministry of Justice in connection with his wrongful detention. A settlement was not reached.
On 1 August 2013 the applicant brought a claim in the Osijek Municipal Court against the State under Article 480 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, seeking non-pecuniary and pecuniary damages for his detention, which he claimed had been unfounded (neosnovan).
On 18 February 2014 the court allowed the applicant’s claim and awarded him 137,550 Croatian kunas (HRK – about 18,560 euros) in non-pecuniary damages. It held that his detention had been unfounded because a judgment dismissing the charges (presuda kojom se optužba odbija) had been adopted after the State Attorney’s Office had dropped the charges against him. The proceedings are still pending as regards the claim for pecuniary damages. The relevant part of the judgment reads:
“The claimant’s claim is well founded in its entirety.
The documents in the case file show that the claimant was finally acquitted of the charge [sic] that he had committed the criminal offence against the values protected by international law – abuse of illegal drugs, described and punishable under Article 173 § 2 of the Criminal Code in conjunction with section 41 of the Criminal Code Amendments Act (Official Gazette no. 71/06) by the Osijek County Court’s final judgment no. K-43/2012-86 of 18 October 2012.
Further documents show that the claimant was actually detained in connection with the criminal proceedings against him for 393 days.
The Osijek County Court’s decision no. Kv-138/2011-3 of 26 May 2011 (pages 16 and 17 of the case file) shows that the claimant had already been finally convicted by the Donji Miholjac Municipal Court of the criminal offence of abuse of illegal drugs under Article 173 § 1 of the Criminal Code, that is to say for an offence of the same type but in its basic form.
Against the above background, this court considers that the claimant is to be awarded the amount of HRK 350 for each day he spent in detention, which in total amounts to HRK 137,550 since the claimant was detained without basis for 393 days.
When assessing the adequate amount of [just] satisfaction, the Court has taken into account all the circumstances of this case: that the claimant was indicted for the criminal offence of abuse of illegal drugs, described and punishable under Article 173(2) of the Criminal Code in conjunction with section 41 of the Criminal Code Amendments Act; was deprived of his personal liberty for 393 days; [and] that the proceedings ended by the Osijek County Court’s judgment no. K-43/2012-86 of 18 October 2012 because the County State Attorney’s Office had withdrawn the charges.
It is true that the claimant was previously convicted of the above-mentioned criminal offence. However, in the opinion of this court the sole fact that the claimant was previously convicted has no effect on the defendant’s obligation to compensate him for his unfounded deprivation of liberty, or his detention. Therefore, since the defendant has not proved that the claimant caused his arrest by some unlawful act such as absconding or concealing evidence, this court considers that there was no contribution on his part to the ordering of his detention.”
The relevant provision of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 56/1990, 135/1997, 8/1998, 113/2000, 124/2000, 28/2001, 41/2001, 55/2001, 76/2010, 85/2010 and 5/2014) reads as follows:
“Personal freedom and integrity are inviolable.
No one shall be deprived of his liberty save in accordance with the law, and any deprivation of liberty must be examined by a court.”
The relevant parts of the Constitutional Court Act (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 49/2002) read as follows:
“1.  Anyone may lodge a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court if he or she deems that the decision of a State authority, local or regional government, or a legal person invested with public authority, on his or her rights and obligations or as regards a suspicion or accusation of a criminal offence, has violated his or her human rights or fundamental freedoms, or the right to local or regional government guaranteed by the Constitution (“constitutional right”) ...
If another legal remedy exists in respect of the violation of the constitutional right [complained of], a constitutional complaint may be lodged only after that remedy has been used.”
 “The Constitutional Court shall declare a constitutional complaint inadmissible if it does not have competence in the matter, or if [the complaint] is time-barred, incomplete, incomprehensible or inadmissible. The constitutional complaint is inadmissible if the relevant legal remedies have not been exhausted, that is, if the applicant has failed to use them in the proceedings before the lower courts, with the exception provided for in section 62 of this Act; the complaint has been lodged by a person not entitled to submit it; or if the complaint has been lodged by a legal entity not vested with constitutional rights.”
The relevant provision of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Zakon o kaznenom postupku, Official Gazette nos. 110/1997, 27/1998, 58/1999, 112/1999, 58/2002, 143/2002 and 62/2003) provides:
“(1) Where a reasonable suspicion exists that a person has committed a criminal offence, he or she may be placed in detention if:
...
(3) special circumstances justify the fear that [he or she] might reoffend ...
...”
“1. Pre-trial detention shall be ordered and extended by a written court decision.
A decision on pre-trial detention shall contain: ... time-limits for detention ...”
“(1) After an investigation has been opened [a decision] ordering or cancelling detention may be adopted by an investigation judge. If this is at the request of a State attorney the ... judge shall decide the matter immediately and within twenty-four hours. If the ... judge does not agree with the request, he or she shall adopt a decision dismissing it against which the State attorney may appeal within forty-eight hours. The appeal has no suspensive effect and is to be decided by a panel ... within a further forty-eight hours.
...”
“1. Detention ordered by an investigating judge or ... detention ordered for the first time during an investigation by a decision of a panel shall not exceed one month from the date [the detainee was] deprived of his liberty ...
For justifiable reasons the investigating judge may, on his or her own motion or at the request of a State Attorney, extend detention for an initial period of no more than two months and then for periods of no more than three months.
...”
“The following persons have the right to compensation:
[a person] who was detained but ... the criminal proceedings ended by ... a judgment dismissing the charges ...
...
who has been arrested or detained on the basis of erroneous or unlawful conduct on the part of a State body, ...”
In decision no. U-III-5449/2013 of 13 January 2014, the Constitutional Court found that it should change its approach to cases where a constitutional complaint has been lodged about a decision on detention which has since been replaced by a new decision on detention before the Constitutional Court has ruled on the complaint. It considered that in view of the requirements under Article 5 § 4 of the Convention, such complaints should be examined on the merits. The relevant part of the decision reads:
“6. The [Court’s] case-law concerning Croatia shows that the Constitutional Court is obliged to re-examine its case-law in line with the requirements under Article 5 § 4 [of the Convention]....
 The Constitutional Court is obliged, however, to align its practice with the requirements of Article 5 § 4 of the Convention. That means in the case at issue the Constitutional Court is obliged to examine on the merits the appellant’s complaints about the disputed decisions to extend his pre-trial detention, irrespective of the fact that those decisions were set aside ... before the termination of the proceedings before the Constitutional Court ...”