The case originated in an application (no. 35585/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Russian nationals, Mr Shomsudin Suleymanov, Mr Said Suleymanov and Ms Zaret Suleymanova (“the applicants”), on 22 July 2008.
The applicants were represented by Mr D. Itslayev and Ms M. Irizbayeva, lawyers practising in Russia. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 23 September 2011 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The first applicant, Mr Shomsudin Suleymanov, was born in 1951. The second applicant, Mr Said Suleymanov, is the first applicant’s son, and was born in 1982. The third applicant, Ms Zaret Suleymanova, is the first applicant’s daughter, and was born in 1986. They live in Gudermes, Chechnya.
The circumstances of the case as submitted by the parties can be summarised as follows.
Until December 2004 the applicants’ family lived in the village of Tazen-Kala in the Vedeno District in Chechnya. When the village was raided and bombed by the military, most of the inhabitants left. Only three families, including the applicants’ one, remained in the village by the autumn of 2004.
On 3 December 2004 the first applicant and his wife were away staying with relatives. Their three children – their fourteen-year-old son, Saydan, and the second and third applicants – remained at home.
At about 8.30 p.m. the second applicant heard a helicopter approaching the village and then a bomb exploding in the vicinity of their house. The windows of the house were blown out and the candles went out. The second applicant tried to calm down the third applicant and Saydan who were very frightened. He lit a candle and asked his brother and sister to lie down on the floor. He then ran out to open the door of the cowshed.
Immediately after the second applicant returned to the house he heard the helicopter approaching again and a new explosion followed. He lost consciousness. When he regained consciousness his head ached, he was blinded and blood covered his face. He heard the third applicant screaming. He found her by the sound of her voice, pulled her out from the debris and carried her outside. He then returned to the house in search of Saydan. He found his body lying on the floor and carried it outside.
The neighbours came to help them. One of them brought the second and third applicants to the doctor in the neighbouring village. They were transported to a hospital in Gudermes and then on to Grozny.
The third applicant was diagnosed with an open craniocerebral injury, bruising on the brain, a penetrating head trauma and a trauma to the left eye. She had to follow a lengthy course of treatment. In January 2006 she had an ocular prosthesis fitted.
The second applicant also suffered eye trauma and had to follow a lengthy course of treatment. He is now blind in his left eye and has a disability of the third degree.
The applicants’ house completely burned down.
The applicants submitted to the Court written statements made by their neighbours, confirming the above events.
On 4 December 2004 the first applicant complained to the prosecutor’s office about the bombing and destruction of his house, the death of his son Saydan and the wounding of his other children, the second and third applicants.
On 9 December 2004 the police inspected the applicants’ house and questioned the neighbours.
On an unspecified date in 2004, the second and third applicants were also questioned.
By a letter of 14 January 2005 the local department of the Federal Security Service (“the FSB”) informed the military prosecutor’s office of military unit no. 20116 that the first applicant had never been suspected of membership of illegal armed groups and that there had been no anti-terrorist operations on 3 December 2004.
By a letter of 21 January 2005 the Vedeno Military Commandant informed the prosecutor’s office that the military forces had not conducted any special operations involving helicopters on 3 December 2004.
On 21 January 2005 the Vedeno district prosecutor opened criminal proceedings under Article 167 § 2 of the Criminal Code (premeditated destruction of property by way of arson, explosion or other dangerous method or which resulted in a person’s death or other serious consequences).
By a letter of 26 January 2005 the Vedeno prosecutor informed the first applicant that the criminal investigation would be conducted by the Vedeno District Temporary Department of the Interior (“the VOVD”).
On 26 January 2005 the second applicant was granted victim status. The decision stated, in particular, that the pecuniary damage sustained by him as a result of the destruction of his house amounted to more than 500,000 Russian roubles (RUB).
On 12 February 2005 the Vedeno FSB issued a certificate stating that they did not have any information about any military helicopter operations in the relevant area.
On 22 February 2005 the Vedeno Military Commandant informed the investigators in charge of the applicants’ case that he did not have any information about the helicopter which had flown over the Vedeno district on 3 December 2004. Nor did he know whether any illegal armed groups had helicopters at their disposal. He advised the investigators to request that information from the United Group Alignment (“the UGA”) in Khankala.
On 24 February 2005 the investigators asked the UGA for information on military operations involving helicopters, conducted on 3 December 2004. They also asked whether any illegal armed groups were known to possess any helicopters. Despite several subsequent reminders, no response to those requests was received.
On 1 March 2005 the third applicant was granted victim status. On the same day, she was questioned about the events of 3 December 2004.
A medical certificate obtained by the investigators on 3 March 2005 from the Central District Hospital in Gudermes described the injuries sustained by the second and third applicants on 3 December 2004.
On 4 March 2005 the investigators ordered an expert medical opinion in respect of the injuries sustained by the third applicant.
On 15 March 2005 an expert examination of shell splinters found in the remains of the applicants’ house was carried out. It was established that the splinters were part of a 130 mm aircraft-launched unguided rocketpropelled missile which had been industrially produced.
On 18 May 2005 the investigators asked the Vedeno prosecutor to refer the case to a military prosecutor’s office, stating that the crime against the applicants had been committed by an identifiable helicopter pilot. Given that only the military forces possessed military helicopters, the case fell within the competence of a military prosecutor’s office.
On 21 May 2005 the investigation was suspended for failure to identify the perpetrators.
On 22 May 2005 the Vedeno prosecutor’s office sent the criminal case to the Chechnya prosecutor’s office for referral to a military prosecutor’s office.
On 30 June 2006 the criminal case was sent to the military prosecutor of military unit no. 20116.
On 28 July 2006 the criminal case was sent to the military prosecutor’s office of the UGA for a further transfer to the Chechnya prosecutor’s office and then back to the Vedeno prosecutor’s office.
On 23 August 2006 the Chechnya deputy prosecutor overruled the decision of 22 May 2005, finding that there was no evidence that the applicant’s house had been bombed by the military, and that therefore the investigation could not be conducted by a military prosecutor’s office.
On the same day the Chechnya deputy prosecutor revoked the suspension of the investigation of 21 May 2005. He stated that the investigation had not been conducted thoroughly and ordered that a number of steps be taken. In particular, the investigators were to obtain information on any special operations conducted on 3 December 2004 in the Vedeno District, identify military units possessing helicopters and study their flight records in order to determine which helicopter had destroyed the applicant’s house, and question the applicant’s neighbours and establish the pecuniary damage sustained by the applicants.
The VOVD resumed the investigation. On an unspecified date in 2006, the investigators questioned the second applicant and the applicants’ neighbours.
In November 2006 the first applicant found, near his destroyed house, a shell splinter bearing identification number 18-02-048-02. On 19 November 2006 he asked the investigators to commission an expert examination of that splinter to determine, with the aid of the identification number, the military unit to which the missile belonged. On the same day, the investigators ordered an expert examination of the splinter. However, they rejected the applicant’s request for identification of the military unit to which the missile belonged because that information was a State secret.
On 19 November 2006 the expert examination issued its conclusion concerning the shell splinter found by the first applicant. Its report confirmed that the splinter was part of a 130 mm aircraft-launched unguided rocket-propelled military-use missile.
On the same date, 19 November 2006, the investigators suspended the criminal proceedings for failure to identify the perpetrators.
On 18 September 2007 the first applicant complained to the Vedeno District Court of the investigators’ failure to effectively investigate the criminal case.
On 22 January 2008 the Vedeno District Court suspended the examination of his complaint as the criminal case file and the material evidence contained therein had been lost.
On 4 February 2009 the Vedeno District Court examined another complaint lodged by the applicants concerning the investigators’ failure to effectively investigate the attack. The court allowed the complaint in full, recognised the failure of the investigators to take basic steps as unlawful and ordered that the investigation be resumed and transferred to the military prosecutor’s office as the case file materials confirmed the involvement of the military in the crime.
On 7 March 2009 the investigation was resumed following a decision by the investigators’ superior, who found that the suspension had been unlawful and premature. It appears that subsequently, on an unspecified date in 2009, the criminal case file was found, but the material evidence obtained by the investigation between 2004 and 2009, including the fragments of the shell splinters, had gone missing.
On 20 March 2009 the investigators requested that the chief of the headquarters of the UGA in Khankala inform them whether any military helicopters had been on a flying mission in Tazen-Kala on 3 December 2004 and whether they had a certain type of 130 mm calibre missile (ЗемляВоздух) in their armament.
On 6 April 2009 the investigators issued a decision concerning the extension of the procedural time-limits for the proceedings. It, amongst other things, enumerated the procedural steps taken by them and, in particular, included the following:
On 24 April 2009 the headquarters of the UGA in Khankala replied to the investigators, stating that the relevant records for 2004 had been destroyed following the expiration of their retention period in 2006.
On 26 August 2009 the investigators again suspended the investigation for failure to identify the perpetrators.
On 7 October 2009 the investigators’ superior again overruled the suspension as premature and unlawful.
On 20 October 2010, in accordance with the order given a year before, the investigation was resumed.
On 20 December 2010, the investigators decided to terminate the investigation as a result of the expiration of the six-year statutory time-limit for prosecution. That time-limit concerned crimes of a medium level of severity, as the proceedings had been opened under Article 167 of the Criminal Code (premeditated destruction of property by way of arson, explosion or other dangerous method or which resulted in a person’s death or other serious consequences). The applicants were not informed of that decision.
On 30 November 2011 the deputy Chechnya prosecutor overruled the above termination as unlawful. His decision criticised the investigation and stated, amongst other things, the following:
On 30 November 2011 the deputy Chechnya prosecutor decided to transfer the investigation of the criminal case to the military prosecutor’s office. It appears that the investigation is still ongoing.
The Government did not dispute the factual circumstances of the attack on the applicants’ house. In particular, they conceded that it had taken place on 3 December 2004 and that, as a result, the second and third applicants had been seriously wounded and their brother, Saydan Suleymanov, had been killed.
As for the investigation into the incident, in their submissions of 16 January 2012 the Government stated, amongst other things, the following:
“... as for the effectiveness of the investigation, the examination of the criminal case file showed the following deficiencies:
(i) the criminal case was opened in violation of the relevant time-limits established in the Russian Criminal Procedure Code;
(ii) the fragments of the shell splinters found at the crime scene were lost;
(iii) there was neither internal nor prosecutorial control over the investigation ...
The examination of the criminal case file showed that the investigation had collected enough evidence to prove that the crime had been committed by military pilots (statements of the victims and witnesses and expert reports). Furthermore, the evidence collected established the elements of a crime under Article 105 § 2 (e) and Article 111 § 2 of the Russian Criminal Code (murder and the premeditated causing of particularly serious injuries, committed in a publicly dangerous way) in the pilot’s actions.
In connection with the above, on 30 November 2011 the decision concerning the termination of criminal case no. 53007 was overruled by the deputy Chechnya prosecutor and the criminal case file was forwarded to the military prosecutor’s office of the Southern Military Circuit for further investigation by military investigators.”
For a summary of the relevant domestic law see Abuyeva and Others v. Russia (no. 27065/05, §§ 165-68, 2 December 2010).