The case was referred to the Court by the applicants on 12 August 1999 and by the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) on 15 September 1999, within the three-month period laid down by former Articles 32 § 1 and 47 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”). It originated in an application (no. 28369/95) against the Kingdom of the Netherlands lodged with the Commission under former Article 25 of the Convention by two Netherlands nationals, Ms Eveline E.C.H. Camp and Mr Sofian A. Bourimi (“the applicants”), on 18 August 1995. The applicants were represented by their counsel. The Netherlands Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Mr R. Böcker and Ms J. Schukking, of the Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The Commission's request referred to former Articles 44 and 48 of the Convention and to the declaration whereby the Netherlands recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (former Article 46). The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 8 of the Convention or Article 14 taken in conjunction with Article 8.
On 20 September 1999 a panel of the Grand Chamber decided, pursuant to Article 5 § 4 of Protocol No. 11 to the Convention and Rules 100 § 1 and 24 § 6 of the Rules of Court, that the application would be examined by one of the Sections. It was, thereupon, assigned to the First Section.
The Chamber constituted within that Section included ex officio Mrs W. Thomassen, the judge elected in respect of the Netherlands (Article 27 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 26 § 1 (a)), and Mrs E. Palm, President of the Section (Rules 12 and 26 § 1 (a)). The other members designated by the latter to complete the Chamber were Mr L. Ferrari Bravo, Mr R. Türmen, Mr J. Casadevall, Mr B. Zupančič and Mr T. Panţîru.
From October 1999 to January 2000 friendly-settlement negotiations took place between the parties which proved unsuccessful.
On 14 March 2000 the Chamber decided to hold a hearing (Rule 59 § 2).
In accordance with Rule 59 § 3, the President of the Chamber invited the parties to submit memorials on the issues arising in the application. The Registrar received the applicants' and the Government's memorials on 29 March and 21 April 2000 respectively.
The hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 6 June 2000 .
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Ms Dosker, Ms van der Grinten and Mr Böcker.
On 24 September 1992 Ms Camp's partner, Mr Abbie Bourimi, died without having recognised (erkenning) the child she was carrying at that time and without leaving a will. Ms Camp and Mr A. Bourimi had been living together in a house owned by the latter. They had been intending to marry, but a wedding scheduled for April 1992 had been postponed due to the death of Ms Camp's mother.
The parents of Mr A. Bourimi believed neither that the child Ms Camp was carrying had been fathered by their son nor that their son had intended to marry Ms Camp. Consequently, they considered themselves and their other children to be their son's heirs. On 22 October 1992, contrary to the wishes of Ms Camp, Mr A. Bourimi's parents, together with five other relatives, moved into the house which had belonged to their son. Thereupon, Ms Camp moved out of the house.
On 2 November 1992 Ms Camp requested the President of the Roermond Regional Court (Arrondissementsrechtbank) in summary proceedings (kort geding) to grant an injunction ordering the parents to vacate the house pending the winding up of Mr A. Bourimi's estate. Furthermore, on 3 November 1992, she requested the Queen to grant letters of legitimation (brieven van wettiging – see paragraphs 16-18 below) in respect of the child she was carrying.
The President of the Regional Court refused to grant the injunction on 19 November 1992 but this decision was quashed by the 'sHertogenbosch Court of Appeal (Gerechtshof) on 2 June 1993. The Court of Appeal considered that Ms Camp had adduced sufficient evidence to corroborate her claim that she had been living with Mr A. Bourimi in his house for a considerable time, that they had intended to get married and that Mr A. Bourimi was Sofian's father. In view of the fact that it therefore seemed likely that letters of legitimation would be granted and Sofian would thus emerge as Mr A. Bourimi's sole heir, the Court of Appeal found that it was Ms Camp's right and in her interest in her capacity of mother and guardian to be given possession of the house. The Court of Appeal accordingly ordered the parents of Mr A. Bourimi to vacate the house. The parents subsequently filed an appeal on points of law (beroep in cassatie) to the Supreme Court (Hoge Raad).
Meanwhile, on 20 November 1992, Sofian Bourimi was born. Since he was illegitimate and had not been recognised by his father, he was initially given the family name of his mother. On 21 October 1994 the Supreme Court issued advice in favour of the granting of letters of legitimation. Such letters were granted on 4 November 1994 and Sofian took on the family name of his father.
On 24 February 1995 the Supreme Court quashed the decision of the Court of Appeal of 2 June 1993. It considered that the letters of legitimation did not have retroactive force from the time of Mr A. Bourimi's death and that therefore Sofian could not inherit from him. As regards Ms Camp's argument that this outcome was contrary to Article 8 of the Convention and Article 14 taken in conjunction with Article 8, the Supreme Court held that the establishment of the consequences of an incompatibility of Netherlands law with these provisions of the Convention went beyond the task of the judiciary.
The Supreme Court referred the case back to the Court of Appeal, which was to examine whether other circumstances existed justifying a judicial order to the effect that Mr A. Bourimi's parents vacate the house – such as the fact that Ms Camp had been living in the house for a considerable time. On 4 June 1996 the Court of Appeal struck the case out in view of the fact that the parties to the proceedings had reached an agreement to the effect that Ms Camp and Sofian would vacate the house.
The estate of Mr A. Bourimi was distributed amongst the heirs (that is, his parents and siblings) on 9 February 2000 by a notary (notaris).
Legally recognised family ties (familierechtelijke betrekkingen) between a father, his relatives and a child exist where a child is born to married parents or if it is born within 307 days following the dissolution of the marriage (Article 1:197 of the Civil Code (Burgerlijk Wetboek – “CC”)). An illegitimate child will have a legally recognised family relationship with its father (who does not have to be the biological father) and the latter's relatives if it has been recognised (erkenning) by the father, either before or after its birth (Article 1:222 CC). At the relevant time, moreover, a legally recognised family relationship would also be created by the granting of letters of legitimation (Article 1:215 CC).
Paragraph 2 of Article 1:215 provided as follows:
“The request for letters of legitimation may also be made if the man, who, aware of her pregnancy, and intending to marry the mother, died before the birth of the child without having recognised it.”
It appears from the explanatory memorandum (Memorie van Toelichting) to this provision that the intention to marry the mother, which, if carried out, would have resulted in the birth of a legitimate child, replaced the recognition required by Article 1:222 CC for the establishment of a legally recognised family relationship.
A request for letters of legitimation could be made by the child's mother or, after her death, by the child itself. No time-limit was attached to a request for such letters. According to Article 1:219 § 1 CC, legitimation pursuant to Article 1:215 took effect from the day on which letters of legitimation were granted.
On 1 April 1998 the Civil Code was amended. The option of letters of legitimation was replaced by a judicial declaration of paternity (gerechtelijke vaststelling van vaderschap, Article 1:207 CC). A declaration of paternity has retroactive force from the time of the child's birth but it does not affect adversely any rights acquired in good faith by third parties.
According to Article 4:879 § 1 CC only those persons who have a legally recognised family relationship with a person who has died intestate may inherit from this person. Furthermore, the heir must have existed at the time of death. (Article 4:883 CC). However, according to Article 1:2 CC, a child who has been conceived but has not yet been born is considered as having already been born when his or her interests so require.
According to the rules of intestacy, if a deceased does not leave any children with whom he has a legally recognised family relationship or a spouse, his parents and siblings will inherit from him (Article 4:901 CC). If there are such children or a spouse, the parents and siblings are excluded from the inheritance (Articles 4:899 and 4:899a CC).
The applicants applied to the Commission on 18 August 1995. They complained that, contrary to Article 8 of the Convention and Article 14 taken in conjunction with Article 8, the letters of legitimation did not have retroactive force from the time of Mr A. Bourimi's death.
On 8 September 1997 the Commission declared the application admissible.
In its report of 23 April 1999 (former Article 31 of the Convention) [Note by the Registry. The report is obtainable from the Registry.], the Commission expressed the unanimous opinion that there had been no violation of Article 8 either in respect of the family life between the two applicants or in respect of Ms Camp's family life with the relatives of Mr A. Bourimi, that it was not necessary to examine under Article 8 of the Convention the complaint relating to Sofian's family life with the relatives of his father, and that there had been a violation of Article 14 of the Convention taken in conjunction with Article 8 in respect of Sofian.