The case originated in two applications (nos. 48310/16 and 59663/17) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Grigoriy Nikolayevich Kablis (“the applicant”), on 28 July 2016 and 30 July 2017 respectively.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Zubkov, a lawyer practising in Syktyvkar, Mr A. Laptev, a lawyer practising in Moscow, and Mr E. Mezak, a human-rights defender from Syktyvkar who was granted leave by the President of the Court to represent the applicant in application no. 48310/16. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant complained of a breach of his right to freedoms of expression and assembly and the lack of an effective remedy in that respect.
On 27 March and 8 September 2017 the Government were given notification of the applications.
The applicant was born in 1976 and lives in Syktyvkar.
On 19 September 2015 the Federal Security Service (‘the FSB”) and the Investigations Committee of the Russian Federation announced that criminal proceedings on suspicion of membership of a criminal gang and fraud had been opened against the Governor of the Komi Republic, Mr Gaizer, one of his deputies, several high-ranking officials in the Komi Republic government, the speaker of the Komi Republic parliament and a representative of the Komi Republic in the upper chamber of the Russian Parliament. All of them were arrested on the same day.
On 21 September 2015 the applicant, together with Ms S., notified the Syktyvkar Town Administration of their intention to hold a “picket” (пикетирование) from 5 to 6 p.m. on 25 September 2015 at the crossroads of Lenin and Kommunisticheskaya streets behind the Lenin monument, which fifty people were expected to attend. The aim of the event was to “discuss the arrest of the Komi Republic government”.
On the same day the applicant published a copy of his notification of 21 September 2015 on his Internet blog. He said that the aim of the “picket” was to let the people express their thoughts about the arrests of members of the Komi Republic government. Any opinions – from approval to criticism of the arrests – were welcome. He hoped that the “picket” would be approved. However, if the town administration proposed to hold it on the outskirts of the town, a “people’s assembly” (народный сход), which did not require prior notification, would be held at the same location (behind the Lenin monument). The applicant then criticised the fact that regional governors were appointed by the President and expressed the wish that governors be elected by the people. He asked why Mr Gaizer had been appointed governor of the Komi Republic in 2010 if, according to the investigators, he had been a member of a criminal gang since 2006. He then said that the accusations against Mr Gaizer and the others seemed to be based on a very slim evidentiary basis, which gave reasons to believe that the criminal proceedings against them were politically motivated. In his opinion, Mr Putin was trying to frighten other governors into submission. In any event, appointed governors always served the interests of those who had appointed them. He therefore wanted to propose a discussion about the future of the Komi Republic and, in particular, about whether the people wanted the next governor to be appointed or elected.
Later on the same day, 21 September 2015, the Syktyvkar Town Administration refused to approve the venue chosen by the applicant, pointing out that regional law no. 91-RZ of 20 November 2012 [sic] prohibited the holding of public events in Stefanovskaya Square (see paragraph 34 below). The town administration proposed that the “picket” be held at one of the special locations for public events designated by the Komi Republic government. The applicant received that decision the following day, 22 September 2015.
On 22 September 2015 the applicant published a new entry on his Internet blog, informing his readers that the town administration had refused to approve the venue behind the Lenin monument, and enclosing a copy of its decision of 21 September 2015. He said that a “people’s assembly” would be held instead at the same location and time. He explained that a “people’s assembly” was an assembly of people who gathered to discuss without there being any organisers. Unlike a “picket”, it was not possible to use placards during a “people’s assembly”. The applicant then stated that the official who had signed the refusal to approve the “picket” was the same official who had been responsible for a 30% increase in the cost of heating in the previous two years.
On 23 September 2015 the applicant also published a post on VKontakte, calling for participation in the public discussion on 25 September 2015.
On 24 September 2015 the applicant’s VKontakte account was blocked by the VKontakte administrator following an order by the Federal Service for Supervision of Communications, Information Technology and Mass Media and a deputy Prosecutor General of the Russian Federation. The deputy Prosecutor General found that the VKontakte post described in paragraph 11 above, which was publicly accessible, contained information about a “picket” to be held on 25 September 2015 at the crossroads of Lenin and Kommunisticheskaya streets. The town administration had, however, refused to allow the “picket” because it was prohibited to hold public events at that location. The post therefore amounted to campaigning for participation in an unlawful public event in breach of section 10 paragraph 1 of the Public Events Act (for a summary of the domestic law provisions, see Lashmankin and Others v. Russia, nos. 57818/09 and 14 others, § 249, 7 February 2017). The applicant’s VKontakte account therefore had to be blocked pursuant to section 15.3(1) of the Information Act (see paragraph 36 below).
On 25 September 2015 the applicant published a third entry on his blog. He asked what would happen if many people came to the “people’s assembly” later that day. He did not believe that it would make the Kremlin change its politics, appoint a responsible local person as the governor of the Komi Republic or stop unsubstantiated accusations against Mr Gaiser. He claimed, however, that a high participation rate would show that there were many people who were not afraid to express their opinion. The FSB and the Prosecutor General’s office were afraid of politically active people. He called on everyone to come to the people’s assembly to prevent similar situations in future.
On the same day the administrator of the Internet site that hosted the applicant’s blog informed him by email that access to the three blog entries described in paragraphs 8, 10 and 13 above had been restricted on the order of the Prosecutor General’s office because they had been found to contain calls to participate in public events held in breach of the established procedure.
At about 7 p.m. on 25 September 2015 about fifty people gathered near the Lenin monument. The “people’s assembly” went peacefully and without any disturbance.
On 26 October 2015 the applicant challenged before the Syktyvkar Town Court the town administration’s decision of 21 September 2015 refusing to approve the location of the “picket”. He submitted, in particular, that the “picket” had been intended to take place fifty metres from Stefanovskaya Square. In any event, it would not have caused any disturbance or inconvenience. The special designated locations proposed by the town administration would have been unsuitable.
On 18 November 2015 the Syktyvkar Town Court rejected the applicant’s complaint. After citing Article 11 of the Convention, the applicable domestic provisions and the Constitutional Court’s decision of 2 April 2009 (see a summary of the domestic law provisions in Lashmankin and Others, cited above, §§ 255-59), the court held:
“The complainant’s argument that the event would lose its purpose if held at the locations proposed by [the town administration] is unsubstantiated.
In substance the law requires organisers to make reasonable and sufficient efforts to reach a compromise on the basis of a balance of interests in order to enjoy the right to freedom of assembly. In a situation where there is no ban on holding a public event but rather an alternative location is proposed, the organisers may not reject without valid reasons the conditions proposed by the authorities for holding the event.
Decree no. 598 of 25 December 2012 by the Komi Republic Government designated [special locations for holding public events in Syktyvkar], having ensured that they were in keeping with the aims of public events and accessible by public transport, permitted the organisers of, and participants in, public events to use public utility facilities, respected sanitary norms and rules, and guaranteed the safety of the organisers of, and participants in, public events.
The [town administration’s] decision of 21 September 2015 mentioned those locations, de facto proposing them as an alternative [to the location chosen by the applicant].
[The town administration’s] decree no. 9/3483 of 4 September 2013 amended [its] decree no. 10/4160 of 28 October 2008 on locations (plots of land) where public events were prohibited. In accordance with the amended decree, it is prohibited to hold public events at the location chosen by the complainant – at the crossroads of Lenin and Kommunisticheskaya streets.
In such circumstances the municipal authority’s proposal to change the location of Mr Kablis’s public event was well reasoned and lawful ...
The court considers that the refusal to approve the location for the reasons advanced in the [town administration’s] decision was lawful and acceptable ...
The [town administration’s] decision of 21 September 2015 in Mr Kablis’s case was made within the time-limit established by law and contained reasons justifying the impossibility of holding the public event at the chosen location, a well-reasoned proposal to change the location and an explanation of the procedure for notifying public events. The complainant was not therefore deprived of a possibility to enjoy his constitutional right to hold [public events] in accordance with the procedure established by [the Public Events Act].
The complainant’s rights and freedoms under Articles 10 and 11 of the Convention were not restricted by the contested decision; there were no obstacles preventing the complainant from enjoying his constitutional rights.”
The applicant appealed. He submitted, in particular, that the crossroads of Lenin and Kommunisticheskaya streets was outside the area where public events were prohibited by regional law no. 91-RZ. The town administration’s decree no. 9/3483, which allegedly prohibited public events at that location, had never been published and was therefore not accessible to the public.
On 28 January 2016 the Supreme Court of the Komi Republic upheld the judgment of 18 November 2015 on appeal, finding it lawful, well reasoned and justified. It held:
“The [district] court rejected the complaint on the merits because the contested refusal to approve the chosen location of the picket had been made by the competent authority in accordance with the procedure prescribed by law. The municipal authority had given the complainant an objective possibility to enjoy his constitutional and Convention rights.
The [district] court correctly applied [the Public Events Act] providing for the conditions for enjoying the right to peaceful assembly guaranteed by Article 31 of the Constitution ...
Having assessed the evidence in the case file, the [district] court made a correct finding that [the town administration’s] proposal to change the location of the public event chosen by the organisers had been substantiated, well reasoned and justified by the necessity to respect the balance of interests of the parties and to ensure public safety.
As correctly established by the [district] court, it is prohibited to hold public events at the location chosen by the complainant – at the crossroad of Lenin and Kommunisticheskaya streets.
Decree no. 598 of 25 December 2012 by the Komi Republic Government designated [special locations for holding political public events in Syktyvkar].
The choice of a location for an event and its approval by the municipal authorities does not restrict the participants’ right to freedom of opinion and expression. The argument that it was impossible to hold the event was hypothetical and did not refer to any valid reasons explaining why the locations proposed by [the town administration] were incompatible with the public event’s purposes sought by the organisers and its social and political significance.
The [district] court correctly held in the judgment that in accordance with Article 17 § 3 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation, the enjoyment of one’s rights and freedoms must not breach the rights and freedoms of others. Therefore, the holding of a public event by some citizens must not create a situation where other citizens are arbitrarily deprived of a possibility to enjoy their rights in accordance with the established order and traditions.
There were therefore objective and sufficient reasons – explaining why it was impossible to approve the location of the public event chosen by the organisers – for the proposal to change the location with the aim of ensuring a balance between the rights of the organisers and those of third persons.
[The town administration] did not omit to examine the request for approval of the location of the public event and gave its reply to the complainant within the statutory time-limit. The reply contained reasons explaining why it was impossible to hold the public event at the chosen location and a well-reasoned proposal to change the location. In the court’s opinion, the complainant’s constitutional rights and interests were respected and there was no violation of Article 11 of [the Convention] guaranteeing freedom of assembly, or of [the Public Events Act]. The law does not guarantee the organiser of a public event an unconditional right to hold a public event at the location which he considers the most relevant to its political and social significance.
[The town administration] fulfilled its statutory obligation to propose an alternative location for the public event that was compatible with its purposes. The locations proposed were an adequate alternative to the chosen location and were in keeping with its purposes.
The [district] court therefore correctly rejected the complaint.
The arguments set out in the appeal submissions are limited to a statement that the contested decision of [the town administration] refusing to approve the location chosen for the public event in Stefanovskaya Square had breached the complainant’s rights to freedom of assembly, expression, conscience and religion. These arguments are based on an incorrect assessment of the facts of the case and an incorrect interpretation of the applicable legal provisions. They do not therefore warrant the quashing of the [district] court’s judgment ...
The contested decision of [the town administration] was in accordance with [the Public Events Act], was made within the municipal authorities’ powers and was in the interests of ensuring public order, with the aim of preventing disorder, protecting health and morality, and safeguarding the rights and freedoms of others. It did not therefore breach the complainant’s rights.”
The applicant lodged a cassation appeal. He repeated his previous arguments and added that public events were regularly held at the crossroads of Lenin and Kommunisticheskaya streets.
On 19 July 2016 a judge of the Supreme Court of the Komi Republic refused to refer the applicant’s cassation appeal to the Presidium of that court for examination, having found no significant violations of substantive or procedural law which had influenced the outcome of the proceedings.
On 25 December 2015 the applicant challenged before the Syktyvkar Town Court the decisions of the prosecutor’s office to block his VKontakte account and three entries on his Internet blog. He argued that they had not been necessary in a democratic society and had therefore breached his right to freedom of expression. He claimed that he had suffered non-pecuniary damage.
On 5 April 2016 the Syktyvkar Town Court dismissed the applicant’s claim. After citing Article 10 of the Convention and section 15.3 of the Information Act (see paragraph 36 below), and noting that the town administration had refused to approve “the picket” at the location chosen by the applicant, the court held:
“Despite the lack of approval for the public event, [the applicant] described the preparations for holding it on his page on a social networking site, VKontakte, and on his blog ..., calling on an unrestricted audience to participate in an unauthorised public event ...
In the present case, access to the information published by the claimant was restricted because he had breached information distribution rules, in particular by distributing information containing calls for participation in a public event to be held in breach of the established procedure.
In such circumstances, the restriction had a basis in law and pursued the aim of preventing breaches of law in the sphere of distribution of information. Contrary to the claimant’s allegations, his freedom of expression was not restricted, because access was blocked to information distributed in breach of the law, rather than in connection with the contents of the claimant’s statements about the aims of the notified public event (to discuss the arrest of the Komi Republic government).
Restriction of access to the entire VKontakte account rather than to the specific post also had a basis in law, which in substance provides for restriction of access to an entire account, taking into consideration the nature of real-time distribution of publicly accessible content on the Internet.
In view of the above, and given that it is possible for the claimant to create and distribute new Internet posts, the claimant’s personal non-property rights were not breached. The claim must therefore be dismissed.”
On 7 July 2016 the Supreme Court of the Komi Republic upheld that judgment on appeal, finding that it had been lawful, well reasoned and justified.
On 14 December 2016 a judge of the Supreme Court of the Komi Republic refused to refer a cassation appeal lodged by the applicant with the Presidium of that court for examination. It held, in particular, that calls for participation in public events held in breach of the established procedure were incompatible with public order. The restriction on access to information containing such calls pursued the aim of preventing more serious violations of public order.
On 31 January 2017 a judge of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation refused to refer the applicant’s cassation appeal for consideration by the Civil Chamber of the Supreme Court, finding that no significant violations of substantive or procedural law had influenced the outcome of the proceedings.
For a summary of the domestic provisions on the procedure for the notification and conduct of public events, on relevant judicial review procedures and on the liability for breaches committed in the course of public events, see Lashmankin and Others (cited above, §§ 216 - 312).
The applicable domestic provisions have since been interpreted by the Supreme Court as follows.
Plenary Supreme Court Ruling no. 28 of 26 June 2018 deals with the application of legislation governing public events during judicial examination of administrative complaints and administrative-offence cases. It provides that a refusal to approve a public event, its location or time or the manner in which it is to be conducted may be challenged before a court either by the event organiser or by a person appointed by the organiser to fulfil certain organisational tasks (point 2). When examining such administrative complaints, the courts have to examine whether the interference by a public authority with the right to freedom of public assembly was lawful, necessary and proportionate to a legitimate aim. The courts must examine all the grounds advanced by the public authority and all the evidence submitted by it and assess whether the reasons for the interference were relevant and sufficient (point 9). Furthermore, Ruling no. 28 provides that the courts must verify whether the proposal to change the location or time of a public event or the manner of conducting it was made within the three-day statutory time-limit. Failure to comply with that time-limit means that the public event must be considered to be approved by default (point 10).
Ruling no. 28 also provides that the courts must take into account that a proposal to change the location or time of a public event or the manner in which it is to be conducted must not be arbitrary or unreasoned. They must mention specific facts showing that public interest considerations make it manifestly impossible to hold the public event at the chosen location or time. Such public interests may include: normal functioning of essential public utilities, social and transport infrastructure and communications (such as emergency maintenance work on engineering and technical networks); maintenance of public order and safety of citizens (both those participating in the public event and passers-by, including on account of a risk of building collapse or an expected number of participants in excess of the maximum capacity of the location); disruption of pedestrians or traffic or of citizens’ access to residential premises or to social or transport facilities); and other similar considerations. At the same time, inconvenience caused to citizens by a public event or an assumption by the authorities that there might be a risk of such inconvenience may not in themselves be considered valid reasons for changing the location or time of a public event. For example, a necessity to temporarily divert pedestrians or traffic may not be considered a valid reason for changing the location or time of a public event, provided that it is possible to ensure that the traffic and the conduct of everyone involved in the event will comply with the established rules and will not lead to traffic accidents. On the other hand, disruption of pedestrians or traffic or a risk of disruption of essential public utility services may be considered valid reasons for proposing to change the location or time of a public event, provided that holding the public event will breach traffic or public transport safety requirements or limit citizens’ access to residential premises or public facilities, irrespective of measures taken by the public authority to ensure compliance with such requirements. The public authority must therefore submit to the court evidence of specific facts making it impossible to hold the public event at the chosen location or time. The courts may not take into account any circumstances which were not mentioned in the proposal to change the location or time of the public event (point 12).
Ruling no. 28 further provides that the courts should take into account that the public authority must suggest a specific alternative location and time for the public event compatible with its purposes and its social and political significance. If approval was denied because it was prohibited to hold public events at the chosen location, the public authority may suggest an alternative location for that event. The organiser must reply in writing, stating whether he or she accepts the proposed alternative location and/or time, no later than three days before the planned date of the event. The organiser may also propose another location or time for approval. However, if the organiser wants to change the date of the event, he must submit a new notification (point 13).
Ruling no. 28 also explains that public events held at private premises with unrestricted public access (such as shopping malls) must be notified to the public authority. The organiser must enclose with the notification the consent to the public event signed by the premises’ owner (points 8 and 14). It is not necessary to notify a public event planned at a specially designated location for public events, provided that the number of participants does not exceed the number permitted for each such location by regional law. The organiser must ensure the safety of participants and must therefore make enquiries about any other events planned at the same location at the same time to make sure that the maximum capacity of the location will not be exceeded. The fact that the organiser informed the public authority about the intended public event will be taken into account if he or she is held liable for failure to ensure public order and safety. The public authority may propose a change of location or time of a public event to be held at a specially designated location and not requiring notification only if another public event has been scheduled to take place at the same location and time and (i) the number of participants of the two simultaneous events will exceed the maximum capacity of the location; or (ii) it will not be possible to ensure the peaceful character of the simultaneous events by applying security arrangements habitually used at public events with a comparable number of participants, that is to say, it will be necessary to apply exceptional security measures (point 15). On the other hand, a cultural event, a fair or some other mass event not falling under the Public Events Act, scheduled to take place at the same specially designated location at the same time, may not in itself serve as lawful grounds for proposing to change the location or time of a public event. It may serve as lawful grounds for proposing to change the location or time of a public event only if information about that mass event was duly published and it will not be possible to ensure safety at the two events if they are held simultaneously (point 16).
Lastly, Ruling no. 28 provides that if a court allowed the administrative complaint before the planned date of the public event, it may require the public authority not to impede the public event at the location and time chosen by the organisers. If the public authority has submitted evidence showing that new grounds objectively preventing holding the public event at the chosen location or time arose after the contested decision, the court may require that the public authority re-examine the issue of the event’s location, time or the manner in which it is to be conducted within a certain time-limit (point 20).
Section 5 of  Komi Republic Law no. 91-RZ of 29 November 2012 on the Holding of Public Events in the Komi Republic provides:
“With the aim of protecting human and citizens’ rights and freedoms, legality, public order and public safety, taking into account that the holding of public events may result in disruption to the functioning of public utilities, transport, social or communications services, obstruction of pedestrians or traffic or of citizens’ access to residential buildings or transport and social services, it is prohibited in the Komi Republic to hold public events at the following locations, in addition to the locations where the holding of public events is prohibited pursuant to section 8 paragraph 2 of the Federal [Public Events] Act:
Syktyvkar’s town administration’s decree no. 9/3483 of 4 September 2013 described the perimeter of the zone in the immediate vicinity of the Constitutional Court of the Komi Republic, where the holding of public events was prohibited. The perimeter comprised the entire Stefanovskaya Square and the adjacent streets, including the area at the crossroads of Lenin and Kommunisticheskaya streets.
Section 15.3 of Law no. 149-FZ of 27 July 2006 on Information, Information Technologies and Protection of Information (“the Information Act”), as in force at the material time, provided:
“1.  If information disseminated through telecommunication networks, including the Internet, containing calls for mass disorder, extremist activities or participation in mass (public) events held in breach of the established procedure has been discovered – including as a result of a notification by the federal State authorities, the regional State authorities, the municipal authorities, organisations or citizens – the Prosecutor General of the Russian Federation or his deputies shall order the federal lawenforcement authority supervising the mass media, mass communications and information technologies to take measures to restrict access to information media distributing that information.
On the basis of the order mentioned in subsection 1 above, the federal lawenforcement authority supervising the mass media, mass communications and information technologies shall immediately:
Upon receipt of the order to take measures to restrict access from the federal lawenforcement authority supervising the mass media, mass communications and information technologies, the communications service provider permitting access to the Internet telecommunications network must immediately restrict access to the information medium, such as a website, or to information published thereon and containing calls for mass disorder, extremist activities or participation in mass (public) events held in breach of the established procedure.
Within twenty-four hours of receiving the notification mentioned in subsection 2(3) above, the host service provider or person mentioned in subsection 2(2) above must inform the owner of the information resource about the notification and that it is necessary to immediately delete the information containing calls for mass disorder, extremist activities or participation in mass (public) events held in breach of the established procedure.
If the owner of the information medium has deleted the information containing calls for mass disorder, extremist activities or participation in mass (public) events held in breach of the established procedure, he must send a notification to the federal law-enforcement authority supervising the mass media, mass communications and information technologies. Such notification may be sent electronically.
Upon receipt of the notification mentioned in subsection 5 above, and after verifying its authenticity, the federal law-enforcement authority supervising the mass media, mass communications and information technologies must immediately send a notification to the communications service provider permitting access to the Internet telecommunications network that it may reopen access to the information medium, such as a website.
Upon receipt of the notification mentioned in subsection 6 above, the communications service provider shall immediately reopen access to the information medium, such as a website.”
The Code of Administrative Procedure (Law no. 21-FZ of 8 March 2015), which entered into force on 15 September 2015, provides that complaints about decisions, acts or omissions of State and municipal authorities and officials are to be examined within a month of receipt, or within two months by the Supreme Court, if not otherwise provided for by this Code for certain categories of cases (Article 226 § 1).