The case originated in an application (no. 37138/14) against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Hungarian nationals, Mr Máté Szabó and Ms Beatrix Vissy (“the applicants”), on 13 May 2014.
The applicants were represented by Mr L. Majtényi, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Justice.
The applicants complained under Article 8 of the Convention that they could potentially be subjected to unjustified and disproportionately intrusive measures within the framework of “section 7/E (3) surveillance” (see paragraphs 10-12 below), in particular for want of judicial control. In their view, the latter issue also constituted a violation of their rights under Articles 6 and 13 of the Convention.
On 12 June 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
On 27 August and 1 September 2014, respectively, Privacy International and Center for Democracy and Technology, both nongovernmental organisations, were granted leave to make written submissions (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The applicants were born in 1976 and 1986 respectively and live in Budapest.
When introducing the application, the applicants were staff members of Eötvös Károly Közpolitikai Intézet, a non-governmental, “watchdog” organisation voicing criticism of the Government. The subsequent employer of one of the applicants was subjected to financial control measures by the Government in 2014, which according to the applicants verged on vexation.
Act no. CXLVII of 2010 defines combating terrorism as one of the tasks of the police. Within the force, a specific Anti-Terrorism Task Force (“TEK”) was established as of 1 January 2011. Its competence is defined in section 7/E of Act no. XXXIV of 1994 on the Police, as amended by Act no. CCVII of 2011 (the “Police Act”).
Under this legislation, TEK’s prerogatives in the field of secret intelligence gathering include secret house search and surveillance with recording, opening of letters and parcels, as well as checking and recording the contents of electronic or computerised communications, all this without the consent of the persons concerned.
The authorisation process for these activities is dependent on the actual competence exercised by TEK, namely whether it is within the framework of secret surveillance linked to the investigation of certain specific crimes enumerated in the law (section 7/E (2)) or to secret surveillance within the framework of intelligence gathering for national security (section 7/E (3)).
Whereas the scenario under section 7/E (2) is as such subject to judicial authorisation, the one under section 7/E (3) is authorised by the Minister in charge of justice, (i) in order to prevent terrorist acts or in the interests of Hungary’s national security or (ii) in order to rescue Hungarian citizens from capture abroad in war zones or in the context of terrorist acts.
“Section 7/E (3) surveillance” takes place under the rules of the National Security Act under the condition that the necessary intelligence cannot be obtained in any other way. Otherwise, the law does not contain any particular rules on the circumstances in which this measure can be ordered, as opposed to “section 7/E (2) surveillance”, which is conditional on the suspicion of certain serious crimes. The time-frame of “section 7/E (3) surveillance” is 90 days, which can be prolonged for another 90-day period by the Minister; however, the latter has no right to know about the results of the ongoing surveillance when called on to decide on its prolongation. Once the surveillance is terminated, the law imposes no specific obligation on the authorities to destroy any irrelevant intelligence obtained.
The applicants filed a constitutional complaint on 15 June 2012, arguing in essence that the sweeping prerogatives under section 7/E (3) infringed their constitutional right to privacy. They emphasised that the legislation on secret surveillance measures for national security purposes provided fewer safeguards for the protection of the right to privacy than the provision on secret surveillance linked to the investigation of particular crimes. They pointed out that (i) “section 7/E (2) surveillance” was always linked to a particular crime and could only be ordered for the purposes of identifying or locating suspects, whereas “section 7/E (3) surveillance” was not linked to any particular crime; (ii) “section 7/E (2) surveillance” was always ordered by the court, whereas “section 7/E (3) surveillance” was authorised by the government minister in charge of justice; (iii) the decision on ordering “section 7/E (2) surveillance” was subject to detailed reasoning, whereas no reasoning was included in the minister’s decision on ordering “section 7/E (3) surveillance”; and (iv) under the legislation relating to “section 7/E (2) surveillance”, all collected but irrelevant information had to be destroyed within eight days, unlike in the case of “section 7/E (3) surveillance”.
On 18 November 2013 the Constitutional Court dismissed the majority of the applicants’ complaints. In one aspect the Constitutional Court agreed with the applicants, namely, it held that the decision of the minister ordering secret intelligence gathering had to be supported by reasons. However, the Constitutional Court held in essence that the scope of national security-related tasks was much broader that the scope of the tasks related to the investigation of particular crimes. For the purpose of national security, the events of real life were examined not for their criminal law relevance; therefore they might not necessarily be linked to a particular crime. Furthermore, in the context of national security, the external control of any surveillance authorised by the minister was exercised by Parliament’s National Security Committee (which had the right to call the minister to give account both in general terms and in concrete cases) and by the Ombudsman, and that this scheme was sufficient to guarantee respect for the constitutional right to privacy of those concerned. Finally, the Constitutional Court was of the opinion that the National Security Act, which applies to “section 7/E (3) surveillance”, contained general provisions on ex officio deletion of any data unnecessary for achieving the aim underlying the gathering of intelligence.
This decision was published in the Official Gazette on 22 November 2013.
Act no. XXXIV of 1994 on the Police (“the Police Act”) provides as relevant:
“(2) The police – within the scope of its duties as prescribed by the Fundamental Law of Hungary, by this Act and by other laws for preventing and combating crimes, administrating and policing – ...
... within the territory of Hungary ...
a) tracks terrorist organisations,
b) prevents, tracks and repels any attempts of individuals, groups or organisations to carry out terrorist acts and impedes the commission of any crimes by them,
c) impedes the promotion of the operation of terrorist organisations by individuals, groups or organisations through providing financial or other support.”
“(1) The anti-terrorist organ does not exercise any investigatory competence. It:
a) fulfils the tasks prescribed in section 1 subsection (2) point 15, and within these tasks ...
ad) – within the framework of the fight against terrorism and in order to safeguard the national security interests of Hungary – prevents, tracks and repels any attempts to carry out terrorist acts (terrorcselekmény) in Hungary. ...
d) on the basis of the decision of the Minister responsible for policing as endorsed by the Minister responsible for foreign affairs – in line with the rules of international law – contributes to rescuing Hungarian citizens who are – outside the territory of Hungary – in distress due to an imminent and life-threatening danger of act of war, armed conflict, hostage-taking or terrorist action; to ensuring their safe return to Hungary and to carrying out their evacuation; to this end it cooperates with the Member States and the organs of the European Union, with the organs of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, with the related international organisations and with the authorities of the concerned foreign country.
e) acquires, analyses, assesses and forwards information relating to foreign countries or being of foreign origin which is required for fulfilling the task prescribed in section d) above.
(2) The anti-terrorist organ may – for the purpose of fulfilling its tasks prescribed in subsection (1) point a) sub-points aa) to ac) and in point c) – perform secret intelligence gathering in line with the provisions of Chapter VII of the Act on Police.
(3) The anti-terrorist organ may – for the purpose of fulfilling its tasks prescribed in subsection (1) point a) sub-point ad) and in point e) – perform secret intelligence gathering in line with the provisions of sections 53-60 of Act no. CXXV of 1995 on the National Security Services (the “Nbtv.”), in the course of which it may request and handle data according to the provisions of sections 38-52 of Nbtv. The secret intelligence gathering provided in section 56 points a)-e) of Nbtv. is subject to authorisation of the Minister responsible for justice.”
The crime of “terrorist act” (terrorcselekmény) is defined in section 261 of the Old Criminal Code and sections 314 to 316 of the New Criminal Code.
Act no. CXXV of 1995 on the National Security Services (the “National Security Act”, “Nbtv.”) contains the passages below.
Under section 11(5), complaints about the activities of the anti-terrorist organ shall be investigated by the Minister of Home Affairs who shall inform the complainants of the outcome of the investigations and of the relevant measures within 30 days (this deadline may, on one occasion, be extended by another 30 days).
Section 14(4) contains provisions concerning the relevant competences of the National Security Committee. In exercising parliamentary supervision, the Committee is entitled to request information from the Minister and the directors of the national security services about the country’s national security situation and the functioning and activities of the services (sub-section (a)).
In individual complaint procedures, where a complainant does not accept the results of the investigation under section 11(5), the Committee may investigate complaints alleging unlawful activities on the part of the National Security Services if, under the affirmative vote of at least one third of the Committee members, the gravity of the complaint justifies an investigation. In investigating a complaint the Committee shall examine the complaint at issue and may request the Minister to submit his opinion on the case. If the Committee is of the view that the operation of the Services has been unlawful or abusive, it may request the Minister to conduct investigations and to inform the Committee of the results of the investigations or may itself carry out fact-finding investigations if it has the impression that the operation of the Services is contrary to the relevant laws. In carrying out the fact-finding investigations, the Committee may inspect the relevant documents in the records of the National Security Services and may hear staff members of the National Security Services. Relying on the findings the Committee may invite the Minister to take the necessary actions.
“The National Security Services may use data having come to their knowledge exclusively for the purpose that corresponds to the legal basis for ordering their acquisition, except
a) if the data are indicative of the commission of a criminal act and forwarding the data is legally allowed, or
b) if they substantiate an obligation to inform another National Security Service and the party receiving the data is itself authorised to obtain them.”
“(1) For the purpose of fulfilling their tasks the National Security Services may request data from each other and are obliged to provide data to each other in line with the provisions of this Act.
(4) The bodies requesting data disclosure shall be responsible for the management of data disclosed to them according to the provisions of this Act and the data management legislation; they shall register the data they receive and their utilisation and, upon request, they shall inform the National Security Service thereof.”
“(1) The National Security Services may, under an international obligation, transfer personal data to foreign data processing authorities within the framework of laws on protection of personal data.”
“(2) Personal data processed by the National Security Services shall be deleted immediately if
a) the deadline specified in subsection (1) has expired;
b) deletion was ordered by a court in data protection proceedings;
c) processing of the data is unlawful;
d) the conditions specified in section 60 (2) are met;
e) processing of the data became manifestly unnecessary.”
“(2) The National Security Services may apply the special means and methods of secret intelligence gathering only if the intelligence needed for the performance of the tasks laid down in the present Act cannot be obtained in any other way.”
“The National Security Services may, under an external permission
a) search a dwelling secretly and record by means of technical equipment what they perceive;
b) keep a dwelling under surveillance by means of technical equipment and record what they perceive;
c) open and check postal mail and any closed parcel belonging to an identifiable person and record their contents by means of technical equipment;
d) detect the content of communications transmitted by electronic communications network and record it by means of technical equipment;
e) detect the data transmitted by or contained on a computer or network, record it by means of technical equipment and use it.”
“(1) The motion to obtain permission for secret intelligence gathering as specified in section 56 may be submitted by director generals of the Information Authority, the Constitution Protection Authority, the Military National Security Service and – in order to carry out its task specified in section 8 (1) f) above – the Special Service for National Security.
(2) The motion shall contain:
a) the premises of the secret intelligence gathering, the person(s) concerned identified by name or as a range of persons, and/or any other information capable of identifying such person or persons;
b) specification of the secret intelligence gathering and reasoning substantiating its necessity;
c) the date of the beginning and the end of the activity;
d) in the case of a motion to obtain permission specified in section 59 below, reasoning why the requested intelligence is absolutely necessary in the specific case for the successful functioning of the National Security Service.”
“(3) The ... Minister in charge of justice ... decides [on the motion] within 72 hours to be counted from the motion’s submission ... [he] grants permission or, in case of an ill-founded request, rejects it. No appeal lies against the decision.
(4) Unless this law stipulates otherwise, the authoriser allows the secret intelligence gathering for a period of a maximum of 90 days upon each request. In justified cases and upon a motion from the director generals, this time limit may be extended by 90 days, unless this law stipulates otherwise.
(6) The authoriser does not inform the person concerned about the proceedings or about the occurrence of secret intelligence gathering.”
“(1) The directors of the National Security Services themselves may [exceptionally] authorise the secret gathering of information within the meaning of section 56 at the latest until the decision given [by the Minister] if the external authorisation procedure entails such delay as obviously countering, in the given circumstances, the interests of the successful functioning of the National Security Service.”
“(1) Secret intelligence gathering based on external permission shall be discontinued immediately if
a) it achieved its aim defined in the permission;
b) its continuation does not promise any results;
c) its time-limit has been expired without extension;
d) the secret intelligence gathering is unlawful for any reasons whatsoever.
(2) In the framework of the special procedure defined in section 59 (1), secret intelligence gathering shall also be discontinued immediately if the authoriser does not permit its continuation. In that case, the data obtained by secret intelligence gathering shall be destroyed immediately, according to the laws regulating the deletion of qualified data.”
Section 74(a) defines the notion of national security interests in the following terms:
“Securing the sovereignty and protecting the constitutional order of Hungary and, within that framework,
aa) obtaining intelligence on aggressive efforts targeted against the independence and territorial integrity of the country,
ab) obtaining intelligence on and combating covert efforts violating or threatening the political, economic or defence interests of the country,
ac) obtaining information of foreign relevance or origin required for government decisions,
ad) obtaining intelligence on and combating covert efforts aimed at altering or disturbing by unlawful means the country’s constitutional order guaranteeing respect for fundamental human rights, pluralist representational democracy, the constitutional institutions and
ae) obtaining intelligence on and combating acts of terrorism, illegal arms and drugs trafficking, and illegal trafficking in internationally controlled products and technologies;”
Act no. CXI of 2011 on the Commissioner for Fundamental Rights (“Ajbt.”) provides as follows:
Under section 18 (1) f), law enforcement organs – including the antiterrorist organ – are authorities subject to investigation by the Ombudsman. There is only one limitation on the investigations conducted by the Ombudsman: the report drafted on the secret intelligence activities of organs authorised for using secret intelligence devices shall not contain data from which the conclusion can be drawn that in the given case secret intelligence activities were or have been carried out by the organ [cf. section 28(3)]. The Commissioner for Fundamental Rights shall annually submit a report to Parliament about the investigated cases and may – except for proposals for amendments – request Parliament to investigate any given case. Where the finding of an abuse or maladministration affects classified data, the Commissioner for Fundamental Rights shall – simultaneously with the annual report or, if the abuse or maladministration is very grave or affects a great number of natural persons, before the submission of the annual report – submit the case to the competent parliamentary committee in a report classified according to the Act on the Protection of Classified Data.
The applicants submitted a statement obtained from the Commissioner’s Office on 9 July 2014, according to which the Commissioner had never enquired into the field of secret surveillance measures.
Act no. CLI of 2011 on the Constitutional Court provides as follows:
“Persons or organisations affected by a particular case may, under Article 24 (2) c) of the Fundamental Law, submit a constitutional complaint to the Constitutional Court where due to the application in the related court proceedings of a piece of legislation contravening the Fundamental Law,
a) their rights enshrined in the Fundamental Law have been violated, and
b) legal remedies have been exhausted or no remedy exists.
(2) By way of derogation from subsection (1), such Constitutional Court proceedings may, exceptionally, also be initiated where
a) the injury originated directly from the application or becoming effective of a provision contravening the Fundamental Law, without a court decision, and
b) no procedure to redress the injury is available or the available remedies have already been exhausted by the complainant. ...”
“Against a judicial decision contravening the Fundamental Law within the meaning of Article 24 (2) d.) of the Fundamental Law, a person or organisation affected by the particular case may file a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court where the decision on the merits of the case or another decision terminating the judicial proceedings
a) has violated the complainant’s rights enshrined in the Fundamental Law, and
b) the complainant has already exhausted the legal remedies or no legal remedy exists.”
Decision no. 32/2013. (XI.22.) AB of the Constitutional Court establishing the constitutional requirement to be met in respect of section 58 (3) of Nbtv. and rejecting the related constitutional complaint contains the following passages:
“... 1. The Constitutional Court finds that ... in order to make the external control effective, the decision of the Minister responsible for justice ... authorising secret intelligence gathering must be supplied with reasons. ...
[42] 1.1. The regulations in force specify two types of secret intelligence gathering: secret surveillance linked to the investigation of particular crimes and secret surveillance not linked to the investigation of particular crimes. ...
[47] 1.2. Secret surveillance not linked to the investigation of particular crimes is either not subject to external authorisation [sections 54-55 of Nbtv.] or is subject to external authorisation [sections 54-55 of Nbtv.] In cases specified in the Act authorisation means authorisation by a judge or by the Minister of Justice.
[48] According to the reasoning of Nbtv., from international practice several examples can be mentioned for States making a distinction between intelligence gathering linked to the investigation of particular crimes (including the closely related fields of crime prevention and crime detection) and intelligence gathering carried out for national security purposes.
[49] On the basis of this principle, a system of divided authorisation has been adopted in the Act. For the purpose of detecting actual criminal offences, secret intelligence gathering is authorised – similarly to the solution applied in the Act on the Police – by a judge designated for the task by the President of the Budapest High Court, whereas section 56 activities carried out in the course of general intelligence gathering shall be authorised by the Minister of Justice. ...
[51] Section 53 (2) of Nbtv., according to which secret intelligence gathering may only be carried out if the data required to perform the statutory tasks cannot be obtained in any other manner, shall apply to both cases. ...
[62] Under section 14 (4) of Nbtv. Parliament’s National Security Committee shall exercise control over the authorisation process of the Minister of Justice. ...
[69] 2. Secret intelligence gathering governed by Nbtv and not linked to the investigation of particular crimes ... has not been examined by the Constitutional Court yet. However, in its decision no. 2/2007. (I. 24.) AB (henceforth: Abh.1.) the Constitutional Court specified the general aspects under which secret intelligence gathering and secret surveillance are acceptable in a democratic, rule-of-law State.
[70] Since the content of Article B) (1) of the Fundamental Law is identical to the content of Article 2 (1) of the former Constitution, and since from the rules of interpretation applicable to the Fundamental Law no conclusion contrary to the above opinion of the Constitutional Court can be inferred, the statements of principle made on the necessity and proportionality of secret intelligence gathering can be maintained.
[71] The Constitutional Court has also taken into consideration the Strasbourg Court’s jurisprudence, as recalled in its former decisions. Cases related to “covert investigations” were examined by the Court in light of the Convention provisions set forth in Article 8 which protects the right to respect for private life. In its judgments the Court held that in a democratic society the rights enshrined under Article 8 § 1 can only be restricted within the limits specified in paragraph 2, that is only for the purposes specified in that provision and only in case the necessity of the restriction is justified.
[72] Lawfulness under the Court’s case law does not merely require that a given restriction be specified under the law. The phrase “in accordance with the law” requires that the regulation itself should meet the rule-of-law principles. Since secret intelligence gathering does, per definition, exclude the possibility of an effective remedy, it is imperative that the process authorising such information gathering should contain sufficient guarantees for the protection of the rights of the individuals. Therefore, the use of secret intelligence gathering must be subject to a three-stage control: when the interference is ordered, while the interference is carried out and when the interference is terminated. Control must be exercised by “bodies” independent of the executive power. First of all, only constant, continuous and mandatory control can guarantee that in a given case the requirement of proportionality is not violated ....
[73] In its judgments the Court laid down the minimum requirements to be met by a legal regulation on the use of secret intelligence devices. The Court emphasised that since the interference with the fundamental rights is secret and since the use of such devices provides “unpredictable” opportunities for the executive power, it is indispensable that the procedures themselves provide sufficient guarantees for the observance of the rights of the individuals. Therefore States must create precise and detailed rules that can be abided by and accessed by the citizens. From the legal regulation the competence of the authority applying such devices, the essence of the measures and the manner of their practice should be clear and apparent. As to the requirement of the clarity of rules the Court also pointed out that the laws should specify the cases and circumstances which warrant such interference and the conditions of the interference. As a minimum guarantee the laws should determine the criteria based on which the scope of persons potentially affected can be determined and should contain provisions regulating the documentation of the use of secret intelligence devices and specifying the rules applicable to the protection and destruction of the documentation. As to decision-making on the application of secret intelligence devices, an excessively wide margin of appreciation may not be granted for the authorities (e.g. Valenzuela Contreras v. Spain (58/1997/842/1048)). As to the application of secret intelligence devices, the requirement that access to the information by outside persons should be restricted serves as an additional guarantee (e.g. Kopp v. Switzerland (13/1997/797/1000) 25 March 1998).
[74] Use for a particular purpose means that secret intelligence devices may only be used for reasons specified in Article 8 § 2 .... Compliance with the necessity test is closely linked to this issue. It is a basic requirement that any interference should be justified by pressing public interest and should be proportionate both to the danger needed to be countered and to the injury caused.
[75] An examination of these issues should not be confined to scrutinising whether the statutory conditions laid down for the restriction meet the necessity-proportionality test but should also extend to examining the necessity of the use of secret intelligence devices in the particular case. As to the requirement of necessity it is of paramount importance that any use should only take place in case of “aggravated” (serious) threat and only in case the traditional investigative means and devices prove to be inefficient in the particular circumstances of a case; moreover, any use of the secret intelligence devices should take place according to a strict procedure that can be known in advance ...
[76] From the Convention and the relevant case law of the Court the Constitutional Court has concluded that national security, public security and the prosecution of crime are interests for which even covert investigations – which amount to serious law-restricting devices – can be used where the above specified criteria are met.
[77] 3. The Constitutional Court has examined the contested provision within the confines of the complainants’ complaint. The complainants challenged the anti-terrorist organ’s secret intelligence gathering activities carried out for purposes other than prosecuting crime. They alleged non-compliance with the Fundamental Law of the contested provision by alleging that the provision at issue allowed for the anti-terrorist organ’s secret intelligence gathering under Nbtv. – while Nbtv. contained no guarantees for the observance of the fundamental rights at issue.
[78] The complainants did not make a distinction between the various stages of the secret intelligence gathering (ordering, carrying out and terminating the interference) but picked out some elements of the application [of this measure] and complained about those elements. As to the ordering of the interference they complained that the permission of the Minister responsible for justice did not constitute a sufficient guarantee, in particular in view of the fact that the grounds on which the request for authorisation can be made are not exhaustively enumerated. The complainants are of the view that following the termination of the interference the fate of the information irrelevant for the purposes of the surveillance and the fate of the data related to persons not concerned in the case is not settled. ...
[80] Therefore, within the confines of the complaint the Constitutional Court must examine whether the authorisation by the Minister responsible for justice of secret intelligence gathering for the anti-terrorist organ and the handling of data following the termination of the interference does or does not violate the fundamental rights invoked, namely the right to privacy and the right to informational autonomy....
[92] 3.2. The Constitutional Court has first examined the constitutionality of the authorisation by the Minister responsible for justice. The first phase of secret surveillance is the ordering of the interference. Since in applying section 7/E (3) of the Act on the Police (henceforth: Rtv.) the Minister responsible for justice gives – by authorising the use of the secret intelligence gathering devices and methods listed in section 56 a)-e) of Nbtv. – consent to a State interference which seriously violates fundamental rights, the process of interference must be regulated under the law, the prescribed norms must be clear, and the process must be subject to external control mechanisms. ...
[94] ... The contested provision of Rtv. authorises the anti-terrorist organ to carry out, in performing certain of its tasks, secret intelligence gathering under the Nbtv. The Rtv. clearly specifies the two tasks for the performance of which secret surveillance under the Nbtv. may be carried out: namely, the performance of the tasks specified in section 7/E (1) a) and ad) and in section 7/E (1) e).
[95] The task specified under section 7/E (1) a) (subsection (ad)) to be performed in the framework of combating terrorism is the prevention, detection and suppression of endeavours to commit an act of terrorism in the territory of Hungary with a view to promoting Hungary’s national security interests. Item e) refers back to item d) which allows for the obtaining, analysing, assessing and forwarding of information on a foreign State or originating in a foreign State in so far as the information is necessary for the performance of the task specified there. The tasks specified under item d) are participation in the rescue, return to Hungary and evacuation of Hungarian nationals who have got into trouble due to acts of war or armed conflicts outside the territory of Hungary imminently threatening the lives and limbs of Hungarian nationals or due to terrorist acts or hostage-taking acts, as well as cooperation for such purposes with the member States and institutions of the European Union, the organs of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the international organisations concerned by the case and the authorities of the foreign State at issue. These tasks shall be carried out upon a decision to that effect taken by the Minister responsible for law enforcement in agreement with the Minister responsible for foreign affairs.
[96] Section 7/E (3) of Rtv., contested by the complainants, refers to Nbtv. and repeats the Nbtv. rules on secret intelligence gathering (sections 53-60) and the handling of the acquired data [sections 38-52]. Section 7/E (3) of Rtv. provides for the application, mutatis mutandis, of the Nbtv. provisions both to the investigation of a complaint about an activity of the anti-terrorist organ, and to the parliamentary control of the anti-terrorist organ and to the investigation of a report alleging unlawful operation on the part of the anti-terrorist organ [section 11 (5), section 14 (1)-(2) and (4) a)-f) and (5), section 15 (3), section 16, section 18 and section 27 (4) of Nbtv.] Moreover, the contested provision clearly provides that the Minister responsible for justice shall be entitled to authorise the use, within the scope of the statutory tasks, of the secret intelligence devices enumerated in an exhaustive list. Therefore section 7/E (3) of Rtv. meets the requirement of being prescribed by law and the requirement of clarity of norms, as it sufficiently specifies the conditions of ordering and the circumstances of executing the measure regulated in the Act.
[97] Thereafter the Constitutional Court has proceeded to examine whether in the given case the authorisation of secret intelligence gathering by the Minister responsible for justice provided sufficient guarantees for the observance of the fundamental rights of the individuals. ...
[102] Secret intelligence gathering for the purposes of national security may only take place under Section 7/E (1) a) ad) or e) of Rtv., that is in order to combat endeavours to commit an act of terrorism in the territory of Hungary and in relation to the protection of Hungarian nationals have got into trouble in a foreign country. ...
[105] The scope of national security-related tasks is much broader than the scope of the tasks related to the investigation of particular crimes as for the purposes of national security the events of real life are examined not for their criminal law relevance, and those events do not necessarily entail legal consequences. Identifying and combating endeavours aimed at committing acts having relevance from the aspects of securing the sovereignty of the State and of protecting the lawful order of the State may fall outside the sphere of particular criminal offences. Therefore national security-related tasks are not comparable to secret intelligence gathering linked to investigating a crime, which is carried out under section 69 of Rtv. and is subject to authorisation by a court. The prevention and elimination of risks to national security require political decisions, therefore decisions of this type fall in the competence of the executive power. This consideration justifies that general character secret intelligence gathering should be authorised by the Minister responsible for justice.
[106] However, in granting the authorisation the Minister responsible for justice must weigh the interests of national security against the injury done to the fundamental rights. Therefore in addition to assessing the national security interests of the country from a political (home and foreign affairs) aspect, the person granting the authorisation should also strike a fair balance between the interests of national security and fundamental rights. In doing so, it must start from the principle that secret intelligence methods for national security purposes may only be used even by the anti-terrorist organ as a last resort means of detection. Section 53 (2) of Nbtv. clearly provides for the ultima ratio nature of secret intelligence methods: the special devices and methods of secret intelligence gathering can only be used where the data needed for the completion of a prescribed task cannot be obtained in any other way, namely by the traditional means of detection. This provision of Nbtv. is intended to serve as a legal guarantee similar to that which the specification in the law of the acts amounting to criminal offences constitutes in the context of secret intelligence gathering linked to the investigation of a particular crime and carried out upon the suspicion of an offence.
[107] ... The request for authorisation must be supported with reasons. The ... grantor of the authorisation shall base his decision on the content of the request: the request shall be granted or, in case of ill-foundedness, rejected. Hence, in case the requesting authority cannot sufficiently justify that the data required for performing its tasks cannot be acquired in any other manner no authorisation for the use of intelligence devices and methods shall be given. ...
[114] As to the ordering and carrying out of the secret intelligence gathering external control is a fundamental guarantee. Control over the activities performed by the anti-terrorist organ under the rules of Nbtv. is exercised by the National Security Committee (henceforth: Committee) of the Parliament ... Upon the Committee’s request the Minister of Justice shall provide information on the nature of the authorised information gathering and on the type of the case (section 14(4) b) Nbtv.).
[115] The Committee may acquire information about irregularities related to the operation of the Services (anti-terrorist organ) from, among others, its own inquiries, from citizen complaints or from information from the staff members of the Services. ...
[119] Nbtv. sets one single bar to the Committee’s control: the Committee may not learn of information which might endanger the prime importance national security interests in protecting the methods and sources (participating persons) relied on in the case at issue (section 16(1) of Nbtv.) .
[120] The operation of the National Security Services and of the anti-terrorist organ and of the Minister of justice’s authorising activity can be controlled, in addition to the Parliament, by the Parliamentary Commissioner for Fundamental Rights as well.
[121] Under section 18 (1) f) of Act no. CXI of 2011 on the Parliamentary Commissioner for Fundamental Rights (henceforth: Ajbt.) law enforcement organs, including the anti-terrorist organ, are authorities that can be examined by the Ombudsman. ... Hence no obstacle exists to an examination by the Ombudsman, the only bar being that – similarly to the control by Parliament – the report made on the examination of the secret intelligence activities of the authorities authorised for using secret intelligence devices and methods may not contain data from which the secret intelligence gathering activities carried out by the organ in the case at issue can be inferred (section 28(3)). The Commissioner for Fundamental Rights may present, in case the conditions specified under section 38 of Ajbt. are met, the cases examined by him to Parliament in an annual report and may, with the exception of motions for amendments, request Parliament to examine a case. ...
[122] On the basis of the above information the Constitutional Court has concluded that Nbtv. allows for the control of the authorisation granting of the Minister of Justice by bodies independent of the executive power. ...
[124] 3.3 In examining the reference in section 7/E (3) of Rtv. the Constitutional Court has observed that section 58 (3) of Nbtv. does not expressly provide for a reasoned decision ...
[127] A necessary element of any judicial decision to be taken on secret intelligence gathering under the Rtv. is an examination of the compliance of the request for authorisation with the statutory requirements. ...
[128] [...] The reference in section 7/E (3) of Rtv. also requires authorisation from the Minister of Justice for national security-related secret intelligence gathering carried out by the anti-terrorist organ, which is part of the Police Service, in order to combat endeavours to commit an act of terrorism in the territory of Hungary or in relation to the protection of Hungarian nationals who have got into trouble in a foreign country. ...
[130] Since Nbtv. does not expressly require the Minister of Justice to issue a reasoned decision, the authoriser is under no obligation to provide reasoning. In the absence of reasoning, however, no posterior understanding, analysis or review of the aspects and reasons giving rise to the decision in a particular case is possible for those who exercise external control.
[131] Though section 58 (3) of Nbtv. prescribes that the authorisation grantor shall base his decision on the content of the request, this content is, per definition, one-sided since in arguing for the necessity of the secret information gathering the request will solely invoke national security interests. The authorisation grantor must strike a fair balance between the interests of national security and fundamental rights enshrined under Article VI (1)-(2) of the Fundamental Law for persons affected by secret intelligence gathering and must ensure, in addition to determining the necessity of the restriction, that the restriction is proportionate. ...
[132] Given that the special nature of secret surveillance excludes the possibility of a remedy, a restriction of the right to privacy and of the right to informational autonomy that is proportionate to the protection of national security will require effective external control already in granting the authorisation for the use of the secret intelligence devices.
[133] The National Security Committee and the Commissioner for Fundamental Rights may only constitute effective external control over the authorisation activity of the Minister of Justice if the Minister’s decision authorising the secret surveillance contains sufficiently detailed reasons. The reasons should be of a depth and detail that enable those who exercise the external control to review the balance struck between the interests of national security and the fundamental rights at issue.
[134] Upon the authorisation granted in section 46 (3) of Abtv., in order to ensure effective external control, the Constitutional Court has laid down as a constitutional requirement ensuring compliance with Article VI (1)-(2) of the Fundamental Law that in applying section 58 (3) of Nbtv. the decision of the Minister responsible for justice ordering secret intelligence gathering must be supported by reasons.
[135] 3.4. Thereafter the Constitutional Court has examined whether the data handling by the anti-terrorist organ following the termination of the secret intelligence gathering violates the right to informational autonomy. The complainants complained that Nbtv., contrary to Rtv., fails to provide for the deletion of such recorded information which is irrelevant for the purposes of the surveillance and of data which are related to persons not concerned by the case. ...
[138] Based on the above considerations the Constitutional Court has established that though Nbtv., contrary to section 73 (3) of Rtv., does not expressly provide for the deletion of such recorded information which is irrelevant for the purposes of the surveillance and of data which are related to persons not concerned by the case, from the joint interpretation of the phrase “obviously unnecessary” in section 50 (2) e) and of section 43 of Nbtv. it clearly follows that any data unnecessary for achieving the aim serving as a legal ground for the data acquisition, in particular the data related to persons not concerned by the case, must be deleted ex officio. Therefore the above regulation meets the principle of being purpose-bound and is suitable to prevent storing data acquisition. Moreover, Nbtv. allows for the concerned persons to file a request for the deletion of their personal data, which request can only be rejected by the Chief Director on specific grounds. External control exists over the data processing as well, since the reasons for the rejection of a request must also be sent to the National Data-Protection and Information Freedom Authority [section 48 of Nbtv.].
[139] Therefore the Constitutional Court dismisses, in this respect as well, the complaint alleging non-compliance of the contested provision with the Fundamental Law and seeking the annulment of the contested provision. ...”
The Report on the Democratic oversight of the Security Services adopted by the Venice Commission at its 71st Plenary Session (Venice, 12 June 2007) (CDL-AD(2007)016-e) contains the following passages:
“81.  In the light of the importance and nature of the interests at stake, security intelligence gathering is one of the main areas of national decision-making which a government is most unwilling to submit to national legislative scrutiny and judicial review and, a fortiori, to international supervision and control.
For a variety of reasons, there can be tension as regards national security policy, not only between the governing party and the political opposition in a State, but also constitutional tension between the executive and the legislative power, tension within a government (especially a coalition government), and tension between political masters and the staff of security intelligence agencies. A large degree of secrecy must accompany national security policy making and operations. However secrecy also has the effect of increasing the government’s control over policy at the expense of the legislative power, and of insulating the former from criticism. This is exacerbated by the fact that nowadays, there is a link between “external” and “internal” threats to the State. Accordingly, security and intelligence information tends to form an indivisible whole. ...
It is particularly important, as regards the limited scope of parliamentary and judicial control, to note the special nature of security intelligence. The heart of a security agency is its intelligence files. “Hard” data, purely factual information, is insufficient for a security agency, or for that matter, any police organization. It also needs to gather speculative intelligence in order to determine which people are, or are probably or possibly, threatening national security. This information can be obtained in different ways. A large proportion of non-open source internal security information comes from informants. Like factual information, such “soft intelligence” can, and must if the agency is to do its job properly, be collated to produce a personality profile of a suspect or an analysis of a suspected activity. ...
Internal control of security services is the primary guarantee against abuses of power, when the staff working in the agencies are committed to the democratic values of the State and to respecting human rights. External controls are essentially to buttress the internal controls and periodically ensure these are working properly.
Internal controls mean in the first place that the senior management of the agency must exercise efficient control in practice over the lower ranks of the agency.
Just as strong internal controls are a precondition for effective executive control over the security agency, a strong executive control over the security agency is a precondition for adequate parliamentary accountability, given that access by parliament to intelligence usually depends on the executive. The same is less true for expert review/authorization systems, to the extent that these have their own access to officials and intelligence material ...
In order to provide for impartial verification and assurance for the government that secret agencies are acting according to its policies, effectively and with propriety, a number of countries have devised offices such as Inspectors-General, judicial commissioners or auditors to check on the activities of the security sector and with statutory powers of access to information and staff.
There are several reasons why parliamentarians should be involved in the oversight of security agencies. Firstly, the ultimate authority and legitimacy of security agencies is derived from legislative approval of their powers, operations and expenditure. Secondly, there is a risk that the agencies may serve narrow political or sectional interests, rather than the State as a whole and protecting the constitutional order, if democratic scrutiny does not extend to them. A stable, politically bi-partisan approach to security may be ensured therefore by proper control, to the benefit of the State and the agencies themselves.
From a comparative international perspective, the most frequent arrangement is for parliament to establish a single oversight body for all the major security and intelligence agencies, rather than having multiple oversight bodies for specific agencies.
Judicial control over internal security services can take different forms. First, there is prior authorization in a pre-trial phase, and/or post hoc review, of special investigative measures, such as telephone tapping, bugging and video surveillance. This is the normal practice in European States.
Nonetheless, there is an obvious advantage of requiring prior judicial authorization for special investigative techniques, namely that the security agency has to go “outside of itself” and convince an independent person of the need for a particular measure. It subordinates security concerns to the law, and as such it serves to institutionalize respect for the law. If it works properly, judicial authorization will have a preventive effect, deterring unmeritorious applications and/or cutting down the duration of a special investigative measure. The Parliamentary Assembly has earlier expressed a clear preference for prior judicial authorization of special investigative measures (depending on the type of measures).
Expert bodies can serve as either a supplement or a replacement for parliamentary bodies or judicial accountability...
An expert body allows for greater expertise and time in the oversight of security and intelligence services and avoids the risks of political division and grandstanding to which parliamentary committees can be prone. The body may be full or part time, but even if it is part time, the supervision exerted is likely to be more continuous than that exercised by a parliamentary body, the members of which have many other political interests and responsibilities. The members’ tenure can be made longer than the standard electoral period, something which is particularly important as intelligence has, as already mentioned ..., a relatively long “learning curve”.
Like parliamentary oversight, the mandate of an expert body can be institutional, meaning that it can be established to exercise supervision only over a specific internal security body (this is in contrast to functional review discussed below) ...
It is, however, important that the scope of the review is drawn carefully, to avoid disputes as to whether a particular activity falls within the body’s mandate and to avoid overlaps with other accountability mechanisms, in particular judicial controls over police powers and Ministerial accountability to parliament.
Clearly it is necessary for individuals who claim to have been adversely affected by the exceptional powers of security and intelligence agencies, such as surveillance or security clearance, to have some avenue for redress. Quite apart from strengthening accountability, complaints may also help to lead to improved performance by the agencies through highlighting administrative failings. The requirements of human rights treaties, and especially the European Convention on Human Rights, with its protections of fair trial, respect for private life and the requirement of an effective remedy must obviously also be borne in mind.
Plainly, though, legitimate targets of a security or intelligence agency should not be able to use a complaints system to find out about the agency’s work. A complaints system should balance, on the one hand, independence, robustness and fairness, and, on the other hand, sensitivity to security needs. Designing such a system is difficult but not impossible.
Individuals who allege wrongdoing by the State in other fields routinely have a right of action for damages before the courts. The effectiveness of this right depends, however, on the knowledge of the individual of the alleged wrongful act, and proof to the satisfaction of the courts. As already mentioned, for a variety of reasons, the capacity of the ordinary courts to serve as an adequate remedy in security fields is limited. The case law of the European Court of Human Rights ... makes it very clear that a remedy must not simply be on paper.
An alternative is to allow an investigation and report into a complaint against an agency by an independent official, such as an ombudsman....
In these ombudsman-type systems, the emphasis is on an independent official investigating on behalf of the complainant. These independent offices usually exist to deal with an administrative failure by public bodies, rather than a legal error. Their investigations may give less emphasis to the complainant’s own participation in the process and to transparency than would be the case with legal proceedings. Typically an investigation of this type will conclude not with a judgment and formal remedies, but with a report, and (if the complaint is upheld) a recommendation for putting matters right and future action...
A less common variation is for a State to use a parliamentary or expert oversight body to deal with complaints and grievances of individuals.... There may be a benefit for a parliamentary oversight body in handling complaints brought against security and intelligence agencies since this will give an insight into potential failures – of policy, legality and efficiency. On the other hand, if the oversight body is too closely identified with the agencies it oversees or operates within the ring of secrecy, the complainant may feel that the complaints process is insufficiently independent. In cases where a single body handles complaints and oversight it is best if there are quite distinct legal procedures for these different roles.
On the whole it is preferable that the two functions be given to different bodies but that processes are in place so that the oversight body is made aware of the broader implications of individual complaints. This approach is also supported by the ECHR. The requirement in ECHR Article 13 of a mechanism for remedies for alleging violations of Convention rights which is independent from the authorization process means that a State’s control system, e.g. for data processing, may pass the test of “accordance with the law” and “necessity in a democratic society” but that the absence of a remedy means that there is nonetheless a violation of the Convention. As already mentioned, the ECtHR has stated that a remedy must be effective in law and fact. It should be noted in particular that the ECtHR has ruled that a data inspection authority which is independent, and which has formal competence in law to award a remedy for the holding of inaccurate, inappropriate etc. security data, but which in fact lacks the expertise to evaluate this data, is not an effective remedy within the meaning of Article 13.
In some countries, not only individuals but also members of the services are permitted to bring service-related issues to the attention of an ombudsman or parliamentary oversight body...
Another method of handling complaints is through a specialist tribunal.”
Several elements of international law, relevant in this context, are outlined in the judgment Dragojević v. Croatia (no. 68955/11, §§ 62 to 66, 15 January 2015).
In Digital Rights Ireland v Minister for Communications & Others, (cases C-293/12 and C-594/12, 8 April 2014), the Court of Justice of the European Union held as follows:
“26.  In that regard, it should be observed that the data which providers of publicly available electronic communications services or of public communications networks must retain, pursuant to Articles 3 and 5 of Directive 2006/24, include data necessary to trace and identify the source of a communication and its destination, to identify the date, time, duration and type of a communication, to identify users’ communication equipment, and to identify the location of mobile communication equipment, data which consist, inter alia, of the name and address of the subscriber or registered user, the calling telephone number, the number called and an IP address for Internet services. Those data make it possible, in particular, to know the identity of the person with whom a subscriber or registered user has communicated and by what means, and to identify the time of the communication as well as the place from which that communication took place. They also make it possible to know the frequency of the communications of the subscriber or registered user with certain persons during a given period.
Those data, taken as a whole, may allow very precise conclusions to be drawn concerning the private lives of the persons whose data has been retained, such as the habits of everyday life, permanent or temporary places of residence, daily or other movements, the activities carried out, the social relationships of those persons and the social environments frequented by them.
...
So far as concerns the right to respect for private life, the protection of that fundamental right requires, according to the Court’s settled case-law, in any event, that derogations and limitations in relation to the protection of personal data must apply only in so far as is strictly necessary (Case C473/12 IPI EU:C: 2013:715, paragraph 39 and the case-law cited).
...
In particular, Directive 2006/24 does not lay down any objective criterion by which the number of persons authorised to access and subsequently use the data retained is limited to what is strictly necessary in the light of the objective pursued. Above all, the access by the competent national authorities to the data retained is not made dependent on a prior review carried out by a court or by an independent administrative body whose decision seeks to limit access to the data and their use to what is strictly necessary for the purpose of attaining the objective pursued and which intervenes following a reasoned request of those authorities submitted within the framework of procedures of prevention, detection or criminal prosecutions. Nor does it lay down a specific obligation on Member States designed to establish such limits.”
The 2013 Report of the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, Frank La Rue, contains the following conclusions and recommendations:
“78.  Communications techniques and technologies have evolved significantly, changing the way in which communications surveillance is conducted by States. States must therefore update their understandings and regulation of communications surveillance and modify their practices in order to ensure that individuals’ human rights are respected and protected.
States cannot ensure that individuals are able to freely seek and receive information or express themselves without respecting, protecting and promoting their right to privacy. Privacy and freedom of expression are interlinked and mutually dependent; an infringement upon one can be both the cause and consequence of an infringement upon the other. Without adequate legislation and legal standards to ensure the privacy, security and anonymity of communications, journalists, human rights defenders and whistleblowers, for example, cannot be assured that their communications will not be subject to States’ scrutiny.
In order to meet their human rights obligations, States must ensure that the rights to freedom of expression and privacy are at the heart of their communications surveillance frameworks. To this end, the Special Rapporteur recommends the following:
Communications surveillance should be regarded as a highly intrusive act that potentially interferes with the rights to freedom of expression and privacy and threatens the foundations of a democratic society. Legislation must stipulate that State surveillance of communications must only occur under the most exceptional circumstances and exclusively under the supervision of an independent judicial authority. Safeguards must be articulated in law relating to the nature, scope and duration of the possible measures, the grounds required for ordering them, the authorities competent to authorize, carry out and supervise them, and the kind of remedy provided by the national law.
Individuals should have a legal right to be notified that they have been subjected to communications surveillance or that their communications data has been accessed by the State. Recognizing that advance or concurrent notification might jeopardize the effectiveness of the surveillance, individuals should nevertheless be notified once surveillance has been completed and have the possibility to seek redress in respect of the use of communications surveillance measures in their aftermath.
Legal frameworks must ensure that communications surveillance measures:
(a)  Are prescribed by law, meeting a standard of clarity and precision that is sufficient to ensure that individuals have advance notice of and can foresee their application;
(b)  Are strictly and demonstrably necessary to achieve a legitimate aim; and
(c)  Adhere to the principle of proportionality, and are not employed when less invasive techniques are available or have not yet been exhausted.
States should criminalize illegal surveillance by public or private actors. Such laws must not be used to target whistleblowers or other individuals seeking to expose human rights violations, nor should they hamper the legitimate oversight of government action by citizens.
The provision of communications data by the private sector to States should be sufficiently regulated to ensure that individuals’ human rights are prioritized at all times. Access to communications data held by domestic corporate actors should only be sought in circumstances where other available less invasive techniques have been exhausted.
The provision of communications data to the State should be monitored by an independent authority, such as a court or oversight mechanism. At the international level, States should enact Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties to regulate access to communications data held by foreign corporate actors.
Surveillance techniques and practices that are employed outside of the rule of law must be brought under legislative control. Their extra-legal usage undermines basic principles of democracy and is likely to have harmful political and social effects.
States should refrain from compelling the identification of users as a precondition for access to communications, including online services, cybercafés or mobile telephony.
Individuals should be free to use whatever technology they choose to secure their communications. States should not interfere with the use of encryption technologies, nor compel the provision of encryption keys.
States should not retain or require the retention of particular information purely for surveillance purposes.
States should be completely transparent about the use and scope of communications surveillance techniques and powers. They should publish, at minimum, aggregate information on the number of requests approved and rejected, a disaggregation of the requests by service provider and by investigation and purpose.
States should provide individuals with sufficient information to enable them to fully comprehend the scope, nature and application of the laws permitting communications surveillance. States should enable service providers to publish the procedures they apply when dealing with State communications surveillance, adhere to those procedures, and publish records of State communications surveillance.
States should establish independent oversight mechanisms capable to ensure transparency and accountability of State surveillance of communications.
States should raise public awareness on the uses of new communication technologies in order to support individuals in properly assessing, managing, mitigating and making informed decisions on communications-related risks.
States should ensure that communications data collected by corporate actors in the provision of communications services meets the highest standards of data protection.
States must refrain from forcing the private sector to implement measures compromising the privacy, security and anonymity of communications services, including requiring the construction of interception capabilities for State surveillance purposes or prohibiting the use of encryption.
States must take measures to prevent the commercialization of surveillance technologies, paying particular attention to research, development, trade, export and use of these technologies considering their ability to facilitate systematic human rights violations.
There is a significant need to advance international understanding on the protection of the right to privacy in light of technological advancements. The Human Rights Committee should consider issuing a new General Comment on the right to privacy, to replace General Comment No. 16 (1988).
Human rights mechanisms should further assess the obligations of private actors developing and supplying surveillance technologies.”
The European Parliament resolution of 12 March 2014 on the US NSA surveillance programme, surveillance bodies in various Member States and their impact on EU citizens’ fundamental rights and on transatlantic cooperation in Justice and Home Affairs contains the following passages:
“...
whereas the revelations since June 2013 have caused numerous concerns within the EU as to: ...
- the possibility of these mass surveillance operations being used for reasons other than national security and the fight against terrorism in the strict sense, for example economic and industrial espionage or profiling on political grounds;
- the undermining of press freedom and of communications of members of professions with a confidentiality privilege, including lawyers and doctors;
- the respective roles and degree of involvement of intelligence agencies and private IT and telecom companies;
- the increasingly blurred boundaries between law enforcement and intelligence activities, leading to every citizen being treated as a suspect and being subject to surveillance;
- the threats to privacy in a digital era and the impact of mass surveillance on citizens and societies;
...
whereas fundamental rights, notably freedom of expression, of the press, of thought, of conscience, of religion and of association, private life, data protection, as well as the right to an effective remedy, the presumption of innocence and the right to a fair trial and non-discrimination, as enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and in the European Convention on Human Rights, are cornerstones of democracy; whereas mass surveillance of human beings is incompatible with these cornerstones;
...
whereas intelligence services in democratic societies are given special powers and capabilities to protect fundamental rights, democracy and the rule of law, citizens’ rights and the State against internal and external threats, and are subject to democratic accountability and judicial oversight; whereas they are given special powers and capabilities only to this end; whereas these powers should be used within the legal limits imposed by fundamental rights, democracy and the rule of law and their application should be strictly scrutinised, as otherwise they lose legitimacy and risk undermining democracy;
whereas the fact that a certain level of secrecy is conceded to intelligence services in order to avoid endangering ongoing operations, revealing modi operandi or putting at risk the lives of agents, such secrecy cannot override or exclude rules on democratic and judicial scrutiny and examination of their activities, as well as on transparency, notably in relation to the respect of fundamental rights and the rule of law, all of which are cornerstones in a democratic society;
whereas most of the existing national oversight mechanisms and bodies were set up or revamped in the 1990s and have not necessarily been adapted to the rapid political and technological developments over the last decade that have led to increased international intelligence cooperation, also through the large scale exchange of personal data, and often blurring the line between intelligence and law enforcement activities;
whereas democratic oversight of intelligence activities is still only conducted at national level, despite the increase in exchange of information between EU Member States and between Member States and third countries; whereas there is an increasing gap between the level of international cooperation on the one hand and oversight capacities limited to the national level on the other, which results in insufficient and ineffective democratic scrutiny;
whereas national oversight bodies often do not have full access to intelligence received from a foreign intelligence agency, which can lead to gaps in which international information exchanges can take place without adequate review; whereas this problem is further aggravated by the so-called ‘third party rule’ or the principle of ‘originator control’, which has been designed to enable originators to maintain control over the further dissemination of their sensitive information, but is unfortunately often interpreted as applying also to the recipient services’ oversight;
whereas private and public transparency reform initiatives are key to ensuring public trust in the activities of intelligence agencies; whereas legal systems should not prevent companies from disclosing to the public information about how they handle all types of government requests and court orders for access to user data, including the possibility of disclosing aggregate information on the number of requests and orders approved and rejected;
...
Recalls the EU’s firm belief in the need to strike the right balance between security measures and the protection of civil liberties and fundamental rights, while ensuring the utmost respect for privacy and data protection;
Considers that data collection of such magnitude leaves considerable doubts as to whether these actions are guided only by the fight against terrorism, since it involves the collection of all possible data of all citizens; points, therefore, to the possible existence of other purposes including political and economic espionage, which need to be comprehensively dispelled;
Questions the compatibility of some Member States’ massive economic espionage activities with the EU internal market and competition law as enshrined in Titles I and VII of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union; reaffirms the principle of sincere cooperation as enshrined in Article 4(3) of the Treaty on European Union, as well as the principle that Member States shall ‘refrain from any measures which could jeopardise the attainment of the Union’s objectives’;
Condemns the vast and systemic blanket collection of the personal data of innocent people, often including intimate personal information; emphasises that the systems of indiscriminate mass surveillance by intelligence services constitute a serious interference with the fundamental rights of citizens; stresses that privacy is not a luxury right, but is the foundation stone of a free and democratic society; points out, furthermore, that mass surveillance has potentially severe effects on freedom of the press, thought and speech and on freedom of assembly and of association, as well as entailing a significant potential for abusive use of the information gathered against political adversaries; emphasises that these mass surveillance activities also entail illegal actions by intelligence services and raise questions regarding the extraterritoriality of national laws;
Sees the surveillance programmes as yet another step towards the establishment of a fully-fledged preventive state, changing the established paradigm of criminal law in democratic societies whereby any interference with suspects’ fundamental rights has to be authorised by a judge or prosecutor on the basis of a reasonable suspicion and must be regulated by law, promoting instead a mix of law enforcement and intelligence activities with blurred and weakened legal safeguards, often not in line with democratic checks and balances and fundamental rights, especially the presumption of innocence; recalls in this regard the decision of the German Federal Constitutional Court on the prohibition of the use of preventive dragnets (‘präventive Rasterfahndung’) unless there is proof of a concrete danger to other high-ranking legally protected rights, whereby a general threat situation or international tensions do not suffice to justify such measures;
...
Points out that the abovementioned concerns are exacerbated by rapid technological and societal developments, since internet and mobile devices are everywhere in modern daily life (‘ubiquitous computing’) and the business model of most internet companies is based on the processing of personal data; considers that the scale of this problem is unprecedented; notes that this may create a situation where infrastructure for the mass collection and processing of data could be misused in cases of change of political regime; ...”