The case originated in an application (no. 52664/07) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by eleven Hungarian nationals (see Annex for details) on 12 November 2007.
On 5 September 2007 Ms Erzsébet Borsayné Sárga, the mother of the applicants Mr Balázs György Borsay and Ms Beáta Ágnes Borsay, who had been a party to the proceedings referred to below, died. On 3 March 2008 the notary public established that the legal heirs were her children. In the meantime, by a power of attorney given to Sándor Borsay on 8 November 2007, the heirs had expressed their wish to lodge an application in respect of the unreasonable length of the proceedings to which their mother had been a party. The term “the applicants” will be used below to refer to Ms Erzsébet Borsayné Sárga and the remaining applicants who were parties to the said proceedings.
The applicants were represented by Mr S. Borsay, a lawyer practising in . The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice.
On 30 November 2010 the application was communicated to the Government. In accordance with Protocol No. 14, the application was allocated to a Committee of three Judges.
In February 1994 the Hungarian National Bank authorised a private limited company (“the Company”) to issue payment cards to its customers. After 1995, however, purchase with such cards was no longer possible. Despite this fact, in 1996 the applicants concluded agreements with the Company for so-called “savings cards” in which they invested various amounts of money.
In November 1996 bankruptcy proceedings were initiated against the Company and its insolvency was established in June 1997. The applicants recovered part of their investments through partial reimbursement by the Company. They sold their remaining claims against the Company to third parties.
On 26 October 1998 three hundred and thirty private individuals, including the applicants, who were all represented by one law firm, brought an official liability action against the Hungarian National Bank before the . They claimed that the respondent had not exercised its supervisory duties over the Company, therefore making it possible for the applicants to conclude the above-mentioned agreements which had resulted in substantial losses.
On 11 January 2001 the  dismissed their action, finding that the respondent had no duty of supervision according to the relevant domestic legislation.
On 28 January 2003 the Supreme Court, acting as a second-instance court, quashed the Regional Court’s decision and remitted the case to the first instance court due to the incomplete findings of fact.
In the resumed proceedings the  found for the applicants on 6 December 2005. It established that the Company had unlawfully overstepped the boundaries of its activities, which had been known to the respondent; nevertheless, the latter could not prove that it had fulfilled its supervisory duties in this respect.
On 26 October 2006 the Budapest Court of Appeal dismissed their appeal. It acknowledged that there were omissions on the respondent’s side. However, since the applicants had already sold their claims to third parties, the court held that they could have no substantive claims whatsoever in the circumstances.
The applicants lodged a petition for review with the Supreme Court. It upheld the Court of Appeal’s decision on 5 June 2007, finding that the latter decision had been in compliance with the law.