The case originated in an application (no. 21913/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Ms Zofia Kowal (“the applicant”), on 4 June 2005.
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the ex officio reopening of the social security proceedings concerning her right to an early-retirement pension, which resulted in the quashing of the final decision granting her a right to a pension, was in breach of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 20 May 2010 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1960 and lives in Tyczyn.
The applicant is married and has children. Until 27 January 2000 she had been employed and paid social security contributions to the State. On 1 March 2000 the applicant was granted the right to a disability pension for a period of one year, effective from 28 January 2000.
On 29 January 2001 the applicant filed an application with the Rzeszów Social Security Board (Zakład Ubezpieczeń Społecznych) to be granted the right to an early-retirement pension for persons raising children who, due to the seriousness of their health condition, required constant care, the so-called “EWK” pension.
Along with her application for a pension, the applicant submitted, among other documents concerning her son’s health condition, a medical certificate issued by a specialist medical centre on 20 October 2000. The certificate stated that the child (born in 1991) suffered from bronchial asthma, allergic rhinitis and faulty posture, and that he was in need of his parent’s constant care.
On 14 February 2001 the Rzeszów Social Security Board (“the SSB”) issued a decision granting the applicant the right to an earlyretirement pension as of 1 January 2001 in the net amount of 433 Polish zlotys (PLN), together with a child benefit in the amount of PLN 240. The pension was twice reassessed and in June 2002 it amounted to PLN 487 net.
On 8 May 2002 the Rzeszów Social Security Board asked the Main Social Security Board’s doctor (Główny Lekarz Orzecznik) to inform it whether the applicant’s son required the permanent care of a parent. On 20 June 2002 the doctor stated, on the basis of the medical documents, that the child could not be considered as ever having required such care.
On 17 July 2002 the Rzeszów Social Security Board issued simultaneously two decisions in respect of the applicant. By virtue of one decision, the payment of the applicant’s pension was discontinued as of 1 August 2002. By virtue of the other decision, the Board reopened the proceedings, revoked the initial decision granting a pension and eventually refused to award the applicant the right to an early-retirement pension under the scheme provided for by the 1989 Ordinance.
The applicant appealed against the respective decisions divesting her of the right to an early-retirement pension. She submitted that she should receive the benefit because her child required constant care, as confirmed by the medical certificate attached to the original application for a pension. Moreover, the applicant alleged that the revocation of her retirement pension was contrary to the principle of vested rights.
On 4 March 2004 the  (Sąd Okręgowy) dismissed the appeal. The  acknowledged that according to the medical expert appointed by the court the applicant’s son required constant care due to his chronic bronchial asthma. However, the applicant had discontinued her employment in January 2000 not in order to take care of her sick child but because she had been granted a disability pension. Consequently, the domestic court held that the applicant had been rightfully divested of her right to a pension under the scheme provided by the 1989 Ordinance as she had not satisfied the requirement of necessary permanent care.
The applicant further appealed against the first-instance judgment.
On 2 July 2004 the Rzeszów Court of Appeal (Sąd Apelacyjny) dismissed the appeal.
On 14 December 2004 the Supreme Court (Sąd Najwyższy) refused to entertain the cassation appeal lodged by the applicant.
Following the social security proceedings the applicant was not ordered to return her early-retirement benefits paid by the Social Security Board, despite the revocation of her right to the early-retirement pension.
The applicant submitted that after the withdrawal of the EWK pension she had been unemployed. She had not received unemployment benefit or any other benefits. In reply to the Government’s submissions, the applicant argued that her daughter, who indeed had been employed since 2006, lived in a separate household.
The Government submitted that after the revocation of the EWK pension the applicant had been registered in the Regional Labour Office as an unemployed person. Subsequently, between 22 March 2005 and 29 February 2008, between 24 June 2008 and 30 June 2009 and as from 10 July 2009 onwards, the applicant had been receiving an agricultural disability pension. The total net amount of that pension paid until 31 August 2010 had been PLN 33,186 (approximately PLN 550 monthly). Moreover, the applicant and her husband owned a farm of 0.69 hectares. The applicant’s daughter, born in 1985, had been employed since 2006.
In addition, the Government submitted information as regards the various types of social benefits available in . However, they did not specify which of those benefits, if any, were available in the applicant’s situation.
Under the relevant laws currently in force, it appears that the applicant will qualify for a regular retirement pension in 2020.
Some 130 applications arising from a similar fact pattern have been brought to the Court. The majority of the applicants form the Association of Victims of the SSB (Stowarzyszenie Osób Poszkodowanych przez ZUS) (“the Association”), an organisation monitoring the practices of the Social Security Board in , in particular in the Podkarpacki region.
Out of all applications lodged with the Court about twenty-four applicants decided not to lodge a cassation appeal against the judgment of the Court of Appeal given in their case.
One hundred-and-four applicants lodged cassation appeals against the final judgments given in their cases. The Supreme Court entertained and dismissed on the merits fifteen appeals. In eighty-one applications the Supreme Court refused to entertain cassation appeals on the ground that they did not raise any important legal issues or require the Supreme Court to give a new interpretation to legal provisions which raised serious doubts or gave rise to ambiguity in the jurisprudence of the domestic courts. In the remaining eight cases cassation appeals were rejected for failure to comply with various procedural requirements.
The legal provisions applicable at the material time and questions of practice are set out in the judgment in the case of Moskal v. Poland, no. 10373/05, § 31-34, 15 September 2009.
The social security scheme for farmers is regulated by the Farmers’ Social Security Act of 20 December 1990 (“the 1990 Act”; ustawa o ubezpieczeniu społecznym rolników).
The reopening of the proceedings concerning the early-retirement pension is regulated in section 114 (1) of the Law of 13 October 1998 on the system of social insurance (Ustawa o systemie ubezpieczeń społecznych), which at the relevant time read as follows:
“The right to benefits or the amount of benefits will be re-assessed upon application by the person concerned or, ex officio, if, after the validation of the decision concerning benefits, new evidence is submitted or circumstances which had existed before issuing the decision and which have an impact on the right to benefits or on their amount are discovered.”
On 1 July 2004 a new subparagraph 114 (1) a was added, which reads as follows:
“Section 1 shall apply respectively, if, after the validation of the decision it is discovered that the evidence that had been submitted did not give the right to a pension, disability pension or its amount.”
A party to civil proceedings could, at the material time, lodge a cassation appeal with the Supreme Court against a judicial decision of a second-instance court. A party had to be represented by an advocate or a legal adviser.
Article 3931 of the Code of Civil Procedure as applicable at the material time listed the grounds on which a cassation appeal could be lodged. It read as follows:
“The cassation appeal may be based on the following grounds:
1)  a breach of substantive law as a result of its erroneous interpretation or wrongful application;
2)  a breach of procedural provisions, if that defect could significantly affect the outcome of the case.”
Pursuant to Article 393¹³ the Supreme Court, having allowed a cassation appeal, could quash the challenged judgment in its entirety or in part and remit the case for re-examination. Where the Supreme Court failed to find non-conformity with the law, it dismissed the cassation appeal. According to Article 39315 if the cassation appeal was well-founded the Supreme Court could also amend the impugned judgment and adjudicate on the merits.
On 22 June 1999 the Ombudsman made an application to the Constitutional Court, asking for section 186 (3) of the Law of 17 December 1998 on retirement and disability pensions paid from the Social Insurance Fund (Ustawa o emeryturach i rentach z Funduszu Ubezpieczeń Społecznych) (“the 1998 Law”) to be declared unconstitutional in so far as it restricted the application of the 1989 Ordinance to persons born before 1 January 1949. More specifically, the Ombudsman submitted that the introduction of an age-limit in respect of persons taking care of a child, which in essence amounted to a deprivation of the right to a benefit, constituted a violation of the principle of equality set forth in Article 32 § 1 of the Constitution.
On 4 January 2000 the Constitutional Court (K18/99) declared the impugned section 186 (3) of the 1998 Law unconstitutional in so far as it restricted the application of the 1989 Ordinance to persons born before 1 January 1949. The  reiterated among other things the constitutional principle of acquired rights which guarantees particularly strong protection for the right to receive social welfare benefits.
On 10 February 2011 the Ombudsman made an application to the Constitutional Court, asking for section 114 (1)(a) of the 1998 Law to be declared unconstitutional in so far as it allowed the SSB to reopen ex officio proceedings relating to the grant of a pension or a disability pension on the basis of a new assessment of evidence which had already been submitted.
On 28 February 2012 the Constitutional Court (K5/11) declared the impugned section 114 (1)(a) of the 1998 Law unconstitutional in so far as it allowed the SSB to reopen such proceedings following a new assessment of evidence which had already been submitted.