The case originated in an application (no. 36697/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Dmitriy Yevgenyevich Krylov (“the applicant”), on 15 October 2003.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr N. Tsoy and Ms E. Krutikova, lawyers from the International Protection Centre based in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Ms V. Milinchuk, former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the criminal proceedings against him had been unfair.
On 9 February 2007 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1981 and is currently held in a detention facility in the  region.
On 6 January 2002 he was arrested on charges of several counts of aggravated murder, robbery, theft, use of forged documents and failure to report a crime. Another individual, , was also charged with the same offences.
On 5 September 2002 the pre-trial investigation was completed and the applicant began to study the case file with his counsel, Ms K. The case file comprised four volumes of material totalling 1,214 pages. It follows from the schedule submitted to the Court that the applicant studied the case file as follows:
(a)  from 11.30 a.m. to 2 p.m. on 10, 11, 12 and 24 September 2002;
(b)  from 11.30 a.m. to 1.30 p.m. on 25 and 27 September;
(c)  from 11.30 a.m. to 2 p.m. on 2 October;
(d)  from 11.30 a.m. to 3 p.m. on 3 October; and
(e)  from 11.30 a.m. to 2 p.m. on 8 October.
According to the applicant, the investigator had pressured him into studying the case file more quickly, promising him additional visits from his mother as a reward. He had also promised to give him copies of the case materials but never fulfilled his promise.
On 8 October 2002 the applicant and Ms K. signed a statement declaring that they had studied the entire case file and had no particular requests to make.
The trial started on 15 November 2002 in the . The court ordered that the applicant and his co-defendant  be tried by jury.
During the trial the applicant was represented by counsel Mr S., who had been retained by his mother. According to the applicant, Mr S. never asked for permission to study the case file.
On 25 December 2002 the jury pronounced the applicant and his co-defendant guilty of aggravated murder, robbery, theft and failure to report a crime.
On 9 January 2003 the  sentenced the applicant to twenty-three years’ imprisonment.
On 14 January 2003 the applicant lodged an appeal (“кассационная жалоба”). On 20 January 2003 counsel Mr S. filed appeal submissions on his behalf. On 7 April 2003 the applicant lodged additional appeal submissions together with a request to attend the hearing.
On 18 February 2003 a local newspaper published an article describing the offences committed by the applicant.
The appeal hearing was scheduled for 25 June 2003. On 17 June 2003 Mr S. was informed of the hearing date by telegram. In anticipation of the hearing, the applicant was transported to  and placed in remand centre IZ-77/3.
On 25 June 2003 the appeal hearing took place in the Supreme Court of Russia. The applicant participated in the hearing by video link. Mr S. did not attend.
According to the applicant, he had asked the court to adjourn the appeal hearing and to appoint counsel on his behalf. The judges had allegedly replied that there had been no legal basis for his request. Furthermore, he had filed additional appeal submissions which, according to him, had been faxed to the Supreme Court by a warder of the remand centre. In those appeal submissions he had complained, in particular, that he had not been afforded sufficient time to study the case file. He read the submissions out to the court. The quality of the video link was poor and the connection was interrupted several times.
The Government disputed the applicant’s account of the appeal hearing. They stated that there was no evidence in the case file of a request to appoint counsel or of the additional submissions allegedly faxed to the Supreme Court on the day of the appeal hearing.
On the same day the Supreme Court upheld the judgment of 9 January 2003 on appeal. It held, in particular, that, by virtue of Article 379 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph  below), it had no competence to examine the factual circumstances of the offences, which had been established by the jury. It then examined the legal issues raised by the applicant and found that the investigation and trial had been carried out in accordance with the procedure prescribed by law.
Article 51 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the  (“the Code”, as in force at the material time) reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“1.  Participation of legal counsel in the criminal proceedings is mandatory if:
...
(5)  the suspect or the accused faces serious charges carrying a term of imprisonment exceeding fifteen years, life imprisonment or the death penalty;
(6)  the criminal case falls to be examined in a jury trial;
...
In the circumstances provided for by paragraph 1 above, unless counsel is appointed by the suspect or the accused or his lawful representative, or other persons at the request or with the consent of the suspect or the accused, it is incumbent on the investigator, the prosecutor or the court to ensure the participation of legal counsel in the proceedings.”
Article 52 of the Code provides that a suspect or an accused may waive his right to legal representation at any stage of the criminal proceedings. Such a waiver may only be accepted if initiated by the suspect or the accused. The waiver must be made in writing and must be recorded in the official record of the relevant procedural step. The refusal of legal representation does not deprive the suspect or accused of the right to ask to be assisted by counsel at further stages of the criminal proceedings. The appointment of counsel does not mean that any of the procedural steps which have already been taken by that time must be repeated.
Article 373 of the Code provides that the appellate court examines appeals with a view to verifying the lawfulness, validity and fairness of judgments.
Article 379 reads as follows:
“1.  A judgment may be quashed on appeal on the following grounds:
(1)  a discrepancy between the findings made in the judgment and the factual circumstances of the case established by the first-instance ... court;
(2)  a breach of criminal procedural law;
(3)  incorrect application of the criminal law;
(4)  injustice of the judgment.”
If the judgment has been adopted following a jury trial, it may be quashed on the grounds described in subparagraphs 2 to 4 of the first paragraph of this Article.”
Article 376 of the Code provides that on receipt of the criminal case file and the statements of appeal, the judge fixes the date, time and place of the hearing. The parties must be given this information no later than fourteen days before the hearing is scheduled to take place. The court determines whether the prisoner should be summoned to attend the hearing. If the prisoner has expressed the wish to be present at his appeal, he has the right to participate in person or to state his case via video link. How he participates in the hearing is to be determined by the court.
Examining the compatibility of Article 51 of the Code with the Russian Constitution, the  ruled as follows (decision no. 497-O of 18 December 2003):
“Article 51 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which describes the circumstances in which the participation of defence counsel is mandatory, does not contain any indication that its requirements are not applicable in appeal proceedings or that the prisoner’s right to legal assistance in such proceedings may be restricted.”
That position was subsequently confirmed and developed in seven decisions delivered by the  on 8 February 2007. The court found that free legal representation for the purpose of appellate proceedings should be provided on the same basis as in the earlier stages of the proceedings, and was mandatory in the situations listed in Article 51. It further highlighted the obligation of the courts to ensure the participation of defence counsel in appeal proceedings.
Article 413 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides for the possibility of reopening criminal proceedings on the basis of a finding of a violation of the Convention by the European Court of Human Rights.