The case originated in an application (no. 34155/08) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian broadcasting company, Agentstvo televideniya Novosti, OOO (“the applicant company”), on 10 July 2008.
The applicant company was represented first by Mr A. Buschenko, a lawyer practising in Kharkiv, and then by Ms O.Y. Sapozhnikova, a lawyer practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant company complained under Article 10 of the Convention of a violation of its freedom of expression.
On 15 May 2017 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant company is a Ukrainian limited liability company which has its registered office in Kharkiv.
On 12 July 2006 Officer G., a police officer, fell out of a moving trolleybus in Kharkiv while on his way to work. He suffered brain trauma and remained in a coma for some time.
On 23 January 2007 the traffic police refused to institute criminal proceedings against the trolleybus driver in connection with that incident. It appears that their decision established that Officer G. had caused the incident himself by opening the trolleybus doors and jumping out.
On 15 May 2007 the Kyivsky District Court of Kharkiv quashed that decision. The court held that the pre-investigation inquiries which had led to that decision had been one-sided, since they had focused on the statements of interested parties, namely the trolleybus driver and the conductor. The only eyewitness with no interest in the outcome had apparently confirmed that Officer G. had opened the door of the moving trolleybus. However, her description of the events contradicted the expert evidence as to how Officer G. had fallen and suffered trauma.
The applicant company broadcast four news stories covering Officer G.’s incident in a programme called ATN. The translation of the relevant parts of the broadcasts, as transcribed by the applicant company, is set out below. The passages which were the subject of subsequent domestic proceedings are underlined and numbered for future reference. Where initials are used, the actual broadcasts contained full names.
The first report (“Broadcast 1”) was broadcast on 18 July 2006 at 11.41 a.m. and went as follows:
“Presenter: A police officer fell out of a trolleybus. This is the sixth day that a lieutenant of the Kyivsky District Police Department has been lying unconscious in a neurosurgery ward. Having fallen out of a trolleybus, the 27-year-old suffered brain trauma and a skull base fracture ... According to eyewitnesses, the man tried to get out of the trolleybus while it was in motion [Statement 1.1].
, head of the traffic safety service of the municipal transport company which operated the trolleybus lines: While we were waiting for the traffic police, a woman came up to us and said that the victim had been trying to open the trolleybus doors while the trolleybus had been in motion ... so other passengers had even started shouting ‘What are you doing?’ But he hadn’t listened.
[Dr K. then stated that the victim was in a serious condition in the intensive care unit.]
Presenter: The law-enforcement officers refuse to comment for now, referring to the secrecy of the investigation. L. said that the trolleybus had immediately been sent to the depot – the checks there had revealed no technical anomaly. Also, according to him, the driver had acted in accordance with [the relevant] regulations: as soon as [he had become aware of] an indicator showing that a door had been opened, he had stopped the vehicle ...”
The second report was broadcast on 18 July 2006 at 6.35 p.m. and went as follows:
“Presenter: Why did the policeman fall out of the trolleybus? The policeman who fell from the moving trolleybus was on duty, he was on his way to work at the Kyivsky District Police Department – ATN was informed today by the public relations department of the Kharkiv police ...
According to information obtained by ATN, two versions of events are under examination: firstly, the policeman could have been under the influence of alcohol or drugs [Statement 2.1]; secondly, [a] more noble [version of events], he saw a suspect and was trying to arrest him. ATN news has already covered this incident. To reiterate, it happened at 7.30 a.m. on 12 July ... a police officer fell out of a moving trolleybus ... and hit his head on a kerb ... Eyewitnesses said that other passengers had been trying to persuade the policeman not to open the doors without permission. But the young man had not listened to anyone and, for reasons still unknown, had grabbed the handles on the trolleybus doors, pried them open and jumped out of the moving trolleybus [Statement 2.2]. According to L., the driver acted professionally and stopped the vehicle. The trolleybus has been checked, it turned out to be in order, and is now back in operation.”
The third report was broadcast on 19 July 2006 and went as follows:
“Presenter: The law-enforcement officers deny the version [of events whereby] the policeman who fell out of the trolleybus on 12 July was under the influence of alcohol or drugs [Statement 3.1]. They have not yet made public their official version of events. However, they say that doctors have found neither alcohol nor drugs in the policeman’s blood ... Eyewitnesses said that other passengers had been trying to persuade the policeman not to open the doors without permission. But the young man, for the reasons still unknown, had grabbed the handles on the trolleybus doors, pried them open and jumped out of the moving trolleybus [Statement 3.2]. According to Officer M., deputy head of the Kyivsky District Police Department’s criminal investigation unit, an investigation into the facts is ongoing.
Officer M.: It has been definitively established that he was not under the influence of alcohol, let alone drugs. He was travelling on a route 24 trolleybus and fell out of the doors [between two stops].”
The fourth report was broadcast on 18 August 2006 and went as follows:
“Presenter: The policeman who fell out of the trolleybus has amnesia ...
[There followed a description of an incident with a certain Officer I., a police officer who had shot himself in the head due to an accident in handling his service weapon and did not wish to talk about it.]
Another policeman, Officer G., may wish to talk about an accident which he had, but he cannot ... ATN previously reported that on 12 July Officer G. had fallen out of a trolleybus ... He was in a coma for two weeks.
[Mr S., a neurosurgeon, then described the medical care Officer G. had received.]
Presenter: doctors say that the health of Officer G., the trolleybus paratrooper (тролейбусний десантник) [Statement 4.1], is now satisfactory. The only consequence of the fall is ‘trauma amnesia’. In simpler language, this means that he remembers everything except what happened on the trolleybus ... What really happened to the policeman that day and why he decided to jump out of the moving trolleybus is still a mystery [Statement 4.2]. The police refuse to comment, referring to the secrecy of the investigation.”
Officer G.’s mother lodged a claim against the applicant company, seeking that the information disseminated about her son – to the effect that he had intentionally jumped out of the trolleybus and had been under the influence of alcohol and drugs – be retracted as untrue. She also sought compensation for nonpecuniary damage. In her claim before the domestic courts, Ms G. stated that the above information had damaged her son’s honour, dignity and professional reputation.
In the course of the trial the Kyivsky District Court of Kharkiv examined a number of witnesses, including the trolleybus driver and a trolleybus passenger, K., who had witnessed the incident and said that she had seen Officer G. prying open the trolleybus doors, but had not seen him jumping out. The court also examined L., the head of the traffic safety service of the municipal transport company whose interview had been part of Broadcast 1 (see paragraph 10 above), and a number of employees of the applicant company who had worked on the broadcasts.
In particular, L. stated that he had not witnessed the incident himself and that he did not remember with precision whether he had spoken to the journalists about any eyewitnesses who may have observed Officer G. opening the door and jumping. He did not remember speaking to anyone about that.
On 15 June 2007 the Kyivsky District Court of Kharkiv allowed the claim. It ordered the applicant company to retract the following information:
(a)  that Officer G. had intentionally jumped out of the trolleybus, namely that he had grabbed the handles on the trolleybus doors, pried them open and jumped out of the moving trolleybus (referring to Statements 1.1, 2.2 and 4.2, hereinafter “Retraction A”); and
(b)  that “he [had been] under the influence of alcohol or drugs” (referring to Statement 2.1, hereinafter “Retraction B”).
The court awarded Ms G. 5,000 Ukrainian hryvnias (UAH – about 730 euros (EUR) at the material time) for non-pecuniary damage, and UAH 83 (about EUR 12 at the material time) for court costs.
By way of reasoning, the court referred to its decision of 15 May 2007 which had overruled the decision not to institute criminal proceedings concerning the incident (paragraph 8 above). It rejected the applicant company’s argument that the statements in issue had been entirely based on information received from public officials and thus protected by section 67 of the Television and Radio Broadcasting Act (see paragraph 28 below). It also held that the State Support of Mass Media Act did not protect the applicant company from liability, because in a dispute between a mass media outlet and a private individual, the defendant was only protected from liability for spreading false information if he or she acted in good faith and checked the information in question.
As regards Retraction A specifically, the court reasoned as follows:
(i)  L.’s statement quoted in Broadcast 1 could not be seen as an official statement of a public official. Moreover, that statement had been preceded by Statement 1.1 of the presenter referring to “eyewitnesses” who had supposedly seen Officer G. jumping out of the trolleybus, but the applicant company had not been able to identify the “eyewitnesses”. Moreover, none of the witnesses examined by the court had seen Officer G. jumping out of the trolleybus. For the same reasons, L.’s statement could not justify the reference to “eyewitnesses” in Statement 2.2;
(ii)  the applicant company’s journalists had failed in their obligation to verify the information they had broadcast because the applicant company had been unable to point to any “eyewitnesses” who had seen Officer G. jumping out of the trolleybus, as referred to in Statements 1.1 and 2.2, and no such eyewitness had been identified in the course of the trial. It emerged in the course of the trial that the reference to “eyewitnesses” in Broadcast 1 had been based entirely on L.’s statement and that the applicant company’s journalists never attempted to verify that statement;
(iii)  in Statement 4.2 the presenter had asked what had caused Officer G. to jump out of the trolleybus, implying that he had indeed jumped.
As regards Retraction B, the court reasoned as follows:
The court lastly concluded that the applicant company had failed to prove that the information which it had disseminated had been sufficiently verified and factually accurate.
On 24 September 2007 the Kharkiv Regional Court of Appeal upheld the judgment in so far as it concerned Retraction A and the monetary awards. It modified the judgment in so far as it concerned Retraction B, ordering that all of Statement 2.1, as opposed to just part of it, should be retracted, and so the retraction should include the statement “two versions of events are under examination: firstly, the policeman could have been under the influence of alcohol or drugs”.
The Court of Appeal endorsed the reasoning of the first-instance court, and added that the media had no right to collect and report rumours, presenting them as corroborated by witnesses.
On 9 November 2007 the Supreme Court refused the applicant company leave to appeal on points of law. On 16 January 2008 that decision was served on the applicant company.
Section 17 provides that a journalist and/or mass media professional shall be released from liability for disseminating untrue information if the court establishes that he or she acted in good faith and checked the information. In claims brought against journalists and mass media professionals by public officials, the defendant’s intent to disseminate false information must be proved in order to hold the journalist or media professional liable.
Section 60 of the Act imposes a number of duties on staff performing creative functions at television and radio organisations, including: (i) the duty to check the veracity of the information they receive, and (ii) the duty to prevent the broadcasting of defamatory information.
Section 67 protects television and radio organisations from liability for disseminating untrue information in a number of situations, in the broadcasting of: (i) official written communications from public authorities; (ii) literal quotes of public officials; (iii) statements of third parties on live broadcasts; (iv) literal quotes from information disseminated by another media outlet or information agency.
The relevant extracts from the Civil Code read as follows:
Article 23
Compensation for non-pecuniary damage
“1. A person shall have the right to compensation for non-pecuniary damage in the event of an infringement of his/her rights ...
Non-pecuniary damage implies:
...
4) a violation of an individual’s honor, dignity or business reputation or a violation of business reputation of a legal entity.
Article 277
Rectification of untruthful information
“1. An individual whose non-pecuniary rights have been infringed as a result of the dissemination of untrue information about him or her and (or) members of his or her family shall have the right to reply and [the right to] the retraction of that information ...
...
Negative information disseminated about a person shall be considered untrue if the person who disseminated it does not prove the contrary.
Untrue information shall be retracted by the person who disseminated the information ...
If the untrue information is contained in a document which has been accepted (issued) by a legal entity, that document shall be recalled.
An individual whose non-pecuniary rights have been infringed in printed or other mass media shall have the right to reply and also [the right to] the retraction of the untrue information in the same mass media, in the manner envisaged by law ...
Untrue information shall be retracted, irrespective of the guilt of the person who disseminated it.
Untrue information shall be retracted in the same manner in which it was disseminated.”
Article 280
The right of an individual whose non-pecuniary rights have been violated to obtain compensation for damage
“1. If there has been pecuniary and/or non-pecuniary damage caused to an individual as a result of a violation of his personal non-pecuniary rights, the damage shall be compensated for.”