The case originated in an application (no. 22004/11) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Azerbaijani national, Mr Suleyman Aliheydar oglu Satullayev (Süleyman Əliheydər oğlu Sətullayev – “the applicant”), on 17 March 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Gasimli, a lawyer based in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
On 10 June 2014 the Government were given notice of the complaints concerning the applicant’s alleged ill-treatment by the police and the lawfulness of his arrest and detention, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1976 and lives in Sumgayit.
He was working as a shop assistant at a family-owned shop in Sumgayit at the time of the events described below.
At around 6.15 p.m. on 20 August 2008 two police officers in plain clothes entered the shop and asked the applicant for water. When the applicant gave them a bottle of water, they told him that they were police officers and that they would carry out a search of the shop because they had information that drug dealing was occurring in the shop. At that moment other police officers in plain clothes entered the shop.
The applicant protested against the search, asking to see a search warrant, so R.B., the deputy head of Sumgayit City Police Station no. 4, ordered other police officers present to handcuff the applicant. The applicant continued to protest against the search, asking the officers to show him the relevant documentation. By way of reply to his requests, R.B. insulted him and another police officer hit him on the head with the palm of his hand (qapaz vurmaq). The applicant’s father and mother arrived at the shop before the end of the search.
Following the search the applicant was taken to Sumgayit City Police Station no. 4. He was detained there until 1.30 a.m. on 21 August 2008 and was then allowed to leave the police station. During this period, he remained handcuffed for around three hours.
On 20 August 2008 the police officers went to the shop run by the applicant in order to question him about an allegation that he was selling stolen SIM cards, cigarettes and food. As there was a need to continue the questioning the applicant was invited to the police station, where he was questioned for thirty minutes. The applicant was not ill-treated by the police.
On an unspecified date the applicant lodged a criminal complaint, complaining of his ill-treatment and unlawful detention by the police. The applicant did not provide the Court with a copy of his complaint.
It appears from the case file that on 31 August 2008 the investigator in charge of the case ordered a forensic medical examination of the applicant; an examination was conducted by an expert, who submitted his report on 1 September 2008. According to forensic report no. 800, no injury or trace of injury was found on the applicant’s body.
It further appears from the documents in the case file that, under a decision issued on 20 September 2008 by the Sumgayit City Police Department, two police officers, R.B. and E.A., were held liable in disciplinary proceedings for the unprofessional (səriştəsiz) organisation of the operation of 20 August 2008. Under that decision, E.A. was subjected to the disciplinary sanction of a reprimand, but no disciplinary sanction was imposed in respect of R.B. because he had already been sent on study leave for one year.
On 13 October 2008 an investigator from the Sumgayit City Prosecutor’s Office declined to institute criminal proceedings against the police officers who had been involved in the events of 20 August 2008. The investigator considered that the applicant had not been ill-treated or detained by the police officers. In that connection, the investigator relied on statements given by four of the police officers to the effect that they had not carried out a search in the shop but that they had merely asked the applicant to follow them to the police station and that he had complied with their request. They further noted that the applicant had not been handcuffed and that he had left the police station following a thirtyminute conversation. The investigator also referred to the findings of forensic report no. 800, according to which the expert had found no sign of injury on the applicant’s body. Lastly, he noted that disciplinary proceedings had been instituted against two police officers, R.B. and E.A., for the unprofessional organisation of the operation.
On an unspecified date the applicant lodged a complaint against that decision with the Sumgayit City Court. He complained, in particular, that the investigator had failed to carry out an effective investigation and had not questioned all the witnesses to the incident.
On 19 February 2010 the Sumgayit City Court quashed the investigator’s decision and ordered the investigating authorities to carry out a new investigation. The court held that the investigator had failed to identify and question all the relevant witnesses and had relied solely on the submissions of the police officers and the conclusions of the forensic report of 1 September 2008. In that connection, the first-instance court found that the investigator had not questioned the applicant’s mother and had made no mention of statements given during the investigation by the applicant’s father and brother, as well as by four other persons residing in the area where the shop was situated.
On 1 March 2010 the deputy prosecutor of the Sumgayit City Prosecutor’s Office declined to institute criminal proceedings, finding that it had not been established that the above-mentioned police officers had hit the applicant or had unlawfully detained him at the police station. The prosecutor referred to the submissions of the police officers and to the forensic report of 1 September 2008. As regards the testimony of the applicant’s family members (his father, mother and brother) and of four residents of the area where the shop was situated, the prosecutor noted that those witnesses had stated that the applicant had been handcuffed and taken to the police office. However, he held that that testimony could not be considered as reliable, because it had been given by people with an interest in the outcome of the case.
On 1 June 2010 the applicant lodged a complaint against the prosecutor’s decision with the Sumgayit City Court, reiterating his previous complaints. He also disputed the prosecutor’s assessment of the witness testimony given by his family members and the four other abovementioned persons.
On 7 July 2010 the Sumgayit City Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint. The court held that the prosecutor had conducted an effective investigation and that there was no reason to quash the decision in question. It also relied on the fact that the two police officers had been subjected to disciplinary proceedings. The court made no mention of the applicant’s complaint concerning the assessment of the witness testimony by the investigating authorities.
On 23 September 2010 the Sumgayit Court of Appeal upheld the first-instance court’s decision. That decision was not amenable to appeal. There is no information in the case file as regards the date on which the applicant was provided with a copy of that decision.
The relevant provisions of the domestic law concerning the prohibition of ill-treatment are described in detail in the Court’s judgment in Mustafa Hajili v. Azerbaijan (no. 42119/12, §§ 26-28, 24 November 2016).