The case originated in an application (no. 30326/03) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Ergin Erkuş (“the applicant”), on 12 August 2003.
The applicant was represented by Mr S. Çetinkaya, a lawyer practising in Izmir. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 20 May 2008 the Court declared the application partly inadmissible and decided to communicate to the Government the complaint concerning the lawfulness and length of the applicant’s detention and the absence of an investigation into his detention. It also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1982 and lives in Izmir.
While the applicant was in compulsory military service in Kırklareli, on 19 November 2002 he got ten days’ leave and went to  to see his family. He did not return to his barracks afterwards.
On 22 February 2003 at 3 p.m., the applicant was arrested by police officers at the Narlıdere police station during a routine identity check on suspicion of being an army deserter (asker kaçağı). At 4 p.m. he was taken to the Üçkuyular Military Station Command where the officials determined that he had not returned to his army command when his leave had ended. He was questioned, inter alia, about which army command he belonged to, why he had deserted and whether he had committed a crime during this time.
On the same day at 8 p.m., the applicant was taken to Şirinyer Military Station Command where he remained in custody. The next day at 11 a.m., he was transferred to the Military Recruitment Office.
On 7 March 2003 at 1.30 p.m., the applicant was transferred to his army command in Kırklareli. The verbatim record of this transfer noted that the applicant, having committed the offence of army desertion, was requested to be transferred to his army command. It further indicated that the applicant had entered the “security room” on 23 February 2003 and “exited” on 6 March 2003.
On the same day at 2 p.m., the applicant was questioned by two army officials who informed him that he had committed the offence of exceeding his leave.
Between 7 March and 11 March 2003, the applicant was held in custody at his army command.
On 11 March 2003 he was brought before the Çorlu Military Court, which remanded him in custody.
On 12 March 2003 the Çorlu Military Prosecutor filed an indictment charging the applicant with exceeding his leave (“izin tecavüzü”) under Article 66 § 1 of the Military Criminal Code.
On 14 April 2003 the  convicted the applicant as charged and sentenced him to ten months’ imprisonment. In its decision the court noted that the applicant had failed to return to his army command at the end of his leave, that he had been apprehended on 22 February 2003 and that he had been held in custody between 7 and 11 March. It deducted the period spent on the road and in custody between 22 February and 11 March 2003 from his prison sentence.
On 22 April 2003 the judgment of the Çorlu Military Court became final as neither the military prosecutor nor the applicant appealed.
Article 72 of the Constitution and Article 1 of the Law on Military Service stipulate that every male citizen of the Republic of Turkey shall fulfil his military service.
Pursuant to section 80 § 1 of the Law on Military Service, those who have deserted their headquarters or who have exceeded their period of leave or medical leave shall be searched for, arrested and placed in the custody of the local military authorities in order to be handed over to their army commands.
Section 66 of the Military Criminal Code is entitled “desertion”. Paragraph 1 (b) of this provision makes it a criminal offence to exceed one’s period of leave by six days without authorisation.
Under section 80 § 3 of the Law on the Constitution of Military Courts and Criminal Procedure applicable at the time of the events, the period a person can spend in custody shall not exceed forty-eight hours, excluding the time necessary to transfer the detainee to the nearest military court. Under section 80 § 5, if the arrestee cannot be brought before a military court within the time-limit specified in section 80 § 3, he or she shall be taken to the nearest magistrates’ court. No one shall be deprived of his or her liberty beyond this time-limit.
On 29 June 2006 section 80 § 3 of the Law on the Constitution of Military Courts and Criminal Procedure was amended by Law no. 5530, which provided that time in custody shall not exceed twenty-four hours, excluding the time necessary to transfer the detainee to the nearest military court, and that the time necessary for transfer could not be more than twelve hours.