The case originated in an application (no. 25358/12) against the Italian Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Italian nationals, Mrs Donatina Paradiso and Mr Giovanni Campanelli (“the applicants”), on 27 April 2012.
The applicants were represented by Mr P. Spinosi, a lawyer practising in Paris. The Italian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their co-Agent, Mrs P. Accardo.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the measures taken by the national authorities in respect of the child T.C. were incompatible with their right to private and family life, as protected by Article 8 of the Convention.
The application was allocated to the Second Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). On 27 January 2015, a Chamber of that Section composed of Işıl Karakaş, President, Guido Raimondi, András Sajó, Nebojša Vučinić, Helen Keller, Egidijus Kūris and Robert Spano, judges, and also of Stanley Naismith, Section Registrar, declared the application admissible regarding the complaint raised by the applicants on their own behalf under Article 8 of the Convention concerning the measures taken in respect of the child and the remainder of the application inadmissible, and held, by five votes to two, that there had been a violation of Article 8. The joint partly dissenting opinion of Judges Raimondi and Spano was annexed to the judgment. On 27 April 2015 the Government requested that the case be referred to the Grand Chamber under Article 43 of the Convention. On 1 June 2015 the panel of the Grand Chamber granted that request.
The composition of the Grand Chamber was decided in accordance with Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24.
The applicants and the Government each filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1).
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 9 December 2015 (Rule 59 § 3).
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Mr Spinosi, Ms Aversano, Ms Morresi and Ms Palmieri and also their replies to questions from judges.
The applicants – a married couple – were born in 1967 and 1955 respectively and live in Colletorto.
After trying to have a child and having unsuccessfully resorted to medically assisted reproduction techniques, the applicants put themselves forward as adoptive parents.
On 7 December 2006 the applicants obtained official authorisation from the Campobasso Minors Court to adopt a foreign child within the meaning of Law no. 184 of 1983, entitled “The Child’s Right to a Family” (hereafter, “the Adoption Act”), subject to the condition that the child’s age was to be compatible with the limits foreseen by the Act (see paragraph 63 below). The applicants state that they waited in vain for a child who was eligible for adoption.
They subsequently decided to try resorting to assisted reproduction techniques again and to a surrogate mother in Russia. To that end, they contacted a Moscow-based clinic. The first applicant stated that she travelled to Moscow, transporting from Italy the second applicant’s seminal fluid, duly conserved, which she handed in at the clinic.
A surrogate mother was found and the applicants entered into a gestational surrogacy agreement with the company Rosjurconsulting. After a successful in vitro fertilisation on 19 May 2010, two embryos were implanted in the surrogate mother’s womb on 19 June 2010.
On 16 February 2011 the Russian clinic certified that the second applicant’s seminal fluid had been used for the embryos to be implanted in the surrogate mother’s womb.
The first applicant travelled to Moscow on 26 February 2011, the clinic having indicated that the child was due to be born at the end of the month.
The child was born in Moscow on 27 February 2011. On the same day the surrogate mother gave her written consent to the child being registered as the applicants’ son. Her written declaration, bearing the same date and read aloud at the hospital in the presence of her doctor, the chief physician and the head of the hospital department, is worded as follows (English translation of the original Russian version):
“I, the undersigned... have given birth to a boy in the ... maternity hospital in Moscow. The child’s parents are an Italian married couple, Giovanni Campanelli, born on ... and Donatina Paradiso, born on..., who expressed in writing their wish to have their embryos implanted in my womb.
On the basis of the foregoing and in accordance with section 16(5) of the Federal Law on Civil Status and Article 51(4) of the Family Code, I hereby give my consent for the above couple to be entered in the birth record and the birth certificate as parents of the child to whom I have given birth...”
In the days following the child’s birth, the first applicant moved with him into a flat in Moscow, rented by her in advance. The second applicant, who had remained in Italy, was able to communicate with her regularly via internet.
On 10 March 2011 the applicants were registered as the new-born baby’s parents by the Registry Office in Moscow. The Russian birth certificate, which indicated that the applicants were the child’s parents, was certified in accordance with the provisions of the Hague Convention of 5 October 1961 Abolishing the Requirement of Legalisation for Foreign Public Documents.
On 29 April 2011 the first applicant went to the Italian Consulate in Moscow, with the birth certificate, in order to obtain the documents that would enable her to return to Italy with the child. The Italian Consulate issued the documents enabling the child to leave for Italy with the first applicant.
On 30 April 2011 the first applicant and the child arrived in Italy.
In a note of 2 May 2011 – which was not filed in the proceedings before the Court – the Italian Consulate in Moscow informed the Campobasso Minors Court, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Colletorto Prefecture and Municipality that the paperwork in respect of the child’s birth contained false information.
A few days later the second applicant contacted the Colletorto municipality, requesting that the birth certificate be registered.
On 5 May 2011 the prosecutor’s office opened criminal proceedings against the applicants, who were suspected of “misrepresentation of civil status” within the meaning of Article 567 of the Criminal Code, of “use of falsified documents” within the meaning of Article 489 of the Criminal Code and of the offence set out in section 72 of the Adoption Act, since they had brought the child to Italy in breach of the procedure provided for by the provisions on international adoption contained therein (see paragraph 67 below).
In parallel, on 5 May 2011, the Public Prosecutor’s Office at the Campobasso Minors Court requested the opening of proceedings to make the child available for adoption, since he was to be considered as being in a state of abandonment for the purposes of the law. On the same date the Minors Court appointed a guardian ad litem (curatore speciale) and opened proceedings to make the child available for adoption.
On 16 May 2011 the Minors Court placed the child under guardianship at the request of the Public Prosecutor. The child’s guardian asked the court to suspend the applicants’ parental responsibility, in application of section 10 § 3 of the Adoption Act.
The applicants challenged the measures in respect of the child.
Following a request of the Minors Court on 10 May 2011, the applicants were visited by a team of social workers on 12 May 2011. Their report, dated 18 May 2011, indicated that the applicants were viewed positively and respected by their fellow citizens, and that they had a comfortable income and lived in a nice house. According to the report, the child was in excellent health and his well-being was self-evident, since he was being cared for by the applicants to the highest standards.
On 25 May 2011 the first applicant, assisted by her lawyer, was questioned by the Larino carabinieri. She stated that she had travelled to Russia alone in September 2008, transporting her husband’s seminal fluid. She stated that she entered into a contract with the company Rosjurconsulting, which had undertaken to find a surrogate mother willing to be implanted with genetic material from the first applicant and her husband through the Vitanova Clinic in Moscow. The applicant explained that this practice was perfectly legal in Russia and had made it possible for her to obtain a birth certificate which identified the applicants as parents. In June or July 2010 the first applicant had been contacted by the Russian company, which informed her that a surrogate mother had been found, and she had given her consent to the medical procedure.
On 27 June 2011 the applicants were heard by the Minors Court. The first applicant stated that, after eight unsuccessful attempts at in vitro fertilisation, which had endangered her health, she had resorted to the Russian clinic, since it was possible in that country to use ova from a donor, which were subsequently implanted in the surrogate mother.
On 7 July 2011 the court ordered that DNA testing be carried out in order to establish whether the second applicant was the child’s biological father.
On 11 July 2011 the Ministry of the Interior asked the Registry Office to refuse to enter the particulars of the birth certificate in the civilstatus register.
On 1 August 2011 the second applicant and the child underwent DNA testing. The result of these tests showed that there was no genetic link between them.
Following the outcome of these tests, the applicants sought an explanation from the Russian clinic. Months later, in a letter of 20 March 2012, the clinic’s management informed them that it had been surprised by the results of the DNA test. It stated that there had been an internal inquiry, since an error had clearly occurred, but it had proved impossible to identify the individual responsible for the error, given that there had been dismissals and recruitment of other staff in the meantime.
On 4 August 2011 the Registry Office of the Colletorto Municipality refused to register the Russian birth certificate. The applicants lodged an appeal with the Larino Court against this refusal. The subsequent proceedings are set out in paragraphs 46-48 below.
The Public Prosecutor asked the Larino Court to give the child a new identity and to issue a new birth certificate.
As part of the proceedings to make the child available for adoption which were then pending before the Minors Court (see paragraph 22 above), the applicants asked a psychologist, Dr I., to prepare a report on the child’s well-being. The report drawn up by Dr I. on 22 September 2011, after four meetings with the child, indicates that the applicants – who were attentive to the child’s needs – had developed a deep emotional bond with him. The report indicated that the grandparents and other family members also surrounded the child with affection, and that he was healthy, lively and responsive. Dr I. concluded that the applicants were suitable parents for the child, both from a psychological perspective and in terms of their ability to educate him and bring him up. She added that possible removal measures would have devastating consequences for the child, explaining that he would go through a depressive phase on account of a sense of abandonment and the loss of the key persons in his life. In her opinion, this could lead to somatic symptoms and compromise the child’s psycho-physical development, and, in the long term, symptoms of psychotic pathology could emerge.
The applicants asked for the child to be placed with them, with a view to adopting him if necessary.
By an immediately enforceable decision of 20 October 2011, the Campobasso Minors Court ordered that the child be removed from the applicants, taken into the care of the social services and placed in a children’s home (casa famiglia).
The relevant passages of the Minors Court’s decision read as follows:
“...
In their evidence Mr Campanelli and Mrs Paradiso stated that Mrs Paradiso had travelled to Russia carrying her husband’s semen in a special container, and had there entered into an agreement with the company Rosjurconsulting. Under this agreement, Mrs Paradiso had delivered her husband’s semen to a pre-determined clinic. One or more eggs from an unknown female donor had been fertilised in vitro with this semen, and then implanted into another woman, whose identity is known and who had subsequently given birth to the child in question on 27 February 2011. In exchange, Mr Campanelli and Mrs Paradiso had paid a large amount of money. Mrs Paradiso stated that the woman who had given birth to the child had waived her rights to him and had consented to him being referred to on the birth certificate, drawn up in Russia, as the son of Mr Campanelli and Mrs Paradiso (a copy of the informed consent, given on 27 February 2011 by the woman who gave birth to the child, is on file in these proceedings).
A court-appointed expert witness was then instructed to establish whether the minor child was the biological son of Giovanni Campanelli. In her report the court-appointed expert witness, Ms [L.S.], concluded that the results obtained by means of typing of the DNA of Giovanni Campanelli and the DNA of the minor child [T.C.] rule out Giovanni Campanelli as the child’s biological father.
In today’s hearing Mr Campanelli and Mrs Paradiso referred to their previous evidence and Mrs Paradiso repeated that she had taken her husband’s semen to Russia to be used for the purpose of the intended fertilisation.
However, the conclusions of the court-appointed expert witness have not been challenged.
At the close of the hearing, the Public Prosecutor requested that the application by Mr Campanelli and Mrs Paradiso be refused, that the minor child be placed in the care of third parties and that a temporary guardian be appointed for him. The child’s guardian ad litem asked that the child be placed in care under section 2 of the Adoption Act and that a guardian be appointed. Mr Campanelli and Mrs Paradiso requested primarily that the court award them temporary care of the child with a view to subsequent adoption; in the alternative, they requested the suspension of these proceedings pending the criminal classification of the offences, and the suspension of the above-mentioned criminal proceedings against them and of the proceedings before the Campobasso Court of Appeal to challenge the refusal to register the child’s birth certificate; again in the alternative, they requested the suspension of these proceedings under section 14 of Law no. 184/1983 for the purpose of a possible repatriation of the minor child to Russia, or, failing that, for the child to be placed with them under section 2 of the cited law.
That being the case, the court finds that the statements by Mr Campanelli and Mrs Paradiso regarding the delivery to Russia of Giovanni Campanelli’s genetic material are not supported by any evidence. On the other hand, it has been established that the minor [T.C.] is neither the biological son of Donatina Paradiso, nor, given the evidence of the expert report, of Giovanni Campanelli. At the present time the only certainty is the identity of the woman who gave birth to the baby. The biological parents of the baby, that is, the man and the woman who provided the gametes, remain unknown.
In the light of this evidence, the present case cannot be viewed as a case of so-called gestational surrogacy, which is the case where the surrogate mother who gives birth to the baby has no genetic link to him or her, the fertilisation having taken place with the egg(s) of a third woman. Indeed, in order to be able to talk of gestational or traditional surrogacy (in the latter, the surrogate mother makes her own ovules available) there must be a biological link between the child and at least one of the two intended parents (in this specific case, Mr Campanelli and Mrs Paradiso), a biological link which, as has been seen, is non-existent.”
In the court’s view, the applicants had thus placed themselves in an unlawful situation:
“It follows that by bringing a baby to Italy, passing him off as their own son, in blatant infringement of the provisions of our legislation (Law no. 184 of 4 May 1983) governing inter-country adoption of children, Mr Campanelli and Mrs Paradiso have acted unlawfully. Besides any criminal offences which may have been committed (infringement of section 72(2) of Law no. 184/1983), which are not within the jurisdiction of this court, it is noted that the agreement entered into between Mrs Paradiso and the company Rosjurconsulting had unlawful elements since, given the terms of the agreement (the delivery of Mr Campanelli’s genetic material for the fertilisation of another woman’s ovules), it was in breach of the ban on the use of assisted reproductive technology (A.R.T.) of a heterologous type laid down by section 4 of Law no. 40 of 19 February 2004.
In any event, it is pointed out that despite being in possession of the authorisation for inter-country adoption issued by order of this court on 7 December 2006, Mr Campanelli and Mrs Paradiso, as has been stated, intentionally evaded the provisions of Law no. 184/1983, which provide not only that the intended adoptive parents must apply to an authorised body (section 31) but also for the involvement of the Commission for Inter-country Adoption (section 38), the only body competent to authorise entry and permanent residence of a foreign child in Italy (section 32).”
The court therefore found it necessary, first and foremost, to put an end to this unlawful situation:
“It is therefore necessary, above all, to prevent this unlawful situation from continuing, since to maintain it would be equivalent to ratifying unlawful conduct in open violation of the provisions of our legislation.
Accordingly, it is necessary to remove the minor child from Mr Campanelli and Mrs Paradiso and place him in an appropriate structure with a view to identifying a suitable couple to foster the child as soon as possible. The Social Services Department of the Municipality of Colletorto is therefore instructed to identify an appropriate structure and to place the child in it. The Italian legislation on adoption applies to this child in accordance with section 37a of Law No. 184/1983, there being no doubt that he is in Italy in a state of abandonment, having been deprived of his biological parents and other relatives, and the mother who gave birth to him having renounced him.
Admittedly, it cannot be denied that the child will in all likelihood suffer harm from being separated from Mr Campanelli and Mrs Paradiso. However, given the age of the child and the short time he has spent with them, the court cannot agree with the conclusions of the report by psychologist [Dr I.] (instructed by Mr Campanelli and Mrs Paradiso), finding that it is certain that the child’s separation from them would entail devastating consequences. Indeed, according to the literature on this subject, the mere separation from the main care-givers is not a causal agent of a psychopathological state in a child unless other causal factors are present. The trauma caused by the separation from Mr Campanelli and Mrs Paradiso will not be irreparable, given that a search will begin immediately for a couple able to attenuate the consequences of the trauma, through a compensatory process that will encourage a new adaptation.
It is also pointed out that the fact that Mr Campanelli and Mrs Paradiso (and in particular Mrs Paradiso) have put up with the hardships and the difficulties of A.R.T (Mrs Paradiso has also stated that during one of these interventions her life was at risk) and have preferred, despite being in possession of an approval for inter-country adoption, to circumvent Italian legislation on this subject gives rise to the doubt and the fear that the minor child may be an instrument to fulfil a narcissistic desire of Mr Campanelli and Mrs Paradiso or to exorcise an individual or joint problem. In the light of the conduct of Mr Campanelli and Mrs Paradiso during the events under examination, all of this throws a consistent shadow over their possession of genuine affective and educational abilities and of the instinct of human solidarity which must be present in any person wishing to bring the children of others into their lives as their own children.
The separation of the minor child from Mr Campanelli and Mrs Paradiso thus corresponds to the best interests of the child.”
According to the applicants, the court’s decision was enforced on the same day, without their having been informed of the decision in advance.
The applicants lodged an appeal (reclamo) before the Campobasso Court of Appeal. They argued, inter alia, that the Italian courts could not contest the Russian birth certificate. They further requested that no measures be taken concerning the child while the criminal proceedings against them and the proceedings challenging the refusal to enter the birth certificate in the Italian civil-status register were pending.
By a decision of 28 February 2012, the Campobasso Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal.
The Court of Appeal found that the child T.C. was “in a state of abandonment” (in stato di abbandono) within the meaning of section 8 of the Adoption Act, as the applicants were not his parents. In those circumstances, the question of whether or not the applicants were criminally liable and whether or not there had been an error in the use of seminal fluid of unknown origin was not, in its view, relevant. In the Court of Appeal’s opinion, it was not appropriate to await the outcome of the criminal trial or of the proceedings brought by the applicants to challenge the refusal to enter the particulars of the birth certificate in the register. The Court of Appeal also considered that section 33 of Law no. 218/95 (the Private International Law Act) did not prevent the Italian courts from refusing to comply with certified information from a foreign State, and that there was no issue of lack of jurisdiction, since, according to section 37bis of the Adoption Act, “... the Italian law governing adoption, fostering, and necessary measures in case of urgency shall be applicable to a foreign minor child who is in [Italy] in a state of abandonment” (cf. also Cass 1128/92)”.
No appeal to the Court of Cassation lay against that decision (see paragraph 68 below).
In the meantime, on 30 October 2011 the public prosecutor at the Larino Court had ordered the preventive seizure of the Russian birth certificate, on the ground that it was an essential item of evidence. In the prosecutor’s view, in all probability the applicants had not only committed the offences with which they were charged, but they had attempted to conceal them. They had, according to him, inter alia, stated that they were the biological parents and had then corrected their versions of events as these were successively disproved.
The applicants challenged the preventive seizure order.
By a decision of 20 November 2012, the Campobasso Court dismissed the applicants’ appeal on the ground of the strong suspicions that they had committed the offences in question. In particular, the court noted the following facts: the first applicant had spread a rumour that she was pregnant; she had gone to the Italian Consulate in Moscow and implied that she was the natural mother; she had subsequently admitted that the child had been born to a surrogate mother; she had stated to the carabinieri on 25 May 2011 that the second applicant was the biological father, which had been disproved by the DNA tests; she had thus made false statements; she had been very vague as to the identity of the genetic mother; the documents concerning the surrogate motherhood stated that the two applicants had been seen by the Russian doctors, which did not correspond to the fact that the second applicant had not travelled to Russia; the documents relating to the birth did not give any precise date. The court considered that the only certainty was that the child had been born and that he had been handed over to the first applicant against payment of almost 50,000 euros (EUR). In the court’s view, the hypothesis that the applicants had behaved illegally with a view to having the particulars of the birth certificate entered in the civilstatus register and to circumventing the Italian legislation thus appeared well-founded.
In November 2012 the Public Prosecutor transmitted the decision regarding the preventive seizure to the Minors Court and indicated that a conviction under section 72 of the Adoption Act would deprive the applicants of the possibility of fostering (affido) the child and of adopting him or other minors. In the Public Prosecutor’s view, there was therefore no other solution but to proceed with the adoption procedure for the child, and his temporary placement with a foster family had therefore been requested, in accordance with sections 8 and 10 of the Adoption Act. The Public Prosecutor repeated his request and emphasised that the child had been removed more than a year previously, and that he had since been living in a children’s home (casa famiglia), where he had developed meaningful relationships with the persons responsible for his care. He explained that the child had thus still not found a family environment to replace the one that had been illegally provided by the couple who had brought him to Italy. According to the Public Prosecutor, the child seemed destined for another separation, even more painful than that from the mother who had given birth to him and then from the woman who claimed to be his mother.
An appeal having been lodged to contest the Registry Office’s refusal to enter the particulars of the Russian birth certificate in the civilstatus register, the Larino Court declined jurisdiction on 29 September 2011. The proceedings were subsequently resumed before the Campobasso Court of Appeal. The applicants insisted that the particulars of the Russian birth certificate be entered in the Italian register.
By an immediately enforceable decision of 3 April 2013, the Campobasso Court of Appeal ruled on the transcription of the birth certificate into the Italian register.
By way of introduction, the Court of Appeal dismissed the objection raised by the guardian to the effect that the applicants did not have standing to bring an action before that court; it acknowledged that the applicants had standing to bring proceedings in that they were referred to as the “parents” in the birth certificate that they wished to have entered in the civil-status register.
However, the Court of Appeal considered it clear that the applicants were not the biological parents and concluded that there had not therefore been a gestational surrogacy. It noted that the parties were in agreement that the Russian legislation presupposed a biological link between the child and at least one of the intended parents before the term surrogate motherhood could be used. It concluded that the birth certificate was fraudulent (ideologicamente falso) and in breach of Russian law. In the Court of Appeal’s view, given that there was nothing to show that the child had Russian citizenship, the applicants’ argument that Italian law was inapplicable ran counter to section 33 of the Private International Law Act, which stated that the legal parent-child relationship was determined by the national law governing the child at the time of his or her birth.
The Court of Appeal added that it was contrary to public order to register the contested birth certificate, since it was fraudulent. It stated that although the applicants had pleaded their good faith, alleging that they were unable to explain why the second applicant’s seminal fluid had not been used in the Russian clinic, this made no difference to the situation and did not alter the fact that the second applicant was not the biological father.
In conclusion, the Court of Appeal held that it was legitimate to refuse to register the Russian birth certificate and to grant the Public Prosecutor’s request that a new birth certificate be issued. The Court of Appeal therefore ordered that a new birth certificate be issued, indicating that the child was the son of persons unknown, born in Moscow on 27 February 2011, and that he would be given a new name, determined in accordance with Presidential Decree no. 396/00.
Following execution of the decision issued by the Minors Court on 20 October 2011, the child was placed in a children’s home for about fifteen months, in a location that was unknown to the applicants. All contact between the applicants and the child was prohibited. They were unable to obtain any news of him.
In January 2013 the child was placed in a family with a view to his adoption.
At the beginning of April 2013 the guardian asked the Minors Court to give the child a formal identity, so that he could be registered for school without complications. He stated that the child had been placed in a family on 26 January 2013, but that he did not have an identity. This “inexistence” had a significant impact on administrative matters, particularly with regard to deciding under what name the child was to be registered for school, for vaccination records, and for residence. While accepting that this situation corresponded to the aim of preventing the applicants from discovering the child’s whereabouts, for his own protection, the guardian explained that a temporary formal identity would enable the secrecy surrounding the child’s real identity to be maintained, while simultaneously enabling him to have access to public services; for the time being, he was entitled only to use emergency medical services.
The case file indicates that this request was granted by the Minors Court and that the child received a formal identity.
The Government have indicated that the child has now been adopted.
The proceedings to make the child available for adoption were resumed before the Minors Court of Campobasso (see paragraph 22 above). The applicants confirmed their opposition to the child’s placement with third persons. The guardian asked for a statement ruling that the applicants no longer had locus standi.
The Public Prosecutor asked the Minors Court not to declare the child available for adoption using the name originally given to him, on the ground that, in the meantime, he had opened a second set of proceedings requesting that the child be declared available for adoption under his new identity (child of unknown parents).
On 5 June 2013, the Minors Court held that the applicants no longer had standing to act in the adoption proceedings, given that they were neither the child’s parents nor members of his family within the meaning of section 10 of the Adoption Act. The court stated that it would settle the question of the child’s adoption in the context of the other set of adoption proceedings, referred to by the Public Prosecutor.
No information has been provided by the parties concerning subsequent developments in the criminal proceedings brought against the applicants. It seems that those proceedings are still pending.
Under section 33 of the Private International Law Act 1995 (Law no. 218), the legal parent-child relationship is determined by the national law governing the child at the time of his or her birth.
Presidential Decree no. 396 of 3 November 2000 (Simplification of Civil Status Act) provides that declarations of birth concerning Italian nationals which have been drawn up abroad must be transmitted to the consular authorities (section 15). The consular authorities transmit a copy of the documents, for the purpose of their entry in the civil-status register, to the municipality in which the individual concerned intends to take up residence (section 17). Documents drawn up abroad cannot be entered in the register if they are contrary to public order (section 18). In order to have full legal force in Italy, foreign decisions (provvedimenti) in respect of persons’ capacity or the existence of family relationships must not be contrary to public order (section 65).
Section 4 of Law no. 40 of 19 February 2004 (the Medically Assisted Reproduction Act) prohibited the use of heterologous assisted reproduction techniques. Failure to comply with this provision entailed a financial penalty ranging from EUR 300,000 to EUR 600,000.
In judgment no. 162 of 9 April 2014, the Constitutional Court found these provisions to be contrary to the Constitution where the above prohibition concerned a heterosexual couple suffering from proven and irreversible sterility or infertility.
In the same judgment, the Constitutional Court held that the prohibition on surrogate motherhood imposed by section 12 § 6 of the Act, was, on the contrary, legitimate. That provision makes it an offence to carry out, organise or advertise the commercialisation of gametes, embryos or surrogate motherhood. The penalties incurred are imprisonment, ranging from three months to two years, and a fine, ranging from EUR 600,000 to 1,000,000.
In judgment no. 96 of 5 June 2015, the Constitutional Court again examined the prohibition on using heterologous reproduction techniques and held that the relevant provisions were unconstitutional in respect of couples who are fertile but are carriers of serious genetically transmitted diseases.
The provisions concerning the procedure for adoption are set out in Law no. 184/1983 (“the Adoption Act”), as amended by Law no. 149 of 2001, entitled “The Child’s Right to a Family”.
Section 2 of the Act provides that a minor who has temporarily been deprived of a satisfactory family environment may be placed with another family, if possible including other minor children, or with a single person, or with a family-type community, for the purposes of providing him or her with support, an upbringing and education. If it is not possible to provide him with a satisfactory family environment, a minor may be placed in a public or private children’s home, preferably in the area in which he has been living.
Section 5 of the Act provides that the family or person with whom the minor has been placed must provide him or her with support, an upbringing and education, taking account of instructions from the guardian and in compliance with the judicial authority’s directions. In any event, the foster family exercises parental responsibility with regard to relations with the school and the national health service. The foster family must be heard in the proceedings on placement and the proceedings concerning the order that the child is available for adoption.
Section 6 of the Act lays down age limits for adopting. The difference in age between the child and the adopting parent must be a minimum of eighteen years and a maximum of forty-five years, a limit which may be extended to fifty-five years for the second adopting parent. The minors courts may derogate from these age limits where they consider that the fact of not proceeding with the child’s adoption would be harmful to him or her.
Furthermore, section 7 provides that adoption is possible for minors who have been declared available for adoption.
Section 8 provides that “the Minors Court may, even of its own motion, declare ... a minor available for adoption if he or she is in a state of abandonment in the sense of being deprived of all emotional or material support from the parents or the members of his or her family responsible for providing such support other than in temporary cases of force majeure”. Section 8 continues: “A minor shall continue to be considered in a state of abandonment ... even if he or she is in a children’s home or has been placed in a foster home.” Lastly, section 8 provides that a case of force majeure shall be deemed to have ceased where the parents or other members of the minor’s family responsible for providing support refuse assistance from the authorities and the court considers their refusal unjustified. The fact that a minor is in a state of abandonment may be reported to the authorities by any member of the public or noted by a court of its own motion. Furthermore, any public official and any member of the minor’s family who is aware that a child is in a state of abandonment must report the situation to the authorities. Children’s homes must keep the judicial authorities regularly informed of the situation of minors whom they take into their care (section 9).
Section 10 then provides that, pending a minor’s placement in a foster home before adoption, the court may order any temporary measure which is in the minor’s interests, including, if necessary, the suspension of parental responsibility.
Sections 11 to 14 provide that enquiries shall be made so as to clarify the minor’s situation and determine whether he or she is in a state of abandonment. In particular, section 11 provides that where, in the course of these enquiries, it transpires that the child does not have contact with any member of his or her family up to the fourth degree, the court may issue a declaration that he or she is available for adoption, unless an adoption application has been made within the meaning of section 44 of the Act.
If, at the end of the procedure provided for in the above sections, the minor is still in a state of abandonment within the meaning of section 8, the Minors Court shall declare him or her available for adoption if: (a) the parents or other members of the family have not appeared in the course of the proceedings; (b) it is clear from interviews with them that they are still failing to provide the child with emotional and material support and are unable to remedy the situation; and (c) measures ordered under section 12 have not been implemented through the parents’ fault (section 15). Section 15 also provides that a declaration that a minor is available for adoption shall be made in a reasoned decision of the Minors Court sitting in chambers, after it has heard the Public Prosecutor, the representative of the children’s home in which the minor has been placed or any foster parent, the guardian, and the minor if he or she is aged over twelve years or, if aged under twelve, where this is deemed necessary.
Section 17 provides that an objection to a decision declaring a child available for adoption must be lodged within thirty days of the date of notification to the requesting party.
Under section 19, parental responsibility is suspended while a minor is available for adoption.
Lastly, section 20 provides that a minor shall no longer be available for adoption if he or she has been adopted or has come of age. Moreover, a declaration that a child is available for adoption may be annulled, either by the court of its own motion or at the request of the parents or the Public Prosecutor, if the conditions laid down in section 8 have in the meantime ceased to apply. However, if the minor has been placed with a family with a view to adoption (affidamento preadottivo) under sections 22-24, the declaration that he or she is available for adoption cannot be annulled.
Section 44 provides for certain cases of special adoption: adoption is possible for minors who have not yet been declared available for adoption. In particular, section 44 (d) authorises adoption when it is impossible to place the child in alternative care pending adoption.
Section 37bis of this Act provides that Italian law applies to foreign minors who are in Italy and who are in “a state of abandonment” with regard to adoption, placement and urgent measures.
In order to be able to adopt a foreign minor, persons wishing to adopt must contact an organisation that is authorised to look for a child (section 31) and the Commission for International Adoptions (section 38). The latter is the only body that is competent to authorise the entry and permanent residence of a foreign minor in Italy (section 32). Once the minor has arrived in Italy, the minors court orders that the information on the adoption decision be transcribed into the civil-status register.
Under section 72 of the Act, any person who – in violation of the provisions set out in paragraph 66 above – brings into the territory of the State a foreign minor, in order to obtain money or other benefits, and in order that the minor be entrusted permanently to Italian citizens, is committing a criminal offence punishable by a prison term of between one and three years. This sanction also applies to those persons who, in exchange for money or other benefits, accept the “placement” of foreign minors on a permanent basis. Conviction for this offence entails disqualification from fostering children (affido) and from becoming a guardian.
Under Article 111 § 7 of the Italian Constitution, appeals to the Court of Cassation to allege violations of the law are always possible against judgments or measures affecting personal freedom. The Court of Cassation extended the scope of this remedy to civil proceedings where the impugned decision has a substantial impact on situations (decisoria) and where it cannot be varied or revoked by the same court which delivered it (definitiva).
Decisions concerning urgent measures with regard to a child in a state of abandonment, taken by the minors court on the basis of section 10 of the Adoption Act (Articles 330 et seq. of the Civil Code, Article 742 of the Code of Civil Procedure) may be varied or revoked. They may be the subject of a complaint before the court of appeal. No appeal on points of law can be made in respect of decisions that may be varied and revoked at any point (Court of Cassation, Section I, judgment of 18 October 2012, no. 17916).
Royal Decree no. 1404 of 1934, which subsequently became Law no. 835 of 1935, established the minors courts. This law has since been amended on several occasions.
Under section 2, all minors courts are made up of an appeal court judge, a judge of first-instance and two lay judges. The latter are chosen from specialists in biology, psychiatry, criminal anthropology, pedagogy or psychology.
The Court of Cassation (Section I, judgment no. 24001 of 26 September 2014) ruled in a civil case concerning two Italian nationals who had travelled to Ukraine to have a child with the help of a surrogate mother. The Court of Cassation held that the decision to take the child into care was lawful. Having noted the absence of genetic links between the child and the intended parents, the Court of Cassation concluded that the impugned situation was illegal under Ukrainian law, since the latter required a biological link with one of the intended parents. The Court of Cassation reiterated that the prohibition on surrogate motherhood was still in force in Italy. It explained that the prohibition on surrogate motherhood in Italian law was a criminal-law one, and was intended to protect the surrogate mother’s human dignity and the practice of adoption. It added that only a legally recognised adoption, organised in accordance with the regulations, would allow non-genetic parenthood to be validated. It stated that the assessment of the child’s best interests had been carried out in advance by the legislature, and the court had no discretion in this matter. It concluded that there could be no conflict of interest with the child’s interests where the court applied the domestic law and refused to take into account a legal parent-child relationship established abroad following a gestational surrogacy arrangement.
The Court of Cassation (Section V, judgment no. 13525 of 5 April 2016) ruled in criminal proceedings against two Italian nationals who had travelled to Ukraine in order to conceive a child and had used an ova donor and a surrogate mother. Ukrainian law required that one of the two parents be the biological parent. The acquittal judgment delivered at first instance had been challenged by the public prosecutor before the Court of Cassation. That court dismissed the public prosecutor’s appeal on points of law, thus confirming the acquittal, which had been based on the finding that the defendants had not been in breach of section 12 § 6 of Law no. 40 of 19 February 2004 (the Medically Assisted Reproduction Act), given that they had had recourse to an assisted reproduction technique which was legal in the country in which it was practised. In addition, the Court of Cassation considered that the fact that the defendants had submitted a foreign birth certificate to the Italian authorities did not constitute the offence of “making a false statement as to identity” (Article 495 of the Criminal Code) or “falsifying civil status” (Article 567 of the Criminal Code), since the certificate in question was legal under the law of the issuing country.
The Court of Cassation (Section I, judgment no. 12962/14 of 22 June 2016) ruled in a civil case in which the claimant had asked to be able to adopt her companion’s child. The two women had travelled to Spain to use assisted reproduction techniques that were forbidden in Italy. One of them was the “mother” under Italian law, and the seminal fluid had been provided by an unknown donor. The claimant had been successful at first and second instance. On an appeal by the public prosecutor, the Court of Cassation dismissed the latter’s submissions, and thus accepted that a child born through assisted reproduction techniques within a same-sex female couple could be adopted by the woman who had not given birth to that child. In reaching that conclusion the Court of Cassation took into account the stable emotional bond between the claimant and the child, and the best interests of the minor child. The Court of Cassation referred to section 44 of the Adoption Act, which provides for special circumstances.
At the relevant time, namely until February 2011, when the child was born, the only relevant legislation in force was the Family Code of 29 December 1995. That Code provided that a married couple could be recognised as the parent couple of a child born to a surrogate mother where the latter has given her written consent (Article 51 § 4 of the Family Code). The Family Code was silent on the question whether or not the intended parents should have a biological link to the child in the event of a gestational surrogacy agreement. Implementing Decree no. 67, which was adopted in 2003 and remained in force until 2012, was also silent on this point.
Subsequent to the child’s birth, the Basic Law on the Protection of Citizens’ Health, which was enacted on 21 November 2011 and entered into force on 1 January 2012, introduced provisions to regulate medical activities, including assisted reproduction. Section 55 of this law defines gestational surrogacy as the fact of bearing and handing over a child on the basis of a contract concluded between the surrogate mother and the intended parents, who provide their own genetic material.
Decree no. 107, issued by the Minister of Health on 30 August 2012, defines gestational surrogacy as a contract entered into between the surrogate mother and the intended parents who have used their genetic material for the conception.
The Hague Convention Abolishing the Requirement of Legalisation for Foreign Public Documents was concluded on 5 October 1961. It applies to public documents – as defined in Article 1 – which have been drawn up in the territory of one Contracting State and which must be produced in the territory of another Contracting State.
“Each Contracting State shall exempt from legalisation documents to which the present Convention applies and which have to be produced in its territory. For the purposes of the present Convention, legalisation means only the formality by which the diplomatic or consular agents of the country in which the document has to be produced certify the authenticity of the signature, the capacity in which the person signing the document has acted and, where appropriate, the identity of the seal or stamp which it bears.”
“The only formality that may be required in order to certify the authenticity of the signature, the capacity in which the person signing the document has acted and, where appropriate, the identity of the seal or stamp which it bears, is the addition of the certificate described in Article 4, issued by the competent authority of the State from which the document emanates.”
“The certificate shall be issued at the request of the person who has signed the document or of any bearer. When properly filled in, it will certify the authenticity of the signature, the capacity in which the person signing the document has acted and, where appropriate, the identity of the seal or stamp which the document bears. The signature, seal and stamp on the certificate are exempt from all certification.”
The explanatory report on this Convention indicates that the certificate does not attest to the truthfulness of the content of the original document. This limitation on the legal effects deriving from the Hague Convention is intended to preserve the right of the signatory States to apply their own choice-of-law rules when they are required to determine the probatory force to be attached to the content of the certified document.
The relevant provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, concluded in New York on 20 November 1989, read as follows:
“The States Parties to the present Convention,
...
Convinced that the family, as the fundamental group of society and the natural environment for the growth and well-being of all its members and particularly children, should be afforded the necessary protection and assistance so that it can fully assume its responsibilities within the community,
Recognizing that the child, for the full and harmonious development of his or her personality, should grow up in a family environment, in an atmosphere of happiness, love and understanding,
...
Have agreed as follows:
...
In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private social welfare institutions, courts of law, administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.
...
The child shall be registered immediately after birth and shall have the right from birth to a name, the right to acquire a nationality and. as far as possible, the right to know and be cared for by his or her parents.
...
States Parties shall ensure that a child shall not be separated from his or her parents against their will...
A child temporarily or permanently deprived of his or her family environment, or in whose own best interests cannot be allowed to remain in that environment, shall be entitled to special protection and assistance provided by the State.
States Parties shall in accordance with their national laws ensure alternative care for such a child.
Such care could include, inter alia, foster placement, kafalah of Islamic law, adoption or if necessary placement in suitable institutions for the care of children. When considering solutions, due regard shall be paid to the desirability of continuity in a child’s upbringing and to the child’s ethnic, religious, cultural and linguistic background.
States Parties that recognize and/or permit the system of adoption shall ensure that the best interests of the child shall be the paramount consideration and they shall:
(a)  Ensure that the adoption of a child is authorized only by competent authorities who determine, in accordance with applicable law and procedures and on the basis of all pertinent and reliable information, that the adoption is permissible in view of the child’s status concerning parents, relatives and legal guardians and that, if required, the persons concerned have given their informed consent to the adoption on the basis of such counselling as may be necessary;
(b)  Recognize that inter-country adoption may be considered as an alternative means of child’s care, if the child cannot be placed in a foster or an adoptive family or cannot in any suitable manner be cared for in the child’s country of origin;
(c)  Ensure that the child concerned by inter-country adoption enjoys safeguards and standards equivalent to those existing in the case of national adoption;
(d)  Take all appropriate measures to ensure that, in inter-country adoption, the placement does not result in improper financial gain for those involved in it;
(e)  Promote, where appropriate, the objectives of the present article by concluding bilateral or multilateral arrangements or agreements, and endeavour, within this framework, to ensure that the placement of the child in another country is carried out by competent authorities or organs.
...”
In its General Comment no. 7 (2005) on implementing child rights in early childhood, the Committee on the Rights of the Child wished to encourage the States Parties to recognise that young children are holders of all rights enshrined in the Convention on the Rights of the Child and that early childhood is a critical period for the realisation of these rights. In particular, the Committee refers to the best interests of the child:
“13.  Article 3 sets out the principle that the best interests of the child are a primary consideration in all actions concerning children. By virtue of their relative immaturity, young children are reliant on responsible authorities to assess and represent their rights and best interests in relation to decisions and actions that affect their well-being, while taking account of their views and evolving capacities. The principle of best interests appears repeatedly within the Convention (including in articles 9, 18, 20 and 21, which are most relevant to early childhood). The principle of best interests applies to all actions concerning children and requires active measures to protect their rights and promote their survival, growth, and well-being, as well as measures to support and assist parents and others who have day-to-day responsibility for realizing children’s rights:
(a)  Best interests of individual children. All decision-making concerning a child’s care, health, education, etc. must take account of the best interests principle, including decisions by parents, professionals and others responsible for children. States parties are urged to make provisions for young children to be represented independently in all legal proceedings by someone who acts for the child’s interests, and for children to be heard in all cases where they are capable of expressing their opinions or preferences;
...”
The relevant provisions of the Convention on Protection of Children and Co-operation in Respect of Intercountry Adoption, concluded in The Hague on 29 May 1993, are worded as follows:
“1. An adoption within the scope of the Convention shall take place only if the competent authorities of the State of origin -
(a)  have established that the child is adoptable;
(b)  have determined, after possibilities for placement of the child within the State of origin have been given due consideration, that an intercountry adoption is in the child’s best interests;
(c)  have ensured that
(1)  the persons, institutions and authorities whose consent is necessary for adoption, have been counselled as may be necessary and duly informed of the effects of their consent, in particular whether or not an adoption will result in the termination of the legal relationship between the child and his or her family of origin,
(2)  such persons, institutions and authorities have given their consent freely, in the required legal form, and expressed or evidenced in writing,
(3)  the consents have not been induced by payment or compensation of any kind and have not been withdrawn, and
(4)  the consent of the mother, where required, has been given only after the birth of the child; and
(d)  have ensured, having regard to the age and degree of maturity of the child, that
(1)  he or she has been counselled and duly informed of the effects of the adoption and of his or her consent to the adoption, where such consent is required,
(2)  consideration has been given to the child’s wishes and opinions,
(3)  the child’s consent to the adoption, where such consent is required, has been given freely, in the required legal form, and expressed or evidenced in writing, and
(4)  such consent has not been induced by payment or compensation of any kind.”
The Council of Europe Ad Hoc Committee of Experts on Progress in the Biomedical Sciences (CAHBI), which preceded the present Steering Committee on Bioethics, published in 1989 a series of Principles. Principle 15, on “Surrogate Motherhood”, is worded as follows:
“1.  No physician or establishment may use the techniques of artificial procreation for the conception of a child carried by a surrogate mother.
Any contract or agreement between [the] surrogate mother and the person or couple for whom she carried the child shall be unenforceable.
Any action by an intermediary for the benefit of persons concerned with surrogate motherhood as well as any advertising relating thereto shall be prohibited.
However, States may, in exceptional cases fixed by their national law, provide, while duly respecting paragraph 2 of this principle, that a physician or an establishment may proceed to the fertilisation of a surrogate mother by artificial procreation techniques, provided that:
the surrogate mother obtains no material benefit from the operation;
the surrogate mother has the choice at birth of keeping the child.”
The Hague Conference on Private International Law has examined the issues of private international law concerning the status of children, particularly with regard to the recognition of parentage. Following an extensive consultation process which resulted in a comparative report (Preliminary Documents nos. 3B and 3C of 2014), in April 2014, the Council on General Affairs and Policy agreed that the work should be continued to explore the feasibility of preparing a multilateral instrument. Preliminary Document no. 3A of February 2015, entitled “The Parentage/Surrogacy project: an updating note” describes the important human-rights concerns raised by the current situation regarding international surrogacy arrangements, and the increasing prevalence of such arrangements. The Hague Conference thus considered that there is now a pressing human-rights requirement, including from the perspective of children’s rights, for its work in this area.
In the cases of Mennesson v. France (no. 65192/11, §§ 40-42, ECHR 2014 (extracts) and Labassee v. France (no. 65941/11, §§ 31-33, 26 June 2014), the Court outlined the results of a comparative-law analysis covering thirty-five States Parties to the Convention other than France. It showed that surrogacy is expressly prohibited in fourteen of those States; in ten other States, in which there are no regulations on gestational surrogacy, it is either prohibited under general provisions or not tolerated, or the question of its legality is uncertain; it is authorised in seven of these thirtyfive member States (subject to compliance with certain strict conditions).
In thirteen of these thirty-five States it is possible for the intended parents to obtain legal recognition of the parent-child relationship between them and a child born from gestational surrogacy carried out legally in another country.