The case originated in an application (no. 31509/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) on 22 August 2002 by a Polish citizen, Mr Janusz Strzałkowski.
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The applicant was represented by Ms J. Agacka-Indecka, a lawyer practising in Łódź.
The applicant alleged that his right to a fair trial had been violated in that the appeal hearing in his criminal case had been held in his absence.
On 19 October 2007 the President of the Fourth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1964. He is currently serving a prison sentence.
On 26 January 1998 he was arrested on suspicion of murder. The trial took place before the . The applicant, represented by a legal-aid lawyer, was present during the trial. The legalaid lawyer attended all hearings held before the court. On 22 February 2001 the  convicted the applicant of murder and sentenced him to twentyfive years’ imprisonment.
The applicant’s lawyer filed an appeal against this judgment with the Warsaw Court of Appeal (the “Court of Appeal”). He argued, in particular, that the firstinstance court had committed errors in the assessment of the evidence. It had wrongly held that the applicant had committed, together with another defendant A.K., a crime of murder, instead of finding the applicant guilty only of handling and selling goods stolen from the victim. The court had also erred in considering that the testimony given by A.K. was credible. The court had wrongly assessed certain other pieces of evidence on the basis of which it had accepted that the applicant had taken part in the crime. It was further argued that the court had failed to take into consideration circumstances pointing to the applicant’s innocence and that it had breached the principle of the presumption of innocence.
On 17 July 2001 the applicant lodged his own appeal with the court, arguing essentially that he was not guilty, that the evidence had been wrongly assessed and that he should be acquitted. On 26 September 2001 the Warsaw Court of Appeal fixed the date of the hearing in the appeal proceedings for 28 November 2001. On the same date the court decided, referring to Article 451 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, that on 3 October 2001 it would hold a session to decide whether to bring the applicant from prison to attend the hearing.
On 3 October 2001 the applicant was served with the decision concerning the date fixed for the hearing. On the same date the court gave a decision ex officio concerning the applicant’s presence at the hearing. By a letter from the court’s registry, served on the applicant on 12 October 2001, he was informed of that decision. The letter read:
“The Warsaw Court of Appeal states that by a decision of 3 October 2001 it has decided not to bring the accused Janusz Strzałkowski to a hearing before that court, as his interests will be duly represented by his defence lawyer.”
No appeal was available against that decision.
On 28 November 2001 the Court of Appeal held a hearing. The applicant’s lawyer and the prosecutor were present. The court considered that the applicant had been properly summoned. The judge rapporteur of the Court of Appeal read out the appeal submitted by the applicant himself. The applicant’s lawyer, in his oral pleadings, supported the arguments of the defence submitted in his appeal. The prosecutor requested the court to dismiss the appeal.
The Court of Appeal dismissed the appeals against the first-instance judgment. The court examined the grounds for the appeals adduced by the applicant’s lawyer. In particular, the court stressed that no arguments had been advanced to persuade it that the findings of fact were incorrect. The first-instance court had found the applicant guilty essentially on the basis of the testimony of other defendants. This evidence had been examined in a thorough manner against the background of other evidence available in the case. The first-instance court had exhaustively explained in the grounds for its judgment why it believed that the testimony given by the applicant himself had been unreliable. The appeals had failed to provide grounds on which to accept that the findings as to the applicant’s participation in the crime and his guilt were erroneous. The statements made in this respect in the appeals had been flagrantly inconsistent with the evidence examined by the first-instance court. The first-instance court had carefully explained in the written grounds for its judgment why it had considered certain evidence as credible and other evidence implausible.
This judgment, together with its written grounds, was served on the applicant on 7 December 2001. Subsequently, he requested legal aid for the purposes of cassation proceedings and his request was granted.
The legal-aid lawyer, the same lawyer who had represented the applicant during the proceedings, was served with the written grounds for the judgment on 5 February 2002. By an undated letter which was served on the applicant on 26 February 2002, he was informed by his lawyer that he had not found grounds on which to prepare a cassation appeal and that he would inform the court accordingly. On the same day the lawyer informed the court of his position.
On 26 March 2002 the Warsaw Court of Appeal refused to assign a new legal-aid lawyer for the purposes of cassation proceedings, finding that there were no grounds on which to call into question the assessment of the prospects of success of such proceedings made by the first legalaid lawyer. No appeal was available against this decision.
In 1997 a new Code of Criminal Procedure was enacted. Article 451 of the Code provided that an appellate court could order that a defendant be detained (under the Polish law detention during judicial proceedings is terminated only by a secondinstance judgment) and that he be brought to the courtroom to attend a hearing before that court.
Article 452 of the Code of Criminal Procedure reads:
“§ 1. A court of appeal shall not be allowed to conduct evidentiary proceedings 	pertaining to the merits of the case.
 § 2. In exceptional cases the appellate court, if it finds the completion of a judicial examination necessary, may nevertheless accept new evidence directly at the hearing, if this will expedite the judicial proceedings and there is no necessity to reconduct the whole of the proceedings, or a major part thereof, anew. Before the hearing the court may issue an order on the admission of evidence.”
In 1999 the Supreme Court decided that during a hearing before an appellate court a defendant should have, at the very least, an opportunity to defend him- or herself, or to be represented by a defence lawyer (5 October 1999, IV KKN 334/99).
In a judgment of 29 March 2000 the Supreme Court stated that it was mandatory to bring the defendant to a hearing before the appellate court, regardless of whether he or she had made a relevant request (V KKN 111/98).
In a judgment of 4 October 2000 the Supreme Court stated that in cases in which the arguments made in the statement of appeal were limited to challenging exclusively legal aspects of a case or where only the sentence was challenged, a decision not to bring a defendant represented by a lawyer before the appellate court was correct (III KKN 164/2000).
In July 2000 Article 451 of the Code was amended, in response to the Court’s judgment in the case of Belziuk v. Poland (25 March 1998, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1998II). The amended provision read:
“The appellate court shall order an accused, who is detained, to be brought to the appellate hearing, unless it finds that the presence of his lawyer is sufficient. If the court decides not to bring an accused who has no defence counsel to the hearing it shall appoint for him ex officio a legal-aid lawyer.”
In 2001 the Supreme Court examined the Ombudsman’s request for clarification of issues relating to the presence of the accused at the appeal hearing. In its resolution of 18 October 2001 it expressed the view that the right to a fair hearing demanded that the person convicted by the first-instance court should be informed of his right to request to be brought before the appellate court and should be brought to such a hearing. It stated:
“...Finally, it should be underlined, that even if the accused requests to be brought to the appeal hearing, the court may establish that the presence of the lawyer at the appeal hearing would be sufficient. If the accused does not have counsel, it is necessary to appoint a legal-aid lawyer for him whose presence at the hearing would be obligatory. It should however be noted that if an accused deprived of liberty requests to be brought to the appeal hearing, granting such a request should be a rule... Finding that the presence of the lawyer would be sufficient could occur in particular if the appeal hearing concerned only questions of law.”
In 2003 Article 451 was further amended in that it became obligatory for an appellate court to inform the accused of his or her right to request leave to attend the hearing before that court.
The Supreme Court has examined, in numerous judgments, cassation appeals based on the allegation that the absence of an accused at the appeal hearing was a flagrant breach of law that could significantly affect the substance of the ruling in question, within the meaning of Article 523 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The Supreme Court on many occasions found that the refusal to bring the accused to the appeal hearing was a flagrant breach of law that could significantly affect the substance of the second-instance judgment. In such cases, the Supreme Court has quashed the appeal judgment and remitted the case (judgment of 10 August 2000, III KKN 192/00, judgment of 5 June 2001, III KKN 28/01).
Under Article 83 of the Code, an accused may appoint a lawyer to represent him or her in criminal proceedings. If he or she cannot afford lawyers’ fees, a request for legal-aid may be made under Article 78 of the Code. Legal representation for the purposes of cassation proceedings is mandatory. In its decisions of 13 March and 17 September 2002 the Supreme Court expressed the view that when a legal-aid lawyer refused to represent a convicted person before the Supreme Court, the appellate court was not obliged to assign a new lawyer to the case (II KZ 11/02, II KZ 36/02).