The case originated in three applications (nos. 19637/05, 43197/06 and 39164/07) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Turkish nationals, Mr Barış İnan, Mrs Muhabbet Kurt and Mr Azimet Ceyhan (“the applicants”), on 30 May 2005, 13 October 2006 and 27 August 2007, respectively.
The first applicant was represented by Mr F.N. Ertekin, Mr K. Öztürk, Mr T. Ayçık, Mr İ.C. Halavurt and Mrs F. Kılıçgün, lawyers practising in . The second applicant was represented by Mr E. Kanar, a lawyer practising in . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 17 June 2008 the Court joined the applications, declared them partly inadmissible and decided to communicate to the Government the complaints concerning the applicants' right to be released pending trial, the alleged rape of the second applicant while in police custody, an alleged lack of an effective domestic remedy whereby the second applicant could challenge the lawfulness of her detention and the right of the second and third applicants to a hearing within a reasonable time. It also decided to examine the merits of these complaints at the same time as their admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant, Mr Barış İnan, is a Turkish national who was born in 1973 and is currently detained in the Kandıra F-type prison, in Kocaeli.
On 8 September 1998 the applicant was arrested during a police operation conducted against the MLKP (the Marxist-Leninist Communist Party). On 14 September 1998 a single judge at the  ordered the applicant's pre-trial detention.
On 18 September 1998 the public prosecutor at the Istanbul State Security Court lodged a bill of indictment, charging the applicant with attempting to undermine the constitutional order, an offence proscribed by Article 146 § 1 of the former Criminal Code.
On 4 December 1998 the  held the first hearing on the merits of the case (no. 1998/259).
According to the information in the case file last submitted by the parties, the criminal proceedings against the applicant are still pending at first instance, which is now the , and the applicant is still detained on remand. During the proceedings, the first-instance courts examined the applicant's continued detention at the end of every hearing, either on their own motion or upon the applicant's request. On each occasion the courts ordered the applicant's continued remand in custody, given the content of the file and the state of evidence.
The applicant, Mrs Muhabbet Kurt, is a Turkish national who was born in 1978 and is currently detained in the Gebze prison, in Kocaeli.
On 8 September 1998 the applicant was arrested during a police operation conducted against the MLKP (Marxist-Leninist Communist Party). During her detention in police custody, the applicant was allegedly subjected to ill-treatment. In particular, she claimed to have been raped by police officers.
On 14 September 1998 the applicant, along with eleven other persons, was examined by a doctor at the  branch of the Forensic Medicine Institute who noted that none of them had sustained any injuries.
On the same day the applicant made statements to the public prosecutor at the  and stated that she had been tortured while in police custody. The applicant was subsequently brought before a single judge at the  who ordered her pre-trial detention.
On 18 September 1998 the public prosecutor at the Istanbul State Security Court lodged a bill of indictment, charging the applicant with attempting to undermine the constitutional order, an offence proscribed by Article 146 § 1 of the former Criminal Code.
On 4 December 1998 the  held the first hearing on the merits of the case (no. 1998/259).
During the hearing on 8 December 1999, the applicant alleged before the first-instance court that she had been raped while in police custody. At the end of the hearing, the  requested the public prosecutor's office to initiate an investigation into this allegation.
On 20 December 1999 the public prosecutor's office at the  issued a decision based on a lack of jurisdiction and passed the investigation to the Fatih public prosecutor's office.
On 3 July 2000 the Fatih public prosecutor issued a decision not to prosecute anyone in relation to the applicant's allegations, holding that there was insufficient evidence to bring criminal proceedings. The public prosecutor noted that the applicant did not apply to the national authorities at the end of her detention in police custody until 8 December 1999. He further noted that the medical reports issued at the end of her police custody period did not indicate any sign of violence on her person.
By Law no. 5190 of 16 June 2004, published in the Official Gazette on 30 June 2004, State Security Courts were abolished. The case against the applicant and her co-accused was transferred to the .
During the hearings of 4 July and 24 October 2007, the applicant and her representatives primarily challenged the reliability and admissibility in evidence of the statements taken from her in police custody under duress. In particular, the applicant repeated her allegations of rape and requested the court to order the public prosecutor's office to investigate her allegations of illtreatment. The assize court heard four witnesses on behalf of the applicant who testified that, at the end of her detention in police custody in 1998, the applicant had claimed to have been raped and that she had been depressed. On both occasions, noting that there had already been an investigation into the applicant's allegations of ill-treatment, the trial court rejected the applicant's requests.
According to the information in the case file last submitted by the parties, the criminal proceedings against the applicant are still pending before the  and the applicant is still detained on remand. During the proceedings, the first-instance courts examined the applicant's continued detention at the end of every hearing, either on their own motion or upon the applicant's request. The courts ordered the applicant's continued remand in custody, given the content of the file and the state of evidence on each occasion. On one occasion, the applicant filed an objection against the first-instance court's remand decision, which was subsequently dismissed by another assize court on 23 August 2006.
The applicant, Mr Azimet Ceyhan, is a Turkish national who was born in 1970 and is currently detained in the Kandıra F-type prison, in Kocaeli.
On an unspecified date in 2000 criminal proceedings were brought against the applicant before the  on the charge of attempting to undermine the constitutional order, an offence proscribed by Article 146 of the former Criminal Code. The  ordered the applicant's pre-trial detention.
Subsequently, the case against the applicant (no. 2000/30) was joined to case no. 1998/259 pending before the .
On 21 February 2000 the applicant was arrested and brought before a single judge at the , who ordered the applicant's detention pending trial.
According to the information in the case file last submitted by the parties, the criminal proceedings against the applicant are still pending at first instance, which is now the Fourteenth Chamber of the , and the applicant is still detained despite his numerous requests for release. During the proceedings, the first-instance courts examined the applicant's continued detention at the end of every hearing, either on their own motion or upon the applicant's request. The courts ordered the applicant's continued remand in custody, given the content of the file and the state of evidence on each occasion.
A description of the domestic law at the relevant time may be found in Barış v. Turkey, (no. 26170/03, § 14, 31 March 2009) and Çobanoğlu and Budak v. Turkey (no. 45977/99, §§ 29-30, 30 January 2007).