The case originated in four applications (nos. 12266/07, 40059/07, 36038/09 and 47155/09) against the Czech Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Pekárny a cukrárny Klatovy a.s. (“the applicant company”) on 16 March 2007, 5 September 2007, 25 June 2009, and 28 August 2009 respectively.
The applicant company was represented by Mr J. Skácel and Mr P. Zima, lawyers practising in . The Czech Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V. A. Schorm, and Deputy Agent, Mr J. Kmec, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant company alleged, in particular, violations of its right to property under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention and to a fair trial under Article 6 of the Convention.
On 30 August 2010 the President of the Fifth Section decided to give notice of the applications to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the applications at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
On 11 July 2005 company P. instituted proceedings against Mr Karel Blažek claiming to be the true owner of shares held by him constituting a ninety percent share of the applicant company. Mr Karel Blažek is the chair of the board of directors of the applicant company and signed the powers of attorney accompanying the present applications. These proceedings (“share surrender proceedings”) are pending.
During these proceedings company P. asked the courts to order interim measures to prohibit the applicant company from holding scheduled general meetings. It argued that a general meeting would have irreversible negative effects on its rights, such as the payout of the company’s dividends amounting to approximately 40,000,000 Czech korunas (CZK) (approximately 1,667,000 euros (EUR)), and control being gained over the company through personnel changes in the board of directors. Such effects should be seen in the context of the existing situation where the ownership or holding of shares and the attached entitlement to exercise voting rights was controversial, or, rather, where a person other than the owner had the majority of shares at his unauthorised disposal.
The applicant company runs a bakery business in several cities in south-west . Between 2006 and 2009 it generated annual profits of between CZK 19,000,000 and 34,000,000 (EUR 790,000 and 1,420,000).
On 1 November 2005 the Prague Municipal Court (městský soud) granted an interim measure and, without any reasoning, prohibited the applicant company from convening its general meeting scheduled for 9 November 2005. On 20 December 2006 and 21 February 2007 respectively, it ordered the same interim measures regarding general meetings scheduled for 15 January 2007 and 5 March 2007, respectively. Only the last decision was reasoned: the court stated that the aim of the interim measure was to preclude the adoption of fundamental decisions concerning the applicant company without the claimant, who claimed to be a majority shareholder, being able to influence those decisions.
The applicant company appealed against the original interim measure arguing that it was not a party to the main proceedings but that the court had nevertheless imposed obligations on it which had a negative effect on its business, that it had learnt about the interim measure only after it had been ordered, and that the decision had lacked any reasoning.
On 10 May 2006 the Prague High Court (vrchní soud) upheld the interim measure. It held that according to the law, decisions on interim measures did not need to be reasoned if the defendant had not raised any arguments against it, as in the present case. It further held that all the legal conditions for ordering the measure had been satisfied. Lastly, it opined that the law allowed for an interim measure to impose obligations on third parties under exceptional circumstances. This condition, the court held, had been satisfied in the present case, because the defendant controlled the applicant company and the general meeting could have had serious negative and irreversible effects on the claimant’s rights.
On 19 September 2006 the  (Ústavní soud) dismissed the applicant company’s constitutional appeal holding that constitutional appeals against interim measures were not allowed.
On 16 June 2006 the Municipal Court, upon company P.’s request, granted another interim measure prohibiting the applicant company from convening another general meeting scheduled for 30 June 2006. It held that all the legal requirements for ordering the interim measure had been satisfied, including the existence of a danger of serious harm to the claimant’s interests.
On 27 July 2006 the High Court, upon the applicant company’s appeal in which it argued that the interim measure would be detrimental to its business and that the legal conditions for ordering it had not been met, upheld the decision of the Municipal Court noting that the applicant company was not being hindered in the ordinary day-to-day running of its business and that had the proposed agenda of the general meeting contained only issues not able to negatively affect company P.’s rights, such as only approving statements reports, there would have been no need to order the interim measure.
On 27 March 2007 the  dismissed the applicant company’s constitutional appeal holding that that remedy was not allowed against interim measures.
On 19 January 2009 the Municipal Court granted a new interim measure and prohibited, without any reasoning, the applicant company from convening the general meeting scheduled for 30 January 2009.
On an unspecified date before 30 January 2009, the applicant company appealed, arguing that it was not a party to the main proceedings but the court had nevertheless imposed obligations on it which had a negative effect on its business, that the decision on the interim measure had not been reasoned and that the legal conditions for ordering the interim measure had not been met.
On 5 February 2009 the High Court dismissed the applicant company’s appeal as inadmissible under Article 218 of the Code of Civil Procedure holding that since the interim measure had already lost effect (because it prohibited a meeting scheduled for 30 January 2009), any review of the measure would be immaterial. The court added that even assuming that the appeal had been admissible it would have upheld the decision of the Municipal Court.
The applicant company lodged a constitutional appeal, which remains undecided.
On 10 March 2009 the Municipal Court granted another interim measure prohibiting the applicant company from convening two general meetings scheduled for 13 and 16 March 2009. The decision was not reasoned. On 5 May 2009 it further prohibited the company from convening general meetings scheduled for 11 and 18 May 2009. This decision was not reasoned either.
On 16 July 2009 the High Court dismissed the applicant company’s appeals as inadmissible under Article 218 of the Code of Civil Procedure. It held that since the interim measures had already lost effect as they prohibited meetings in the past, their review would be immaterial.
The applicant company’s constitutional appeal is pending before the .
It seems that the applicant company held several general meetings despite the interim measures prohibiting them. Subsequently, company P. instituted proceedings seeking the nullity of all decisions adopted at these meetings.
In one of these proceedings, on 20 December 2006, the  (krajský soud) held that all decisions adopted at the general meeting of 9 November 2005 were null and void. The decision was upheld on appeal.
However, on 24 August 2010 the Supreme Court quashed these decisions holding that the meeting of shareholders on 9 November 2005 could not be considered as a general meeting, the holding of which had been prohibited by the court order. Consequently, it was not possible to pronounce its decisions null and void because anything adopted at that meeting could not have been legally considered as a decision of a general meeting. It also agreed with the High Court that it could not review the interim measures in these proceedings.
Under Article 102 a court may impose an interim measure during ongoing proceedings if it is necessary to regulate the situation of the parties, or if there is a concern that the enforcement of the judgment would be threatened.
Article 76 § 2 provides that a court may impose, by means of an interim measure, an obligation upon a person who is not a party to the proceedings only if it can be reasonably required from that person.
Pursuant to Article 77a, if an interim measure was terminated or was quashed for any other reason than following a decision on the merits in favour of the claimant or that the claimant’s right has been satisfied, the claimant is obliged to compensate any damage or other harm sustained by a person as a result of the interim measure.
Under Article 169 § 2, the written rendering of the decision to fully grant a request against which nobody has protested or which concerns the conduct of the proceedings, or of certain decisions on the court’s jurisdiction, need not contain reasoning.
Pursuant to Article 218 an appellate court must dismiss an appeal as inadmissible if it has been lodged by a person not entitled to do so or if it has been lodged against a decision which is not subject to appeal.
Article 125 § 1 provides that the general meeting of a company’s shareholders is the highest body of the company. Its powers include:
(a) approval of transactions made in the name of the company under Article 64 prior to its incorporation;
(b) approval of the company’s ordinary, extraordinary and consolidated financial statements and, in the instances stipulated by law, interim financial statements, distribution of its profit and settlement of any loss;
(c) approval of the articles of association statutes and changes to them;
(d) decision making on any change to the content of the deed of association, unless such change is based on another legal fact (Article 141);
(e) decision making on raising or lowering the share capital;
(f) appointment, dismissal and remuneration of the company’s executive officers;
(g) appointment, dismissal and remuneration of the members of the supervisory board;
(h) forced transfer of shares of a member of the company in accordance with Articles 113 and 121;
(i) appointment, dismissal and remuneration of a liquidator, and decision making on whether to wind up the company, if the deed of association so permits;
(j) approval of contracts mentioned in Article 67a;
(k) decision making on mergers, transfer of business assets to a sole member, division, or conversion of legal form;
(l) approval of controlling agreements (Article 190b), contracts on profit transfers (Article 190a) and contracts with silent partners, and amendments to them;
(m) approval of contracts on performance of an office (Article 66 § 2);
(n) approval of financial assistance under Article 120a;
(o) any other matters entrusted to the general meeting by law or the deed of association.
Under Article 156 § 7 bearer shares (akcie na majitele) are fully negotiable without limitations. The rights attached to bearer shares in certificated form shall be exercised by the person who presents such shares or by the person who demonstrates, by way of furnishing a written statement by the person who performs custody or deposit under a separate legal regulation, that the shares are deposited for him under a separate legal regulation.