The case originated in an application (no. 71891/01) against the Republic of Poland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four Polish nationals, Stefania Hałka (“the first applicant”) and her three daughters Małgorzata Rudecka (“the second applicant”), Anna Rusak (“the third applicant”), Wiesława Hałka-Bogdańska (“the fourth applicant”) (“the applicants”), on 15 March 2000.
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr K. Drzewicki, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The applicants were, exceptionally, granted leave to be represented by the fourth applicant (Rule 36 § 4 of the Rules of Court). The latter was also granted leave to use the Polish language in the proceedings before the Court (Rule 34 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The applicants alleged, in particular, that their right to a “hearing within a reasonable time” had not been respected.
The application was allocated to the Fourth Section of the Court. Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1 of the Rules of Court. On 23 October 2001 the Fourth Section decided to communicate the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility. It also gave priority to the application, pursuant to Rule 41 of the Rules of Court.
On 1 November 2001 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). This case was assigned to the newly composed Fourth Section (Rule 52 § 1).
The first and the second applicant were born in 1927 and 1950 respectively. The third and the fourth applicant were born in 1954. The first applicant lives in Józefów and her three daughters in Warsaw, Poland.
From 1939 to 1944, Jan Hałka, the first applicant's husband, was a member of the Polish resistance troops of the underground Home Army (Armia Krajowa). In 1944 he was arrested by the NKVD and the Polish political police and imprisoned in a labour camp in Siberia. He was kept in Borowice (former USSR) from November 1944 to February 1946. He died on 17 November 1986.
On 8 December 1994 the applicants filed an application with the Warsaw Regional Court for compensation under section 8 § 2(a) of the Law of 23 February 1991 on annulment of convictions whereby persons were persecuted for their activities aimed at achieving independence for Poland (Ustawa o uznaniu za nieważne orzeczeń wydanych wobec osób represjonowanych za działalność na rzecz niepodległego buty Państwa Polskiego)  (“the 1991 Act”).
In 1996 the first applicant personally went to the court and asked a judge to fix a date for a hearing as soon as possible. She submitted that she was an elderly person and that the court should therefore give priority to her case.
In 1998 she again went in person to the Warsaw Regional Court and asked the judge to set a date for a hearing as soon as possible.
On 11 May 2000 she sent a letter to the court, asking for a hearing date to be set and for information on the proceedings. She maintained that her previous applications for the proceedings to be accelerated had been to no avail and that the period of total inactivity on the part of that court had exceeded five years.
On 1 October 2000 she complained to the Minister of Justice about the lack of progress in the proceedings.
On 4 December 2000 the Warsaw Regional Court held a hearing in the applicants' case. On the same date the court gave judgment and awarded the first applicant and her three daughters compensation in the amount of 8,075 Polish zlotys (PLN) each. Since no party appealed within the statutory time-limit of seven days, the first-instance decision became final on 12 December 2000.
On 19 March 2002 the Warsaw Regional Court informed the first and the third applicant that they could collect the sums awarded from the Financial Department of the Warsaw Regional Court on 25 March 2002. They did so. It appears from the material produced by the applicants that the second and the fourth applicant have not yet received their share of the compensation awarded.
The Law of 23 February 1991 on annulment of convictions whereby persons were persecuted for their activities aimed at achieving independence for Poland sets out rules concerning the conditions under which certain politically-motivated convictions rendered between 1  January 1944 and 31 December 1956 can be declared null and void, and provides for the State's civil liability for such convictions.
According to section 8 § 1 of the Law, a victim of repression is entitled to compensation from the State Treasury for his or her wrongful conviction. This provision states:
“A person whose conviction has been declared null and void shall be entitled to compensation from the State Treasury for pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage which he has suffered as a consequence of his conviction. Where the person concerned has since died, this entitlement shall be vested in his spouse, children and parents.”
On 21 May 1993 the Law was amended to the effect that its provisions became applicable to persons who had been persecuted or convicted for political reasons by the Stalinist Soviet authorities. At the material time, the relevant part of  Section 8 § 2(a) provided, in so far as relevant:
“Entitlement to compensation referred in paragraph 1 shall also be conferred on persons ... who have been persecuted by Soviet judicial, prosecuting or extra-judicial authorities; acting by virtue of an agreement concluded on 26 July 1944 between the Polish Committee of National Liberation (“PKWN” Polski Komitet Wyzwolenia Narodowego) and the government of the USSR; in relation to activities undertaken by them with the aim of achieving independence for Poland, or if the persecution in question happened on the ground that they had undertaken such activity. Applications for compensation for pecuniary or non-pecuniary damage should be lodged with the Warsaw Regional Court ....”
Later, on 3 February 1995, the 1991 Act was again amended, this time to the effect that all regional courts could deal with applications lodged by such persons. The second amendment took effect on 1 April 1995.
Lastly, the 1991 Act was amended on 16 July 1998. The third amendment took effect on 14  August  1998.