The case originated in an application (no. 14090/10) against the Slovak Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Slovak national, Mr Ján Franek (“the applicant”), on 18 February 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr R. Slamka, a lawyer practising in Dolný Kubín. The Government of the Slovak Republic (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his right to a fair hearing by a tribunal had been breached in the context of civil proceedings and their subsequent review by the Constitutional Court.
On 17 January 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1964 and lives in Liptovský Mikuláš.
The applicant is an enforcement officer. In the context of enforcement proceedings, he seized movable property of a company with a view to having it sold. Subsequently bankruptcy (insolvency) proceedings were brought against the debtor. The administrator in bankruptcy asked the applicant to transfer the property to him in accordance with the required legal procedure in such cases. The applicant stored some of the items at the premises of one of the creditors. The representatives of the latter decided to retain the property until the debtor discharged the debt. They later revoked that decision.
On 21 October 2003 the Liptovský Mikuláš District Court, on an application by the administrator, ordered the applicant to transfer the property to the administrator within fifteen days. It further ordered the applicant to pay his costs amounting to EUR 1,130.
On 14 April 2005 the Žilina Regional Court quashed the judgment. It held that the first-instance court had not duly examined whether the applicant had standing in the case as a defendant, given that the property in question was being retained by a third party.
A hearing was scheduled for 21 March 2006, but on 14 March 2006 the applicant asked the District Court for an adjournment “on account of his incapacity for work”.
On 21 March 2006 the District Court, after taking further evidence, again ordered the applicant to transfer the property to the administrator, with reference to sections 14 and 18 of the Bankruptcy Act 1991. He was further ordered to reimburse the administrator’s costs amounting to EUR 1,964. The District Court held that, under the relevant law, the property had been at the applicant’s disposal. The creditor company where the applicant had stored the property had no obligation towards the bankruptcy administration. In those circumstances, the applicant’s argument, that the creditor had availed itself of its right to retain the property, could not be upheld.
The judgment indicated that the applicant had not submitted any documentary evidence to prove that he had been unable to attend the hearing. The District Court had therefore proceeded with the case in his absence.
The applicant appealed. He indicated, among other things, that he had been bedridden and unable to submit relevant documentary evidence of his sick leave for the period 16 February to 2 May 2006. He enclosed a medical certificate drawn up on 17 February 2006 confirming his inability to work until 2 May 2006 because of an accident.
On 6 September 2007 the Žilina Regional Court upheld the firstinstance judgment. The decision on the claim in issue became final on 10 December 2007.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law. Relying on Article 237(f) of the Code of Civil Procedure, he argued that the first-instance court had not accepted his excuse and had proceeded with the case in his absence. He further argued, among other things, that he had no standing in the case as a defendant, and that the lower courts had applied the law incorrectly and had decided arbitrarily. In particular, the applicant maintained that he could not have been ordered to transfer the movable property to the administrator as it was not in his possession. The decision against the applicant was therefore unenforceable.
In addition, the applicant argued that the administrator also lacked standing to bring the claim, as the law did not entitle him to realise property which one of the creditors had exercised its right to secure a debt by retaining. Since, in the course of the proceedings, the company which had been storing the property had indicated that it no longer wished to exercise that right, the courts should have discontinued the proceedings, as nothing had prevented the administrator from recovering the property.
The Supreme Court rejected the appeal on points of law on 7 April 2009. It noted that on 14 March 2006 the applicant had sent a written excuse and a request for the District Court hearing on 21 March 2006 to be adjourned. However, he had not submitted any documentary evidence to that court in support of his argument that ill-health had prevented him from attending the hearing. In those circumstances, the District Court had been entitled to proceed with the case, and it had not prevented the applicant from asserting his rights in the proceedings within the meaning of Article 237(f) of the Code of Civil Procedure.
With reference to its case-law, the Supreme Court further held that the alleged lack of standing of both the applicant and the administrator was not a relevant reason for an appeal on points of law within the meaning of Article 237(b) of the Code of Civil Procedure. That provision extended exclusively to situations where a person lacked legal capacity. That was not the situation in the applicant’s case.
As a result, the applicant’s appeal on points of law was declared inadmissible, and the Supreme Court could not deal with his arguments as to the alleged errors of fact and law by courts at a lower level of jurisdiction.
On 12 June 2009 the applicant submitted a constitutional complaint. He alleged a breach of Article 6 of the Convention in the proceedings leading to the above decisions being taken by the three levels of ordinary court. In particular, the applicant alleged that (i) the firstinstance and appellate courts had committed errors of fact and law when determining the merits and had decided in an arbitrary manner, (ii) he had had no standing in the case as a defendant, and (iii) the District Court had proceeded with the case in his absence. As to the last-mentioned complaint, he submitted that he had been immobilised because of a broken leg and had therefore been unable to attend the hearing or to enclose a medical certificate in support of his request for its adjournment.
The Constitutional Court dismissed the complaint on 17 September 2009. It held that the complaint had been lodged outside the statutory timelimit of two months in so far as it concerned the first-instance and appellate courts’ decisions, which had become final on 10 December 2007. As the Supreme Court had declared the applicant’s appeal on points of law inadmissible, and since the Constitutional Court found no reason to disagree with that conclusion, the applicant’s use of that remedy could not affect the running of the above time-limit in respect of the judgments of the District Court and the Regional Court.
The Constitutional Court further carried out a detailed examination of the reasons for the Supreme Court’s decision, and concluded that it was neither arbitrary nor otherwise contrary to the applicant’s right to a fair hearing.
Article 101 § 1 provides that parties are obliged to assist the court in achieving the purpose of the proceedings by, inter alia, complying with the court’s instructions. Article 101 § 2 entitles the court to proceed with a case even when the parties remain inactive. When a party to the proceedings fails to appear at a hearing despite the fact that he or she has been duly summoned, and when such a party requests that the hearing be adjourned without a legitimate excuse, the court may proceed with the case in the absence of that party, having regard to the contents of the file and the evidence which has already been taken.
Article 237(b) allows for an appeal on points of law to be lodged on the grounds that a person acting as a party to proceedings lacked capacity to do so.
Under Article 237(f), an appeal on points of law against an appellate court judgment is available when a court, by its conduct, prevented a party from having access to it.
Further statutory rules concerning appeals on points of law are summarised in the Court’s judgment in the case of Ringier Axel Springer Slovakia, v. Slovakia (no. 41262/05, §§ 61-68, 26 July 2011).
The Supreme Court has acknowledged as contrary to Article 237(f) the courts’ practice of proceeding with a case despite a party’s timely request for the adjournment of a hearing, where such a request is based on the party’s medically certified inability to work (Collection of Judicial Decisions and Opinions, R 31/1995).
Under section 53(1) of the Constitutional Court Act 1993, a complaint to the Constitutional Court is admissible only where the claimant has exhausted the effective remedies provided for by law to protect his or her fundamental rights. Section 53(3) provides that a complaint to the Constitutional Court can be lodged within two months of a decision taking final effect, or from the date of a contested measure or notification of another interference with a person’s rights.
As a rule, the Constitutional Court has required, with reference to the principle of subsidiarity, that a party should lodge an appeal on points of law where the alleged breach of his or her rights is of such a nature that an appeal on points of law is available under the relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure.
In a number of earlier cases, the Constitutional Court’s assessment of admissibility of a complaint depended on the nature of the decision which the Supreme Court had given on a party’s appeal on points of law.
Thus, where the Supreme Court rejected an appeal on points of law as inadmissible, the Constitutional Court refused to take that decision into account when determining the compliance with the two-month timelimit in respect of an alleged breach of a claimant’s rights at first instance or before the appellate court (see, for further details, Stavebná spoločnosť TATRY Poprad, s.r.o. v. Slovakia, no. 7261/06, § 44, 3 May 2011, and Zborovský v. Slovakia, no. 14325/08, §§ 24-26, 23 October 2012).
At a later point the Constitutional Court modified its practice with reference to judgments which the Court had delivered on several cases against the Czech Republic giving rise to a similar issue (see Zvolský and Zvolská v. the Czech Republic, no. 46129/99, ECHR 2002IX; Bulena v. the Czech Republic, no. 57567/00, 20 April 2004; and Soffer v. the Czech Republic, no. 31419/04, 8 November 2007).
Thus, from 2009 it held in a number of cases that, where a party simultaneously lodges an appeal on points of law and a constitutional complaint, the principle of subsidiarity prevented the Constitutional Court from dealing with the case pending the determination of the former remedy. In such cases, the Constitutional Court rejected the claimants’ complaints in respect of the first and second-instance decisions as premature. It emphasised that the statutory two-month time-limit would be respected in respect of those decisions if the Supreme Court ultimately declared the appeal on points of law inadmissible and the unsuccessful party submitted a fresh constitutional complaint (decision nos. I. ÚS 169/09; I. ÚS 237/09; III. ÚS 462/2011; I. ÚS 312/2011; and II. ÚS 65/2012).
At the same time, in a number of cases decided in 2010 and later (for example decision nos. IV. ÚS 245/2010; II. ÚS 324/2010; IV. ÚS 406/2011; III. ÚS 237/2011; IV. ÚS 468/2011; III. ÚS 87/2012; and III. ÚS 316/2012) the claimants had lodged their constitutional complaints against judicial decisions of the appellate court and court of appeal on points of law within two months of the delivery of the Supreme Court’s decision declaring their appeal on points of law inadmissible. The Constitutional Court examined the merits of their complaints under Article 6 of the Convention in respect of the proceedings leading to the decisions of the appellate court and the Supreme Court in its capacity as the court of appeal on points of law. It held, in particular, that in such cases a constitutional complaint was admissible only after the Supreme Court’s decision on the appeal on points of law, while the time-limit in respect of both the Supreme Court’s and appellate court’s decisions started running from the service of the former. The above-mentioned decisions indicate that such an approach has corresponded to the current practice of the Constitutional Court.
The following provisions of the Bankruptcy Act 1991 (Act No. 328/1991 Coll.) are relevant in the present case.
Pursuant to section 14(1)(a), upon the declaration of bankruptcy all rights related to the assets of the bankrupt pass over to the administrator. At the same time, any pending judicial, enforcement or other proceedings are stayed to the extent that they concern the assets of the bankrupt or claims which are to be satisfied from those assets (section 14(1)(d)).
Section 18(2) obliges all those who have at their disposal property belonging to the assets of a bankrupt to inform the administrator as soon as they learn of the declaration of bankruptcy. They are further obliged to allow the administrator to include such property in the schedule of assets and to have them valued. Failure to comply renders such parties liable for damages.