.  The case originated in an application (no. 62279/09) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Hamdi Atiman (“the applicant”), on 17 November 2009.
.  The applicant was represented by Mr A. Kiran, a lawyer practising in Van. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
.  On 27 September 2011 the complaint concerning Article 2 of the Convention was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
.  Following the communication of the application, the Government, but not the applicant, filed further written observations (Rule 54 § 2). However, the applicant indicated his wish to pursue his application.
.  The applicant was born in 1974 and lives in Van.
.  According to the incident and the crime scene investigation reports, upon receipt of intelligence that terrorists were hiding in the area, on 24 June 2008 a large group of gendarme officers from the Hakkari Mountain Commando Brigade blocked the road near the village of Armutdüzü in the Yüksekova district. At about 1.30 a.m. the gendarme officers stopped a lorry on suspicion of fuel smuggling. Subsequently, another lorry approached the gendarme officers. The applicant was travelling in this vehicle and it was being driven by his cousin, N.A. The soldiers ordered them to stop, but N.A. continued to drive. According to the report drafted by the gendarme officers, the driver attempted to escape and the gendarme officers fired a warning shot in the air and then fired at the tyres of the lorry to stop it. According to the applicant, they were driving down a steep hill at high speed, and as the brakes had failed, they could not stop. They maintained that they had shouted from the window that the brakes were not working and N.A. had tried to avoid hitting the other lorry, which was parked in the middle of the street, by trying to pass it on the right. He then headed towards the hills, where there was a group of gendarme officers. The gendarme officers opened fire, first in the air and then at the vehicle. The applicant was wounded in the hip and his cousin in the leg during the incident as a result of ricochet bullets.
.  The crime scene investigation report revealed that there were no bullet holes on the left side or the back of the lorry. Three of the tyres were flat, namely the two front tyres and the rear right tyre. Eight bullet holes were observed on the right wing over the tyres, three bullet holes in the petrol tank, a bullet entry and exit hole on the front right door, and another bullet hole on the right wheel rim. The gendarme officers further collected a total of nine bullet cases from the scene of the incident.
.  On the same day, a major from the District Gendarmerie wrote to the Yüksekova Public Prosecutor and requested authorisation to search the two vehicles which had been stopped by the gendarmes. Upon receipt of authorisation, the gendarme officers searched the two lorries. They found sixtysix barrels of smuggled fuel in the first lorry and forty-five barrels in the applicant’s cousin’s lorry. No other illegal items were found in the vehicles. The applicant’s cousin, N.A., declined to sign the search report.
.  Also on the same day, two gendarme officers tested the lorry belonging to the applicant’s cousin in the presence of the village mayor. They reported that the vehicle had three flat tyres, that there were four bullet holes in the petrol tank, that the engine was working correctly and that the brake system was intact.
.  Subsequently, on the same day, the applicant’s cousin gave a statement to the Yüksekova Public Prosecutor and stated that the applicant had been taken to Van Hospital. He requested that criminal proceedings be initiated against the gendarme officers who had used force against them. He emphasised that when he had been told to stop he had been driving down a steep hill at high speed, and when he could not stop, he had shouted from the window that the brakes were not working. He had had no intention of escaping from the gendarmes. He further denied that he had been transporting smuggled fuel and maintained that the barrels found by the gendarmes must have been from the other vehicle.
.  The public prosecutor also took statements from two eyewitnesses to the incident. These two individuals had also been in the lorry which had been stopped by the gendarmes on suspicion of fuel smuggling. According to their statements, while they were being questioned by the gendarme officers about the barrels found in their lorry, they saw another vehicle approaching. The gendarmes ordered the driver to stop but the driver failed to obey, shouting from the window that the brakes had failed. The driver then tried to pass their vehicle, which was blocking the road, on the right. The gendarmes opened fire, first into the air and then at the tyres. Both witnesses stated that the driver had no intention of escaping and was shouting that he was unable to stop.
.  On 15 December 2008, the applicant’s cousin, N.A., gave a statement to the Hakkari Public Prosecutor. He explained that on the day of the incident, while he was driving down a steep hill, the gendarme officers ordered him to stop. He called out that he would stop, but the gendarmes opened fire and he was shot in the leg. He was able to stop the vehicle by using the handbrake. He stated that he had had no intention or reason to escape.
.  On 20 February 2009 a statement was taken from the applicant at Iskele police station. He explained that on the day of the incident he had been travelling in his cousin’s lorry. His cousin had told him that there was a problem with the brake system of the vehicle. When they approached the checkpoint, a gendarme officer ordered them to stop, and they shouted out that there was a problem with the brakes and that they were not able to stop. The gendarme thought that they were trying to escape and fired a shot in the air and then started shooting at them. The applicant was shot in the hip. He concluded that the gendarme who had shot at them was not at fault, as he must have thought that they were trying to escape.
. On 22 July 2008 statements were taken from the accused gendarme officers by a sergeant from the Yeniköprü Gendarme Command. They all stated that they had ordered the driver of the lorry to stop on suspicion of fuel smuggling. The driver initially stopped the vehicle. When the officers asked about the load of the lorry, he started driving away in an attempt to escape. The officers explained that they first fired warning shots in the air and then shot at the tyres to stop the lorry. They considered that the force they had used had been proportionate as they had only used their guns, whereas they were also equipped with heavy machine guns and hand grenades.
.  Based on the evidence in the file, on 26 April 2009 the Yüsekova Public Prosecutor delivered a decision not to prosecute. He concluded that the use of force had been legal pursuant to Article 11 of Law no. 2803 on the establishment, duties and jurisdiction of the gendarmerie and section 39 (i) of the Regulation on the Duties and Powers of the Gendarmerie. He found it established that the driver of the vehicle in which the applicant was travelling had disobeyed the order to stop and had continued driving. He further pointed out that the lorry had not stopped and that the officers had first fired warning shots in the air and had then shot at the tyres of the lorry.
.  On 4 June 2009 the Van Assize Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal, finding the decision of the Yüksekova Public Prosecutor to be in line with domestic law.
.  Article 11 of Law no. 2803 on the Establishment, duties and jurisdiction of the gendarmerie states that gendarme officers have the authority to use firearms in the course of their duties, where necessary.
.  Section 39 of the Regulation on the Duties and Powers of the Gendarmerie provides, in so far as relevant:
“Gendarme officers are entitled to use firearms
(a)  in cases of self-defence,
...
(i)  when smugglers disobey an order to stop and disregard a warning shot in the air.”
.  A description of the relevant domestic law may be found in Halis Akın v. Turkey (no. 30304/02, §§ 15-17, 13 January 2009).
.  The United Nations Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials were adopted on 7 September 1990 by the Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders.
.  Paragraph 9 provides:
“Law enforcement officials shall not use firearms against persons except in self-defence or defence of others against the imminent threat of death or serious injury, to prevent the perpetration of a particularly serious crime involving grave threat to life, to arrest a person presenting such a danger and resisting their authority, or to prevent his or her escape, and only when less extreme means are insufficient to achieve these objectives. In any event, intentional lethal use of firearms may only be made when strictly unavoidable in order to protect life.”
.  According to other provisions of the Principles, law enforcement officials must “act in proportion to the seriousness of the offence and the legitimate objective to be achieved”. Also, Governments must “ensure that arbitrary or abusive use of force and firearms by law enforcement officials is punished as a criminal offence under their law” (paragraph 7). National rules and regulations on the use of firearms should “ensure that firearms are used only in appropriate circumstances and in a manner likely to decrease the risk of unnecessary harm”.
.  Paragraph 23 of the Principles states that victims or their families should have access to an independent process, “including a judicial process”. Further, paragraph 24 provides:
“Governments and law enforcement agencies shall ensure that superior officers are held responsible if they know, or should have known, that law enforcement officials under their command are resorting, or have resorted, to the unlawful use of force and firearms, and they did not take all measures in their power to prevent, suppress or report such use.”