The case originated in an application (no. 12504/09) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Mr Ivan Hristov Yonchev (“the applicant”), on 8 January 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Kashamov and Mr K. Terziyski, lawyers practising in Sofia. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Dimova of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant, a former police officer, alleged that he had been unjustifiably refused access to personal data held by the Ministry of the Interior containing, among others, two psychological assessments.
On 2 June 2016 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Sofia.
The applicant was employed as a police officer in 1977. After having participated in several international missions, in 2001 he applied for a position as police observer in a new mission. This necessitated an assessment of his psychological suitability, which he underwent at the Ministry of the Interior’s Psychology Institute (hereinafter “the Institute”) on 1 September 2001.
The result of the assessment was negative and the applicant was not included in the contingent to be sent to the international mission.
The applicant complained of the negative result of his psychological assessment to the head of the Institute, but was informed, in a letter dated 1 February 2002, that a check-up had shown that the assessment had been objective and correct. In an explanatory note sent to the head of the Institute in relation to that check-up the psychologist who had carried out the assessment explained that during his interview with the applicant he had informed the latter of the results of the assessment in a “clement manner”, and that the applicant had been able to pose questions and to comment.
After the negative outcome of the assessment, on 1 March 2002 the applicant retired from service. The parties have not specified whether he would have been able to continue working for the Ministry of the Interior at a different position.
Despite having formally retired, after the expiry of the statutory time-limit of one year the applicant was allowed to undergo a fresh psychological assessment at the Institute, in relation to the preparation of a new international police mission. The new psychological assessment was conducted on 11 October 2002, and the Institute psychologists concluded once again that the applicant was psychologically unfit for the job. Thus, the applicant’s application to join the new mission was rejected.
The applicant complained of this outcome to the Minister of the Interior and other bodies, such as the parliamentary commission on internal security and public order and the President of the Republic. The human resources department of the Ministry of the Interior informed him, in a letter dated 29 January 2003, that the refusals to include him in the international contingents had been lawful.
On 12 February 2003 the applicant applied under the Protection of Personal Data Act (see paragraph 22 below) to receive access to the documents contained in his personnel file at the Ministry of the Interior. He argued that the file contained data which could be considered personal for the purposes of this Act, including “appraisals, the results of different tests, data from psychological assessments”.
In the subsequent administrative and judicial proceedings, as described below, the competent national authorities did not refer to any individual documents or a category of documents, but instead referred generally to the information sought by the applicant as “personal data” contained in his personnel file.
An initial refusal to allow him access to the file, signed by the head of the Ministry’s human-resources department and dated 2 April 2003, was quashed on 17 November 2003 by the Sofia City Court, as it had not been ordered by the competent body, namely the Minister of the Interior. This conclusion was upheld on 30 July 2004 by the Supreme Administrative Court.
On 31 January 2005 the Minister of the Interior issued a decision refusing the applicant access to his personnel file. He relied in general terms on the provisions of section 34(3) of the Protection of Personal Data Act and section 182(7) of the Ministry of the Interior Act, as in force at the time (see paragraphs 22 and 25 below).
This refusal was quashed by a three-member panel of the Supreme Administrative Court on 29 July 2005, on the grounds that it had not been reasoned, as it had merely referred to the provisions restricting access to personal data without explaining how they had been relevant to the circumstances of the case and without accounting for the applicant’s own right to access to data concerning him. On 15 August 2006 a five-member panel of the Supreme Administrative Court upheld these findings.
In a new decision dated 17 October 2006, the Minister of the Interior refused the applicant access to his personnel file at the Ministry. The Minister relied once again on section 34(3) of the Protection of Personal Data Act, as well as on section 161 of the Ministry of the Interior Act of 2006 (see paragraphs 22 and 26 below). He explained that personnel files of officers contained information on “the enquiries in respect of a person applying to be employed” at the Ministry and information revealing the Ministry’s “structures, positions and functions”. He noted that the first category of information was classed as an official secret, but at the same time mentioned that, in accordance with an internal instruction of the Ministry, officers’ personnel files had to be considered to contain information which was a State secret. It was explained further that even though personnel files also comprised documents which contained no sensitive information, owing to the presence of some classified documents the files had to be classified in their entirety.
The applicant applied for judicial review. He explained the circumstances in which he had left the Ministry of the Interior and that he had a “particularly strong interest” to get acquainted with his psychological assessments. He stated furthermore that his application for access to his personnel file concerned his “professional identity”. He argued that the Minister of the Interior had not duly taken into account his right to access to information, that there were no legal grounds to consider the information referred to in the decision as classified, and that in any event, seeing that the applicant had left the Ministry in 2002 and that the relevant time-limits for keeping classified documents representing official secrets had expired, any such documents in his file had had in the meantime to be declassified.
In a judgment of 25 March 2008 a three-member panel of the Supreme Administrative Court dismissed the application for judicial review. It held that the Minister’s decision was well reasoned, and that the Minister had correctly considered that the information concerned was classified. It pointed out that even though personnel files of police officers also comprised documents which contained no sensitive information, they had to be classified in their entirety due to the presence of some classified documents.
Upon appeal by the applicant, in a final judgment of 8 July 2008 the judgment above was upheld by a five-member panel of the Supreme Administrative Court. It endorsed the three-member panel’s reasoning, adding that the declassification of documents could only occur after an express decision of the competent official, despite the expiry of the relevant time-limits.
In the proceedings before the Court the Government submitted copies of the applicant’s psychological assessments of September 2001 and October 2002. They bear no security markings.
That Act provides, in its section 26, that each person should have access to personal data concerning him or herself. An exception to that rule is contained in section 34(3), which provides that such access can be entirely or partially denied when provided by another statute and when access would “endanger defence or national security, or the protection of classified information”.
The Commission for the Protection of Personal Data (hereinafter “the Commission”) is an independent State body which, pursuant to section 6 of the Act, is tasked with supervising “the protection of individuals in the process of treatment of their personal data and their access to such data”, and with participating in “the implementation of State policy in the area of data protection”. The Commission has five members who are appointed by Parliament. It is competent to examine individual complaints concerning any breach of the rights conferred upon individuals under the Act and, where finding such a breach, it can issue binding instructions, advice the relevant body to put an end to the breach or impose administrative punishments (section 38(1) and (2) of the Act). Its decisions are amenable to judicial review (section 38(6)).
In addition, anyone whose rights under the Act have been breached can seek directly the judicial review of the respective administrative decision, without being obliged to lodge first a complaint with the Commission (section 39 of the Act).
Under section 182(4) of that Act, in force from 1997 to 2006, every person was entitled to seek access to personal data concerning him or herself held by the Ministry of the Interior. Section 182(7) provided that such access could nevertheless be refused where this would have, in particular, “endanger[ed] national security or public order, the protection of information classified as a State or official secret, the secrecy of sources of information or nonverbal methods and means for its collection”.
Almost identical provisions were contained in section 161 of the new Ministry of the Interior Act, which was in force from 2006 to 2014.
The provisions of the Ministry of the Interior Act 1997 on psychological unfitness for work at the Ministry and the psychological assessments of servicemen have been summarised in the case of Fazliyski v. Bulgaria (no. 40908/05, §§ 29-39, 16 April 2013).
Under the third paragraph of section 1 of this Act, which entered into force in 2002, classified information comprises any information which constitutes a State secret (държавна тайна) or an official secret (служебна тайна), and classified information received from another country.
Section 25 of the Act defines in more detail a State secret as “information set out in Schedule no. 1 [to the Act], the unregulated access to which could endanger or prejudice the interests of the Republic of Bulgaria and which relates to national security, defence, foreign policy, or the protection of the constitutional order”. Schedule no. 1 to the Act sets out a list of categories of information which are liable to be classified as being a State secret. In addition, section 26(1) of the Act defines an official secret as “information created or stored by the State or local government authorities, which is not a State secret, but the unregulated access to which could have a negative impact on the interests of the State or on another legally protected interest”.
Pursuant to section 30(1) and (2) of the Act, classified information is to be marked as such and the security markings should in particular mention the level of security. The official authorised to sign documents containing sensitive information is obliged to re-examine the justifiability and validity of the respective markings at least once every two years (section 35(4) of the Act). A set in which some of the documents are classified is to be considered classified in its entirety (section 30(3) of the Act and section 44 of the Regulations for its Implementation).
Section 34(1) of the Act lays down timelimits for protecting classified information. They vary from thirty years for information marked as “highly secret” to six months (until 2007 – two years) for information graded as official secret. These timelimits may be extended only once.