The case originated in two applications (nos. 18475/06 and 22444/06) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Azerbaijani nationals, Mr Ali Amirhuseyn oglu Kerimli (Əli Əmirhüseyn oğlu Kərimli – “the first applicant”) and Mr Gulamhuseyn Surkhan oglu Alibeyli (Qulamhüseyn Surxan oğlu Əlibəyli – “the second applicant”), on 28 April and 19 May 2006 respectively.
The applicants were represented by Mr I. Aliyev, a lawyer practising in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Asgarov.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the invalidation by the Constitutional Court of the parliamentary elections in their respective electoral constituencies had infringed their electoral rights under Article 3 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 3 September 2008 (application no. 22444/06) and 21 October 2008 (application no. 18475/06) the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the applications to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the applications at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
Both applicants live in . They are well-known opposition politicians. The first applicant served as a member of parliament until the elections of 2005. Both applicants stood for the elections to the National Assembly (Milli Majlis) of 6 November 2005 as candidates of the opposition bloc Azadliq.
The first applicant was registered as a candidate by the Constituency Electoral Commission (“the ConEC”) for the singlemandate Surakhany Second Electoral Constituency no. 31. There were a total of twenty-eight polling stations in the constituency.
On 7 November 2005 representatives of the Azadliq bloc applied to the Central Election Commission (“the CEC”) with several complaints claiming that, during election day, there had been numerous violations of the electoral law to the advantage of the pro-governmental candidate, and requesting that the election results for the entire constituency be invalidated.
On 8 November 2006 the CEC invalidated the election results in ten polling stations of Surakhany Second Election Constituency no. 31 owing to infringements of electoral law in those polling stations. The CEC did not invalidate the election results for the entire constituency.
Subsequently, the CEC published, on its official website, the preliminary results of the elections in Surakhany Second Election Constituency no. 31 based on the results of the vote in the eighteen remaining polling stations, naming the applicant as the winner with 3,549 votes in total, his closest contender having obtained 3,515 votes.
The second applicant ran for election in the singlemandate Jalilabad-Masalli-Bilesuvar Electoral Constituency no. 69.
After an official tabulation of election results by the ConEC on 6 November, the ConEC drew up an official record of election results (səsvermənin nəticələrinə dair protokol) which stated that the applicant had received a total of 4,264 votes in the constituency. His closest contender had received 3,575 votes. The ConEC record named the applicant as the winner.
The ConEC record of results was submitted to the CEC for approval.
The CEC’s final record of election results (seçkilərin ümumi yekunları haqqında protokol) named the first applicant as the elected candidate in Surakhany Second Electoral Constituency no. 31 and the second applicant as the elected candidate in Jalilabad-Masalli-Bilesuvar Electoral Constituency no. 69.
As for the country-wide results, the CEC invalidated the election results in four electoral constituencies and approved the results in 121 constituencies, including both applicants’ constituencies.
On 23 November 2005 the CEC record of results, together with the ConEC record of results and other documents, was submitted to the  for review and approval.
By a decision of 1 December 2005, the  approved the election results in 115 electoral constituencies only and invalidated the results in the remaining six constituencies. The decision stated, in the relevant part:
“In its letter of 30 November 2005 to the , the Prosecutor General’s Office indicated that it had received, from the [CEC] and relevant [ConECs], a total of 72 applications concerning breaches of the electoral law of an allegedly criminal nature during the elections to the National Assembly. As a result of an examination of these applications, 11 criminal cases have been instituted [against a number of registered candidates and election officials in a number of constituencies, including] chairmen and members of 10 polling station electoral commissions of Surakhany Second Electoral Constituency no. 31 for falsification of electoral documents [and] 4 members of the [ConEC] of Jalilabad-Masalli-Bilesuvar Electoral Constituency no. 69 for abuse of official authority.
Following the examination of the documents submitted by the [CEC], including additional documents requested by the Constitutional Court, as well as the opinion of the commissioned specialists, 115 out of 121 [ConEC] results records [“protokollar”] which formed the basis for the [CEC results record] should be considered to be in accordance with the requirements of the Electoral Code.
As for the remaining 6 (six) constituencies, [including] Surakhany Second Electoral Constituency no. 31 [and] Jalilabad-Masalli-Bilesuvar Electoral Constituency no. 69 ..., the election results in these constituencies should not be approved because the results records of [the ConECs] of these constituencies do not meet the requirements of the Electoral Code. ...
... the Plenum of the  decides:
To approve the election results in [115 listed constituencies].
Not to approve the election results in ... Surakhany Second Electoral Constituency no. 31, Jalilabad-Masalli-Bilesuvar Electoral Constituency no. 69 [and four other constituencies].
This decision shall enter into force at the moment of its delivery. ...”
The  ordered repeat elections on 13 May 2006 for all the constituencies in which the results had been invalidated.
Article 86 provides as follows:
Article 86. Review and approval of results of elections to the National Assembly of the 
“The accuracy of election results shall be reviewed and approved by the Constitutional Court of the  in the manner specified by law.”
After the votes in a polling station have been counted at the end of election day, the Polling Station Electoral Commission (“the PEC”) draws up an official record of election results (in three original copies) documenting the results of the vote in the polling station (Articles 106.1106.6). One copy of the PEC record, together with other relevant documents, is then submitted to the relevant ConEC within twentyfour hours (Article 106.7). The ConEC verifies whether the PEC record complies with the law and whether it contains any inconsistencies (Article 107.1). After submission of all PEC records, the ConEC tabulates, within two days of election day, the results from the different polling stations and draws up a record reflecting the aggregate results of the vote in the constituency (Article 107.2). One copy of the ConEC record of results, together with other relevant documents, is then submitted to the CEC within two days of election day (Article 107.4). The CEC checks whether the ConEC records comply with the law and whether they contain any inconsistencies (Article 108.1) and draws up its own final record reflecting the results of voting in all constituencies (Article 108.2).
If within four days of election day the CEC discovers mistakes, impermissible alterations or inconsistencies in the records of results (including the accompanying documents) submitted by ConECs, the CEC may order a recount of the votes in the relevant electoral constituency (Article 108.4).
Upon review of a request to invalidate the outcome of an election, an electoral commission has a right to hear submissions from citizens and officials and to obtain the necessary documents and materials (Article 112.8).
In the event of the discovery of irregularities aimed at assisting candidates who were not ultimately elected, such irregularities cannot be a basis for the invalidation of the election results (Article 114.5).
The ConEC or CEC may invalidate the election results in an entire single-mandate constituency if election results in two-fifths of polling stations, representing more than one-quarter of the constituency electorate, have been invalidated (Article 170.2.2).
Pursuant to Article 86 of the Constitution, the results of elections are reviewed and approved by the  (Article 171.1). The CEC reviews the relevant ConEC records of results (together with the relevant documents) within a period of up to twenty days of election day, and then forwards them to the  within forty-eight hours (Article 171.2). Within ten days of receipt of these documents, the , with the involvement of relevant specialists (mütəxəssislər), verifies their conformity to the requirements of the Electoral Code. The ten-day examination period may be extended if the process so requires (Article 171.3). If the ConEC records conform to the requirements of the Electoral Code, the  approves the results of the elections. This decision is final (Article 171.4).
Article 42 provides, in the relevant part:
Article 42. Interested Persons in Special Constitutional Proceedings
“42.1. Interested persons in special constitutional proceedings shall be the bodies which have submitted a relevant inquiry or request to the Constitutional Court or bodies or persons whose interests are affected by such inquiries or requests made in connection with the circumstances provided for by Article 86 ... of the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
2. The interested persons may be represented by their legal representatives in the special constitutional proceedings.”
According to Article 43, the parties and interested persons in special constitutional proceedings have the following rights, inter alia: (a) to participate and speak at the sessions of the Constitutional Court; (b) to present evidence and other material; (c) to file motions and proposals concerning the examination of the case; (d) to answer questions; (e) to raise objections against judges; (f) to ask for witnesses and experts to be called upon; and so on.
Article 54 provides, in the relevant part:
Article 54. Particularities of the review and approval of the results of the elections to the National Assembly of the 
“54.1. In accordance with Article 86 of the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan, the  shall review and approve the accuracy of the results of elections to the National Assembly of the . The procedure for review and approval of the accuracy of the results of elections to the National Assembly shall be determined by the Electoral Code of the .
...
5. The Chairman and members of the Central Electoral Commission, as well as other persons summoned by the , may participate at the session of the Plenum of the  concerning the review and approval of the accuracy of the results of elections to the National Assembly of the . ...”