The case originated in an application (no. 60281/11) against Romania and Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Ms E.S. (“the applicant”), on 29 August 2011. The Chamber decided of its own motion to grant the applicant anonymity pursuant to Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was represented by Ms S. Cojusneanu, a lawyer practising in Râmnicu Vâlcea. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The Bulgarian Government were represented by Ms K. Radkova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged a disruption of her family life because of the respondent States’ unsatisfactory response to her daughter being kidnapped in Romania and illegally kept in Bulgaria by her paternal grandparents.
On 4 April 2013 the application was communicated to the two respondent Governments.
The applicant was born in 1981 and lives in Hotarele, Vâlcea County.
On 12 November 2004, in Spain, the applicant gave birth to a girl. The father was R.E.N., a Bulgarian national. In 2008 the couple split up.
The child lived with her parents in Spain until January 2007, when she was sent to her paternal grandparents in Bulgaria. She remained there until March 2008. From March until June 2008 the couple again lived together with their daughter in Spain; then, with the father’s consent, the applicant returned with her daughter to Romania for what was meant to be a short stay with the child’s maternal grandmother. The applicant remained with her daughter in Romania until September 2008 and subsequently returned to Spain to work, leaving the child in Romania with her maternal grandmother.
On 4 November 2008 the child’s paternal grandparents visited the child in Romania. With the maternal grandmother’s consent, they took the child to town for ice-cream, accompanied by her aunt (the wife of the applicant’s brother). They stopped the car on the side of the road, expelled the aunt from the car and then returned to Bulgaria, taking the child with them without the knowledge or consent of the applicant or her family. The child has been living in Bulgaria with her paternal grandparents ever since.
On 29 July 2008 the applicant, represented by counsel, lodged a request for full custody of the child with the Râmnicu Vâlcea District Court (“the District Court”). She initially indicated that R.E.N. was living in Romania with her family. However, during the proceedings the applicant told the court that R.E.N. no longer lived in Romania and that she did not know his whereabouts. As a summons could therefore not be served on him, it was posted at the court’s premises and published in a newspaper. Later on the applicant provided an address in Spain, which turned out to be incomplete.
The court postponed four times the examination of the case, mainly on account of attempts made by the applicant and her lawyer to establish R.E.N.’s whereabouts and to secure his presence in court. On 21 November 2008 the District Court heard two witnesses for the applicant. On the same date, the applicant informed the court that her daughter had been kidnapped by the paternal grandparents.
On 30 January 2009 the District Court awarded custody of the child to the applicant, on the basis of the evidence in the case file, including the witness evidence and a report made by the Child Protection Agency following a visit in the applicant’s home. The parties had fifteen days to appeal.
In September 2009 R.E.N. sought leave to appeal outside the time limit (cerere de repunere în termenul de apel), submitting that he had been living in Bulgaria with his parents throughout the period of the proceedings and that the applicant had known of that fact. On 11 December 2009 the Vâlcea County Court (“the County Court”) quashed the decision of 30 January 2009 (see paragraph 11 above) on the ground that R.E.N. had not been legally summoned to appear. It sent the case back to the District Court.
On 12 February 2010 the case file was again registered with the District Court. Eleven hearings were held and the applicant and/or her counsel were present at all of them. The court heard evidence from the two parents and from four witnesses (two for each party – R.E.N. summoned his neighbours from Bulgaria) and ordered the child protection agencies in Romania and Bulgaria to investigate the living conditions both in the applicant’s mother’s home and in the paternal grandparents’ home in Bulgaria. The latter investigation was ordered by the court on 18 March 2010; the court order arrived at R.E.N.’s counsel’s office on 17 May 2010 and the latter added to the case file the final report of that investigation in both Bulgarian and Romanian on 2 September 2010.
In a decision of 11 November 2010 the District Court again awarded custody to the applicant. The court also noted that on 22 December 2008 R.E.N. had instituted similar proceedings in Bulgaria. Given that he had lodged his application for full custody of the child with the Bulgarian courts only after the applicant had lodged her request with the Romanian courts, the District Court considered that it had jurisdiction to deal with the matter. On the merits, the court considered that while the living conditions offered by the father and paternal grandparents were superior to the ones available in the applicant’s home, the father and the paternal grandparents did not set the child a satisfactory moral example. Regarding this point, the court referred to R.E.N.’s criminal past and to the manner in which the paternal grandparents had kidnapped the child.
The father lodged an appeal and the case was heard by the County Court. Five hearings took place before the County Court and both the applicant and her counsel were present at all of them. He (that is to say the father) asked the court to interview the child, who was aged seven at that time. On 10 June 2011 the court granted that request. On 14 June 2011 the applicant gave notarised consent for her daughter to obtain travel documents and to cross the border into Romania. On 29 August 2011 R.E.N. informed the applicant that the said notarised consent was not sufficient for the Bulgarian authorities. The applicant offered to travel to Bulgaria to assist in the formalities necessary to obtain a passport. On 9 September 2011 the County Court acknowledged the situation and ordered the applicant to travel to Bulgaria. It also ordered R.E.N. to allow contact between the mother and the child for the purposes of making travel arrangements. After the applicant’s visit to Bulgaria, the child was brought before the court on 17 October 2011. The child told the court in a private hearing, with the help of a Bulgarian translator, that she would prefer to stay with her father and paternal grandparents in Bulgaria; that she spoke on the phone with her mother occasionally; that she could not remember her maternal grandmother; and that she did not like being in Romania.
On 21 October 2011 the County Court granted custody of the child to the father on the grounds that the child was already integrated into her environment in Bulgaria, where she had lived for the past four years, and that she did not speak Romanian.
The applicant appealed on points of law. The Piteşti Court of Appeal held one hearing, at which the parties and their respective counsel were present. The Court of Appeal re-examined the facts and concluded that the County Court had interpreted the situation erroneously and had disregarded the child’s “best interests”. It therefore quashed the County Court’s decision and upheld the decision rendered by the District Court. The Court of Appeal delivered its final ruling in the case on 9 January 2012.
On 29 June 2011 the applicant, seeking temporary custody of her daughter pending the outcome of the custody proceedings, lodged a request for interim measures. On 26 July 2011 her application was rejected by the District Court on the ground that as at that time the child had already been living with her paternal grandparents in Bulgaria for over three years, it would not be in her interests to temporarily remove her from her usual environment and place her with her mother until the end of the custody proceedings.
The applicant appealed; on 16 September 2011 the County Court dismissed her appeal, upholding the District Court’s decision.
The applicant sought recognition in Bulgaria of the 30 January 2009 judgment of the first-instance Romanian court that had given custody of the child to her (see paragraph 11 above). The Pazardzhik Regional Court granted her request on 14 May 2009, finding that the Romanian judgment had become final in the absence of an appeal within the statutory time-limit (as indicated in paragraph 12, the judgment was appealed later, outside the statutory limits). On 16 April 2010 the Sofia Court of Appeal upheld this decision, which – as it was not appealed against – became final on an unspecified date. The applicant was issued with a writ of enforcement on 20 July 2010.
On 30 August 2010 the applicant applied to a Bulgarian enforcement officer, who brought enforcement proceedings immediately. The authorities unsuccessfully attempted on several occasions to personally serve an invitation for voluntary compliance on R.E.N. Having noted that he was working abroad for an indefinite period, the summons was posted twice – on 13 and 28 October 2010 – on the entrance gate at R.E.N.’s address. On 20 January 2011 the enforcement officer appointed a lawyer to represent R.E.N. as he had not been located.
On 28 January 2011 the enforcement officer scheduled the handover of the child to the applicant for 9 February 2011 and asked the police and the social services to assist him on that day. Notice of the handover was personally served on R.E.N. on 4 February 2011. On 8 February 2011 two lawyers acting on behalf of R.E.N. brought judicial review proceedings in respect of the enforcement officer’s actions; those proceedings were dismissed by the Pazardzhik Regional Court on 22 March 2011.
Following the unsuccessful attempt on 9 February 2011 to locate the child at the address of her paternal grandparents with whom she lived, the enforcement officer fined R.E.N. 200 euros (EUR) for failure to cooperate and scheduled 16 March 2011 as the new date for the child’s transfer to the applicant. The enforcement officer also directed the social services to help to ensure for the child a smooth transition to life with the applicant by, inter alia, arranging a meeting with a psychologist. On 15 March 2011 the social services drew up a report on the child, which concluded that abruptly removing the child from her usual environment – and thus separating her from the adults who provided her with emotional and physical security – would be detrimental to her development. The report noted that the child needed to be assisted in the process of re-establishing a relationship with her mother.
Upon a request of R.E.N., on 2 June 2011 the Supreme Court of Cassation suspended the enforcement proceedings brought by the applicant. It did so following R.E.N.’s request for the reopening of the proceedings for the recognition of the Romanian judgment on custody.
Following the suspension of the enforcement proceedings brought by the applicant in Bulgaria (see the preceding paragraph), on 12 January 2012, within the context of the reopening of the proceedings for recognition of the Romanian judgment, the Supreme Court of Cassation quashed the decision of the Sofia Court Appeal of 16 April 2010 (see paragraph 20 above). The Supreme Court of Cassation found that R.E.N. had not been summoned in accordance with the applicable procedural rules and as a result had been unable to take part in the proceedings for the recognition and enforcement of the Romanian judgment which had determined custody of his daughter. More specifically, he had only learned of those proceedings on 4 February 2011, when he had received notice to hand the child over. In the same decision of 12 January 2012 the Supreme Court of Cassation remitted the case to the Pazardzhik Regional Court for a new examination and decision.
On 10 May 2012, in response to the applicant’s request for the recognition and enforcement of the Romanian judgment of 11 November 2010 granting custody to her (see paragraph 14 above), which had become final and enforceable on 9 January 2012 (see paragraph 17 above), the Pazardzhik Regional Court recognised that judgment and authorised its execution in Bulgaria. Upon an appeal by R.E.N., the Sofia Court of Appeal upheld that decision on 10 April 2013. On 15 May 2014 the Supreme Court of Cassation rejected R.E.N.’s cassation appeal; the decision therefore became final on that date.
Thereafter, on an unspecified date, the applicant brought new enforcement proceedings in Bulgaria seeking implementation of the final Romanian judgment granting custody to her.
On 9 July 2014, upon R.E.N.’s request (see paragraph 43 below), the Pazardzhik District Court suspended the enforcement. The court observed that R.E.N. had in the meantime brought proceedings in Bulgaria for a change of custody in respect of the child. It then noted that the child had settled well in Bulgaria, both in terms of emotional and material comfort, having been living there uninterruptedly since November 2008. The child only spoke Bulgarian, had adapted to and quite enjoyed her schooling environment, and showed interest in the extra-curricular activities she attended. Also, she enjoyed a particularly close and warm relationship with her paternal grandparents, who were caring remarkably well for her. The court found that, in view of the above and the fact that proceedings for a change of custody were pending before the Bulgarian courts, a sudden change in the child’s environment would not be in her interests. The court then granted R.E.N.’s request and suspended the enforcement.
Following a telephone conversation between the applicant and an employee of the Romanian Ministry of Justice, the applicant was invited to lodge a request for the return of her daughter under the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction of 25 October 1980 (“the Hague Convention”; see paragraph 43 below). Accordingly, on 1 July 2011 the applicant lodged a request for the return of the child with the Romanian Ministry of Justice, the Central Authority for the purpose of the Hague Convention.
On 12 July 2011 the Romanian Ministry of Justice requested further clarification from the applicant, in particular asking her to explain why she had waited for such a long time before lodging her request. They informed her that any application lodged more than one year after the abduction could be rejected. On 26 July the Ministry of Justice further informed the applicant that she could request the return of her child either under the terms of the Hague Convention or under the terms of the Brussels II bis Regulation (see paragraph 46 below). They advised her to lodge her request either directly with the competent Bulgarian authority or through the Romanian Ministry of Justice.
On 17 August 2011 the applicant’s initial request was transmitted by the Romanian Ministry of Justice to the Bulgarian Ministry of Justice, the Central Authority for the purpose of the Hague Convention.
On 24 August 2011 the Bulgarian Ministry of Justice informed the applicant that the request had been refused as the Hague Convention had not entered into force between Romania and Bulgaria (see paragraph 43 below).
On 26 October 2011 the Romanian Ministry of Justice also informed the applicant and her counsel about the outcome of the proceedings before the Bulgarian Central Authority. They advised the applicant to apply directly to the Bulgarian courts (under Article 29 of the Hague Convention) or to the Bulgarian Ministry of Justice (either directly or through the Romanian Ministry of Justice, under the provisions of the European Convention on Recognition and Enforcement of Decisions Concerning Custody of Children and on Restoration of Custody of Children – “the Luxembourg Convention” – see paragraph 45 below).
On 12 December 2011 the Romanian Ministry of Justice transmitted to the Bulgarian Ministry of Justice a request lodged by the applicant under the Brussels II bis Regulation, which in its view took precedence over the Hague Convention. In the absence of any response to that request, on 9 February 2012 the Romanian Ministry of Justice repeated the request to the Bulgarian Ministry of Justice.
On 7 February 2012 the Bulgarian Ministry of Justice informed its Romanian counterpart that it had refused the request. In its view the Hague Convention did not apply, as the child had entered Bulgarian territory before the entry into force of that Convention between Romania and Bulgaria. Consequently, the Brussels II bis Regulation did not apply either, as it was not meant to be applicable outside the scope of the Hague Convention.
On 22 December 2008 R.E.N. unsuccessfully brought proceedings in Bulgaria seeking custody of the child. Those proceedings were terminated on 25 October 2010 by the Pazardzhik District Court; the decision became final on 11 November 2010.
At the beginning of 2011 R.E.N. brought a second set of proceedings in Bulgaria before the Pazardzhik District Court in which he sought custody of the child. His request for interim measures, namely for the child to live with his parents in Bulgaria and for him to have custody of her, as well as for the suspension of the enforcement proceedings brought in 2010 in Bulgaria by the applicant, was refused by the same court in April 2011. The court suspended the proceedings on 2 December 2011 as it had determined that another set of proceedings – between the same parties concerning the same issue – was pending in Romania (see paragraphs 9 to 17 above).
Following the 9 January 2012 final judgment of the Romanian courts granting custody of the child to the applicant (see paragraph 17 above), on 23 October 2012 R.E.N. brought a third set of proceedings before the Pazardzhik District Court, seeking a change of custody due to a change in circumstances. The Pazardzhik District Court terminated these proceedings on 22 November 2012 as it found that the second set of proceedings R.E.N. had brought before it (see the preceding paragraph) concerning the same issue and involving the same parties was still pending, as those proceedings had only been suspended on 2 December 2011 and not terminated.
Subsequently R.E.N. asked the court to terminate the second set of proceedings he had brought, and the court did so on 28 November 2012. On 10 December 2012 R.E.N. appealed against the termination of the third set of proceedings he had brought. In a final decision of 25 March 2013 the Pazardzhik Regional Court granted his request, quashed the termination of those proceedings and remitted the case to the first-instance court for examination. Within the context of those proceedings, in 2014 R.E.N. sought as a protective measure (обезпечителна мярка) the suspension of the enforcement proceedings of the Romanian judgment granting custody to the applicant. His request was granted on 9 July 2014 (see paragraph 28 above). No information is available regarding developments in those proceedings.
Section 1(1) of the Bulgarian State and Municipality Responsibility for Damage Act 1988 (the SMRDA) provides, as of July 2006, that the municipalities and the State are liable for damage caused to private individuals and legal entities as a result of unlawful decisions, acts or omissions on the part of their own authorities or officials while discharging their administrative duties. Section 4 of the SMRDA provides that the State shall be strictly liable for compensation for all damage which is the direct and proximate result of an unlawful act or omission on its part. A claim for damages can be made after the administrative act in question has been quashed in prior proceedings. The lawfulness of administrative actions or failure to act is established by the court within the context of proceedings for damages (Article 204 (4) of the Bulgarian Code of Administrative Procedure). Persons seeking redress for damage occasioned in circumstances falling within the scope of the SMRDA have no claim under the general law of tort, as the SMRDA is a lex specialis and excludes the application of the general regime (реш. № 1370/1992 г. от 16 декември 1992 г. по гр.д. № 1181/1992 г. на ВС, ІV г.о.; реш. от 29 юли 2002 г. по гр.д. № 169/2002 г. на СГС, ГК, ІVб отд.).
Articles 622 and 623 of the 2007 Bulgarian Code of Civil Procedure provide that an applicant can request the recognition and enforcement in Bulgaria of a foreign judgment adopted by the courts of another European Union Member State. Such a request should be submitted before the competent regional court in Bulgaria and may be subject to appeal before courts at two further levels of jurisdiction – respectively the Sofia Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court of Cassation.
The relevant Articles of the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction of 25 October 1980 (“the Hague Convention”) and the interpretation given to the concept of “the child’s best interests” are described in Neulinger and Shuruk v. Switzerland ([GC], no. 41615/07, §§ 57-68, ECHR 2010).
In addition to the Articles described in Neulinger and Shuruk, the following Articles of the Hague Convention were quoted in the domestic proceedings:
“This Convention shall not preclude any person, institution or body who claims that there has been a breach of custody or access rights within the meaning of Article 3 or 21 from applying directly to the judicial or administrative authorities of a Contracting State, whether or not under the provisions of this Convention.”
“The accession will have effect only as regards the relations between the acceding State and such Contracting States as will have declared their acceptance of the accession. Such a declaration will also have to be made by any Member State ratifying, accepting or approving the Convention after an accession. Such declaration shall be deposited at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of the Netherlands; this Ministry shall forward, through diplomatic channels, a certified copy to each of the Contracting States.”
Romania ratified the Hague Convention on 20 November 1992 and Bulgaria ratified it on 20 May 2003. According to the procedure put in place under the Hague Convention, it entered into force between the two States on 1 June 2013, after Romania had accepted Bulgaria’s accession on 12 March 2013.
The relevant provisions of the Council of Europe’s European Convention on Recognition and Enforcement of Decisions Concerning Custody of Children and on Restoration of Custody of Children, adopted in 1980 in Luxembourg (“the Luxembourg Convention”), read as follows:
“1.  Any person who has obtained in a Contracting State a decision relating to the custody of a child and who wishes to have that decision recognised or enforced in another Contracting State may submit an application for this purpose to the central authority in any Contracting State.
The central authority receiving the application, if it is not the central authority in the State addressed, shall send the documents directly and without delay to that central authority.”
“1.  The central authority in the State addressed shall take or cause to be taken without delay all steps which it considers to be appropriate, if necessary by instituting proceedings before its competent authorities, in order:
a)  to discover the whereabouts of the child;
b)  to avoid, in particular by any necessary provisional measures, prejudice to the interests of the child or of the applicant;
c)  to secure the recognition or enforcement of the decision;
d)  to secure the delivery of the child to the applicant where enforcement is granted;
e)  to inform the requesting authority of the measures taken and their results.”
“1.  A request for recognition or enforcement in another Contracting State of a decision relating to custody shall be accompanied by:
a)  a document authorising the central authority of the State addressed to act on behalf of the applicant or to designate another representative for that purpose;
b)  a copy of the decision which satisfies the necessary conditions of authenticity;
c)  in the case of a decision given in the absence of the defendant or his legal representative, a document which establishes that the defendant was duly served with the document which instituted the proceedings or an equivalent document;
d)  if applicable, any document which establishes that, in accordance with the law of the State of origin, the decision is enforceable;
e)  if possible, a statement indicating the whereabouts or likely whereabouts of the child in the State addressed;
f)  proposals as to how the custody of the child should be restored.
The documents mentioned above shall, where necessary, be accompanied by a translation according to the provisions laid down in Article 6.”
European Council Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003 of 27 November 2003 concerning jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and matters of parental responsibility (“the Brussels II bis regulation” or “the Regulation”) reads as follows:
“(17)  In cases of wrongful removal or retention of a child, the return of the child should be obtained without delay, and to this end the Hague Convention of 25 October 1980 would continue to apply as complemented by the provisions of this Regulation, in particular Article 11. The courts of the Member State to or in which the child has been wrongfully removed or retained should be able to oppose his or her return in specific, duly justified cases. However, such a decision could be replaced by a subsequent decision by the court of the Member State of habitual residence of the child prior to the wrongful removal or retention. Should that judgment entail the return of the child, the return should take place without any special procedure being required for recognition and enforcement of that judgment in the Member State to or in which the child has been removed or retained.”
“In case of wrongful removal or retention of the child, the courts of the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention shall retain their jurisdiction until the child has acquired a habitual residence in another member State and:
(a) each person, institution or other body having right of custody has acquiesced in the removal or retention; or
(b) the child has resided in that other member State for a period of at least one year after the person, institution or other body having rights of custody has had or should have had knowledge of the whereabouts of the child and the child is settled in his or her new environment and at least one of the following conditions is met:
(i) within one year after the holder of rights of custody has had or should have had knowledge of the whereabouts of the child, no request for return has been lodged before the competent authorities of the Member State where the child has been removed or is being retained;
(ii) a request for return lodged by the holder of rights of custody has been withdrawn and no new request has been lodged within the time limit set in paragraph (i);
(iii) a case before the court in the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention has been closed pursuant to Article 11(7);
(iv) a judgment on custody that does not entail the return of the child has been issued by the courts of the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention.”
“1.  Where a person, institution or other body having rights of custody applies to the competent authorities in a Member State to deliver a judgment on the basis of the Hague Convention [..], in order to obtain the return of a child that has been wrongfully removed or retained in a Member State other than the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention, paragraphs 2 to 8 shall apply.
...
A court to which an application for return of a child is made as mentioned in paragraph 1 shall act expeditiously in proceedings on the application, using the most expeditious procedures available in national law.
Without prejudice to the first subparagraph, the court shall, except where exceptional circumstances make this impossible, issue its judgment no later than six weeks after the application is lodged.
A court cannot refuse to return a child on the basis of Article 13 (b) of the [...] Hague Convention if it is established that adequate arrangements have been made to secure the protection of the child after his or her return.
A court cannot refuse to return a child unless the person who requested the return of the child has been given an opportunity to be heard.
If a court has issued an order on non-return pursuant to Article 13 of the 1980 Hague Convention, the court must immediately either directly or through its central authority, transmit a copy of the court order on non-return and of the relevant documents, in particular a transcript of the hearings before the court, to the court with jurisdiction or central authority in the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention, as determined by national law. The court shall receive all the mentioned documents within one month of the date of the non-return order.
Unless the courts in the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention have already been seized by one of the parties, the court or central authority that receives [a copy of an order on non-return pursuant to Article 13 of the Hague Convention and of the documents relevant to that order] must notify it to the parties and invite them to make submissions to the court, in accordance with national law, within three months of the date of notification so that the court can examine the question of custody of the child...”
“1.  A judgment given in a Member State shall be recognised in the other Member States without any special procedure being required.”
“1.  A judgment on the exercise of parental responsibility in respect of a child given in a Member State which is enforceable in that Member State and has been served shall be enforced in another Member State when, on the application of any interested party, it has been declared enforceable there.”
“1.  The enforcement procedure is governed by the law of the Member State of enforcement.”
“1.  Subject to the provisions of Articles 60, 63, 64 and paragraph 2 of this Article, this Regulation shall, for the Member States, supersede conventions existing at the time of entry into force of this Regulation which have been concluded between two or more Member States and relate to matters governed by this Regulation.”
“In relations between Member States, this Regulation shall take precedence over the following Conventions in so far as they concern matters governed by this Regulation:
(a) the Hague Convention of 5 October 1961 concerning the Powers of Authorities and the Law Applicable in respect of the Protection of Minors;
(b) the Luxembourg Convention of 8 September 1967 on the Recognition of Decisions Relating to the Validity of Marriages;
(c) the Hague Convention of 1 June 1970 on the Recognition of Divorces and Legal Separations;
(d) the European Convention of 20 May 1980 on Recognition and Enforcement of Decisions concerning Custody of Children and on Restoration of Custody of Children;
and
(e) the Hague Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction.”
“1.  The agreements and conventions referred to in Articles 59(1), 60 and 61 shall continue to have effect in relation to matters not governed by this Regulation.
The conventions mentioned in Article 60, in particular the 1980 Hague Convention, continue to produce effects between the Member States which are party thereto, in compliance with Article 60.”
“This Regulation shall enter into force on 1 August 2004.
The Regulation shall apply from 1 March 2005, with the exception of Articles 67, 68, 69 and 70, which shall apply from 1 August 2004.
This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in the Member States in accordance with the Treaty establishing the European Community.”
Both Romania and Bulgaria became members of the European Union on 1 January 2007.
The relevant provision of the 1959 Treaty between Bulgaria and Romania on legal assistance in civil, family and criminal matters reads as follows:
“1.  Final court ... decisions rendered in respect of non-pecuniary matters (de natură nepatrimonială) by one Contracting Party are enforceable on the territory of the other Contracting Party without any additional proceedings, if no court [...] of the latter Contracting Party has rendered a final decision that constitutes res judicata in the case, or if the latter Contracting Party does not have exclusive jurisdiction in the matter under the present Treaty.”