The case originated in an application (no. 7334/13) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Kristijan Muršić (“the applicant”), on 17 December 2012.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr Z. Vidović, a lawyer practising in Varaždin. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged in particular, relying on Article 3 of the Convention, that the conditions of his imprisonment had been inadequate, principally owing to a lack of personal space.
The application was allocated to the First Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). On 8 October 2013 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. On 12 March 2015 a Chamber of that Section, composed of Isabelle Berro, President, Khanlar Hajiyev, Julia Laffranque, Linos-Alexandre Sicilianos, Erik Møse, Ksenija Turković and Dmitry Dedov, judges, and Søren Nielsen, Section Registrar, gave judgment. The Chamber unanimously declared the complaint under Article 3 of the Convention admissible and the remainder of the application inadmissible. It held by a majority that there had been no violation of Article 3 of the Convention. The dissenting opinion of Judge Sicilianos was annexed to the judgment.
On 10 June 2015 the applicant requested the referral of the case to the Grand Chamber in accordance with Article 43 of the Convention. On 6 July 2015 the panel of the Grand Chamber granted that request.
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined according to the provisions of Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24 of the Rules of Court. At the final deliberations, Krzysztof Wojtyczek and Pauliine Koskelo, substitute judges, replaced Işıl Karakaş and Egidijus Kūris, who were unable to take part in the further consideration of the case (Rule 24 § 3).
The applicant and the Government each filed observations (Rule 59 § 1) on the merits of the case. In addition, joint third-party comments were received from the Observatoire international des prisons – section française (OIP-SF), Ligue belge des droits de l’homme (LDH) and Réseau européen de contentieux pénitentiaire (RCP). Further third-party comments were received from the Documentation Centre “L’altro diritto onlus”. The third parties had been given leave by the President on 7 and 20 October 2015, respectively, to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3).
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 6 January 2016 (Rule 59 § 3).
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Mr Vidović and Ms Stažnik, and also replies by Mr Vidović and Mr Mostovac to questions from judges.
The applicant was born in 1987 and lives in Kuršanec.
In a judgment of the Čakovec County Court (Županijski sud u Čakovcu) of 19 June 2008, upheld by the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske) on 3 February 2009, the applicant was sentenced to two years’ imprisonment for armed robbery.
On 2 July 2010 the Čakovec Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Čakovcu) sentenced him to one year’s imprisonment for theft, which was confirmed by the Čakovec County Court on 3 November 2010.
Following a request by the applicant, on 26 August 2011 a three-judge panel of the Čakovec County Court took into account those two convictions and sentenced him to a single term of two years and eleven months’ imprisonment.
On 16 October 2009 the applicant was transferred from a semi-open regime in Turopolje State Prison (Kaznionica u Turopolju) to Bjelovar County Prison (Zatvor u Bjelovaru) to serve the prison sentence originally imposed by the Čakovec County Court on 19 June 2008 (see paragraph 10 above). The reason for the transfer, as indicated in a report of Turopolje State Prison, was the applicant’s inappropriate behaviour and threats of escape.
The applicant remained in Bjelovar Prison until 16 March 2011, when he was transferred to Varaždin County Prison (Zatvor u Varaždinu) following a decision by the Ministry of Justice Prison Administration (Ministarstvo pravosuđa, Uprava za zatvorski sustav) of 11 March 2011.
According to the applicant, during his stay in Bjelovar Prison he was placed in overcrowded cells. He alleged in particular that for a period of fifty days in total he disposed of less than 3 square metres (sq. m) of personal space, including for a period of twenty-seven consecutive days. There were also several non-consecutive periods in which he was allocated between 3 and 4 sq. m of personal space in the cells (see paragraph 17 below).
The applicant further submitted that the cells in which he had been held were badly maintained, humid, dirty and insufficiently equipped with lockers and chairs for all inmates. The sanitary facilities were in the same room as the living area, from which they were not fully separated. Those facilities were about half a metre away from the dining table and there was a constant smell in the cell. Moreover, he had not been given any opportunity to engage in prison work and in general was not provided with sufficient access to recreational and educational activities. The prisoners were allowed to move freely outside the locked part of the prison between 4 and 7 p.m., and the out-of-cell facilities were inadequate and insufficient, particularly given that there was only an open recreation yard. The nutrition was poor and the hygiene conditions were inadequate, especially since the toilet was not separated from the living area. The inmates did not have sufficient access to hot water and were allowed to shower only once or sometimes three times per week.
According to the Government, while in Bjelovar Prison the applicant had at his disposal an average of 3.59 sq. m of personal space. He was held in four different cells, the conditions of which are detailed in the table below.
The measurements of the cells indicate their overall size (as provided by the Government) and with the in-cell sanitary facility deducted (based on the methodology enunciated in paragraph 114 below). That calculation is based on an approximate measurement of the sanitary facility (1.9 sq. m) according to the floor plans of Bjelovar Prison, which the Government provided to the Court and which are not disputed by the applicant.
The Government further explained that each cell in which the applicant had been accommodated had had windows allowing in natural light and fresh air. Artificial light was also secured and all cells were heated by a central heating system and equipped with a communication system enabling the inmates to contact prison staff immediately in case of need. All cells had a toilet fully separated from the living area and equipped with its own ventilation system. All cells had direct access to drinking water. The cells were constantly maintained and some necessary reconstruction work and improvements to the facilities had been carried out in 2007, July 2009 and May-July 2010, as well as in 2011, 2012 and 2013. Furthermore, the inmates were provided with all necessary hygiene and sanitary facilities. This included a shower three times per week and after sports activities. Every inmate was also regularly provided with the necessary toiletries and cleaning supplies for keeping the cells clean. The inmates were provided with clean bedding and bedspreads every fifteen days, or more often if necessary. In addition, the inmates were provided with the necessary clothing although they were allowed to use their own clothes. Nutrition was based on an assessment by experts and the quality of the food was constantly monitored by the competent State authorities. The inmates were provided with three meals per day meeting the necessary nutrition requirements, as supervised by the prison doctor. Meals could be taken to cells or eaten in a common room.
The Government also explained that the inmates were allowed to move freely outside their cells in the morning and afternoon, and to use the indoor and outdoor facilities of Bjelovar Prison. This in particular included two hours of outdoor exercise and in addition free out-of-cell movement inside the prison between 4 and 7 p.m. Specifically, in the ordinary daily regime, the inmates would wake up at 7 a.m. on working days and at 7.30 a.m. on weekends and public holidays. They would then wash, tidy their beds, and have breakfast, followed by the morning cleaning of the cell. Leisure time was scheduled afterwards, until 1 p.m., when they had an opportunity to take part in a number of activities. Leisure time was followed by lunch served between 1 and 2 p.m. The period after lunch was usually set aside for various group activities and meetings with lawyers and prison staff. Between 4 and 7 p.m. all cell doors were opened again, enabling the inmates to move about within the prison and to use its facilities as they saw fit. Dinner was served from 7 p.m., followed by the evening tidying and cleaning of the cells and other rooms in the prison.
The Government submitted that Bjelovar Prison was equipped with a recreation area located in the courtyard, which, in addition to the asphalted parts, included a lawn. The surface area of the courtyard was 305 sq. m. There was also direct access to drinking water and artificial light as well as protection from inclement weather available in the recreation area. The gym was open between 8 a.m. and 12.30 p.m. and between 2 and 6 p.m., and the basketball court was open on working days between 3 and 4 p.m. and at the weekends in both the morning and the afternoon. The recreation area was also equipped with a badminton court and ping-pong tables. The inmates were able to borrow books and use other services of the Bjelovar library, which were regularly available in the prison. The prison administration also organised religious ceremonies and contacts with cultural and religious associations. Each cell was equipped with cable television, which could be watched between 7 a.m. and 11 p.m. during working days, and between 7.30 a.m. and midnight at weekends and on public holidays. There were also radio receivers in the cells and the possibility of borrowing and watching films from a collection available in Bjelovar Prison. In addition, the inmates were allowed to socialise by playing board games. There was also a room for spousal visits and the inmates were allowed to obtain various goods from outside the prison. Bjelovar Prison also offered a possibility of education in prison but the applicant had decided not to avail himself of that opportunity. Remunerated work in prison was available in accordance with the economic possibilities, which were at the time limited due to the general economic crisis. A possibility of work outside the prison existed but the applicant’s previous threats to escape and his inadequate behaviour in detention had not made him eligible for this possibility. During his stay in Bjelovar Prison, the applicant had regularly received medical treatment. He had seen his family four times while standing trial for another offence in Čakovec and had been allowed to speak to them by telephone twenty minutes per week, with an additional ten minutes on public holidays.
The Government substantiated their arguments with photographs taken in 2007, 2010 and 2011 in the context of the renovation of the prison and visits by various officials to the prison, floor plans and other relevant documentation related to the available facilities in Bjelovar Prison and the applicant’s health care and nutrition.
On 24 March 2010 the applicant lodged a request with the Bjelovar Prison administration through a lawyer, asking to be transferred to Varaždin Prison for personal and family reasons.
On 26 April 2010 he complained to the Ministry of Justice Prison Administration in general terms about the conduct of the Bjelovar Prison administration, alleging that they had never offered him the opportunity to have a meeting with the relevant officials, that his request for a transfer had been ignored and that the prison food had been inadequate.
The applicant again reiterated his request for a transfer to Varaždin Prison on 6 May 2010, citing personal and family reasons, particularly his family’s lack of financial means, which made it difficult for them to visit him.
On 14 July 2010 the Ministry of Justice Prison Administration replied to the applicant’s complaints, finding them ill-founded in all respects. It pointed out that he had been given sufficient opportunity to have contact with his family by telephone and while attending the court hearings in March, April and July 2010 in the criminal proceedings against him, that he had not been engaged in any work because there had been an insufficient number of work posts in Bjelovar Prison, that he had had seven meetings with the prison governor and twenty-five meetings with various other Bjelovar Prison officials, and that food had been prepared in consultation with experts, the prison diet having been continuously supervised by the prison doctor.
On 24 August 2010 the applicant complained about the conditions of his detention to a sentence-execution judge of the Bjelovar County Court (Županijski sud u Bjelovaru). He pointed out that central to his complaints was his wish to be transferred to another prison closer to his family. He also complained, in particular, that his request to engage in prison work had not been answered. He was being detained with seven other inmates in cell no. 8, which measured 18 sq. m in total and was inadequately equipped and maintained. Hygiene conditions were poor, given that he had been allowed to take a shower only three times per week.
Following the applicant’s complaint, the sentence-execution judge requested a detailed report from Bjelovar Prison concerning the conditions of his detention.
After obtaining the relevant report and hearing the applicant in person, on 7 October 2010 the sentence-execution judge dismissed his complaints as ill-founded. She found, in particular, that the applicant had sufficient personal space at his disposal, given that four other persons were at the time placed with him in the same cell. The sentence-execution judge also found that the applicant was provided with sufficient hygiene and sanitary facilities, and that he was not engaged in prison work since such opportunities did not exist for all prisoners in Bjelovar Prison.
On 15 October 2010 the applicant lodged an appeal against the sentence-execution judge’s decision with a three-judge panel of the Bjelovar County Court, alleging that she had erred in her factual findings, as cell no. 8 had been occupied by up to eight inmates.
On 21 October 2010 a three-judge panel of the Bjelovar County Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal as ill-founded, endorsing the reasoning of the sentence-execution judge. It also explained that the required standard for personal space under the Enforcement of Prison Sentence Act, namely 4 sq. m, was the recommended minimum standard that should in principle be respected, but that there could be no automatic violation of a prisoner’s rights if such a standard was temporarily not complied with. In view of the fact that a reduction in the applicant’s personal space in cell no. 8 had only been temporary, the three-judge panel considered that there had been no violation of his rights.
On 5 November 2010 the applicant complained to the Bjelovar County Court about the decision of its three-judge panel. He argued that for the first six months following his arrival at Bjelovar Prison, he had been detained in cell no. 1, measuring 17.13 sq. m, where six inmates in total had been detained. He had then spent one month in cell no. 8 on the first floor with six inmates, which had measured 17.13 sq. m. He had then been placed in another cell, also marked “cell no. 8”, which again measured 17.13 sq. m, where he had spent six months with eight inmates. At the time of his complaint he was being held in cell no. 4 with six inmates.
On 20 November 2010 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske), relying on Article 14 § 2 (equality before the law), Article 26 (equality before the State authorities) and Article 29 (right to a fair trial) of the Constitution, complaining in general terms of a lack of personal space and work opportunities in Bjelovar Prison. He also relied on section 74(3) of the Enforcement of Prison Sentences Act, guaranteeing adequate personal space to detainees, and alleged that this provision had not been complied with in his case.
On 26 November 2010 the applicant complained to the Ombudsperson (Pučki pravobranitelj) that he had not been granted a transfer to a prison closer to his family, and alleged in general terms that the conditions of his detention had been inadequate.
Meanwhile, in November 2010 the applicant joined a group of inmates who complained to the sentence-execution judge about inadequate general conditions in Bjelovar Prison.
By a letter of 7 December 2010 the Ombudsperson invited the applicant to further substantiate his complaints.
The applicant replied to that request on 21 December 2010, indicating that the sentence-execution judge and the three-judge panel of the Bjelovar County Court had never examined his complaints properly, and that he had not been granted 4 sq. m of personal space in detention as required under the Enforcement of Prison Sentences Act.
In March 2011 the applicant saw a psychiatrist, who found that the applicant was frustrated with his internment and the impossibility of seeing his family.
On 12 April 2011 the Ombudsperson replied to the applicant’s letter that, according to the information available, his accommodation in Bjelovar Prison had fallen short of the requirements of adequate personal space under the Enforcement of Prison Sentences Act. The Ombudsperson also pointed out that the cell where the applicant was being detained had been renovated in 2010, and complied with all hygiene and health standards. The Ombudsman also noted that, just like ninety-two other inmates, the applicant had not been engaged in prison work, as there had been an insufficient number of work posts for all prisoners.
On 5 June 2012 the Constitutional Court declared the applicant’s constitutional complaint (see paragraph 32 above) inadmissible as manifestly ill-founded. The relevant part of the decision reads:
“In his constitutional complaint, the complainant was unable to show that the Bjelovar County Court had acted contrary to the constitutional provisions concerning human rights and fundamental freedoms or had arbitrarily interpreted the relevant statutory provisions. The Constitutional Court therefore finds that the present case does not raise an issue of the complainant’s constitutional rights. Thus, there is no constitutional law issue in the case for the Constitutional Court to decide upon ... ”
The Constitutional Court’s decision was served on the applicant’s representative on 18 June 2012.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 56/1990, 135/1997, 8/1998, 113/2000, 124/2000, 28/2001, 41/2001, 55/2001, 76/2010, 85/2010 and 5/2011) read as follows:
“No one shall be subjected to any form of ill-treatment ...”
“All detainees and convicted persons shall be treated in a humane manner and with respect for their dignity.”
The relevant part of section 62 of the Constitutional Act on the Constitutional Court (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 99/1999, 29/2002, 49/2002) reads:
“1.  Anyone may lodge a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court if he or she deems that a decision (pojedinačni akt) of a State body, a body of local and regional self-government, or a legal person with public authority, which has decided about his or her rights and obligations, or about a suspicion or accusation of a criminal act, has violated his or her human rights or fundamental freedoms, or his or her right to local and regional self-government guaranteed by the Constitution (hereinafter ‘constitutional right’) ...”
The relevant provisions of the Enforcement of Prison Sentences Act (Zakon o izvršavanju kazne zatvora, Official Gazette no. 128/1999, 55/2000, 99/2000, 129/2000, 59/2001, 67/2001, 11/2002, 190/2003, 76/2007, 27/2008, 83/2009 and 18/2011) read as follows:
“The main purpose of the enforcement of prison sentences is, ensuring humane treatment and respect for the dignity of the person serving the prison sentence (hereinafter the ‘inmate’), to prepare him or her for life after release in accordance with the law and social rules.”
“(1) An inmate shall enjoy the protection of basic rights established in the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia, international agreements and the present Act.
(2) The basic rights of an inmate may be restricted by the enforcement of a prison sentence only to the extent necessary for the achievement of the purpose of the enforcement of the sentence and subject to the procedure specified in the present Act.
(3) The rights of an inmate may be restricted only exceptionally, if it is indispensable for the protection of order and security in a State prison or [county] prison, and for the protection of other inmates.
(4) Any restrictions on the basic rights of inmates provided for in the present Act shall be proportionate to the reasons for which they are implemented.”
“(1) The task of the enforcement of prison sentence shall lie within the jurisdiction and competence of the [Ministry of Justice Prison Administration] and the sentence-execution judge. ...”
“(1) Prison sentences shall be enforced so that the respect for the human dignity of inmates is guaranteed. Treatment subjecting inmates to any form of torture, ill-treatment or humiliation, or medical or scientific experiments, shall be prohibited and punishable.
(2) Prohibited treatment under paragraph 1 of the present section shall particularly include any treatment which is disproportionate to the need to maintain order and discipline in State prisons or prisons, or which is unlawful and could result in suffering or inappropriate restriction of the basic rights of inmates.”
“(1) Subject to the conditions set forth in the present Act, every inmate shall be entitled to:
...
 (9) a minimum of two hours per day to be spent outdoors within a State prison or [county] prison ...”
“(1)  An inmate shall have the right to complain about an act or decision of an employee of a State prison or [county] prison.
(2)  Complaints shall be lodged orally or in writing with the prison governor, or the head office of the Prison Administration [of the Ministry of Justice]. ...
(5)  If an inmate lodges a complaint with the sentence-execution judge, it shall be considered a request for judicial protection under section 17 hereof.”
“(1)  An inmate may lodge a request for judicial protection against any acts or decisions unlawfully denying him or her any of the rights guaranteed by the present Act or unlawfully restricting such rights.
(2)  The sentence-execution judge shall dismiss the request for judicial protection if he or she finds that it is unfounded. If the request is well-founded, the sentence-execution judge shall order that the unlawful deprivations or restrictions of rights be remedied. If that is not possible, the sentence-execution judge shall find a violation and prohibit its repetition.
(3)  The inmate and the prison facility may lodge an appeal against the sentence-execution judge’s decision ... ”
“(1) Accommodation of inmates has to meet health, hygienic and spatial standards and be appropriate to the climate.
(2) Inmates shall, as a rule, be accommodated in separate rooms. Inmates who are believed not to be causing mutual negative influence can be accommodated in the same room. Each inmate shall have his or her own bed. Inmates shall spend free time in living rooms, together with other inmates.
(3) Premises where inmates are accommodated have to be dry, clean and large enough. There shall be a minimum space of 4 square metres and 10 cubic metres per prisoner in each dormitory.
(4) Each room in which inmates live or work must have daily and artificial light which enables reading and work without causing any difficulties for eyesight.
(5) State prisons and [county] prisons must be equipped with sanitary facilities which enable regular satisfaction of physiological needs in a clean and appropriate environment, whenever inmates need them.
(6) Drinking water must always be accessible to inmates.”
“(1) All premises in a State prison or [county] prison must be well maintained and regularly cleaned.
(2) Assignments specified in paragraph 1 of this section shall be performed by inmates up to two hours a day, without financial compensation.
(3) Inmates shall be enabled to wash their bodies every day. Inmates are required to maintain personal hygiene. A State prison or [county] prison shall provide water and toiletries for ensuring personal hygiene and clean laundry, clothing, shoes and bedding. Beards, moustaches and long hair may be exceptionally prohibited for reasons of security or health.
(4) Supervision of personal hygiene and tidiness shall be performed by a medical doctor or by another medical expert.”
“(1) Inmates shall be offered appropriately prepared and served meals at regular intervals. The quality and quantity of meals shall satisfy the requirements of nutrition and hygiene and shall be appropriate to the inmate’s age, health, nature of work and, depending on the possibilities of a State prison or [county] prison, religious and cultural preferences. ...”
“(1)  An inmate shall be entitled to work, subject to his state of health, [level of] knowledge and the opportunities [available] in a State prison or [county] prison. ...”
“(1) A State prison or [county] prison shall provide for space and equipment for meaningful use of free time.
(2) A State prison or [county] prison shall organise various kinds of activities in order to meet the physical, spiritual and cultural needs of inmates.
(3) The free time of inmates shall be used in workshops organised for painting, technical activities, music, literature, theatre, journalism, computing, debating clubs, exercising and the like.
(4) The content of organised free time shall be determined in the enforcement programme.
(5) In accordance with the possibilities of a State prison or [county] prison an inmate shall be permitted to organise his or her own free time (his or her hobby) at his or her own expense, if it does not endanger security and order and does not disturb other inmates. ...”
In the periodic annual reports between 2009 and 2011 the Croatian Ombudsperson reported on the general problem of prison overcrowding in Croatia, including in Bjelovar Prison, as one of the central organisational problems of the prison system which had generated the majority of complaints and violations of the rights of prisoners. The Ombudsperson also observed that prisons generally addressed the problem by converting various premises into dormitories and cells for prisoners and by providing greater freedom of movement inside the prisons. In the reports, the Ombudsperson constantly pointed out the need to adequately secure the rights of prisoners as guaranteed under the relevant domestic law and international standards.
In a general report on the conditions of detention in Croatia, no. U-X-5464/2012 of 12 June 2014, the Constitutional Court identified the problem of prison overcrowding and instructed the competent authorities to take more proactive measures in securing adequate conditions of detention for all types of detainees, as provided under the relevant domestic law and international standards. The relevant part of the report reads as follows:
“Conclusions
The Constitutional Court points out that the State authorities are obliged to introduce effective normative and enforcement measures, which must ensure that every detainee is placed in conditions such as to guarantee respect for his or her human dignity. Notwithstanding the financial limitations in the designated budgetary expenses for the criminal justice system, and in view of the economic crisis, an appropriate financial position should be adopted concerning the construction of new custodial capacities, and with regard to other infrastructural investments within the prison system.
1. The Constitutional Court observes that to persons who are serving a prison sentence or are detained [pending trial], the State authorities are obliged to secure the minimum personal space as provided for under the Enforcement of Prison Sentences Act or in accordance with the standards which [the Court] set out in the Ananyev and Others v. Russia case (judgment of 10 January 2012). These are as follows: each detainee must have an individual sleeping place in the cell, each detainee must dispose of at least 3 sq. m of floor space, and the overall surface area of the cell must be such as to allow detainees to move freely between furniture.
...”
The relevant part of the Explanatory report to the Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT/Inf/C (89) 1 [EN]) reads:
“27. The case-law of the Court and Commission of Human Rights on Article 3 provides a source of guidance for [the CPT]. However, the Committee’s activities are aimed at future prevention rather than the application of legal requirements to existing circumstances. The Committee should not seek to interfere in the interpretation and application of Article 3.”
The relevant part of the First General Report, CPT/Inf (91) 3 [EN], of 20 February 1991, reads:
“47. Four important consequences follow from the fact that ‘prevention’ constitutes the lynchpin of the whole monitoring system set up by the Convention.
First, the CPT must always look into the general conditions of detention existing in the countries visited. It must examine not only whether abuses are actually occurring but also be attentive to those ‘indicators’ or ‘early signs’ pointing to possible future abuses. For instance, it must - and indeed does - scrutinise the physical conditions of detention (the space available to detainees; lighting and ventilation; washing and toilet facilities; eating and sleeping arrangements; the medical care provided by the authorities, etc.) as well as the social conditions (for example, relationships with other detainees and the law enforcement personnel; links with families, social workers, the outside world in general, etc.). The CPT also pays close attention to the extent to which certain basic safeguards against ill-treatment exist in the country visited e.g. notification of police custody; access to a lawyer; access to a medical doctor; the possibilities of lodging complaints about ill-treatment or conditions of detention.
Second, often one cannot understand and assess the conditions under which persons are deprived of their liberty in a given country without considering those conditions in their general (historical, social, economic) context. Although human dignity must be effectively respected in all Parties to the Convention, the background of each of these countries varies, and can account for differences in their response to human rights issues. It follows that, to fulfil its task of preventing abuses, the CPT must often look into the underlying causes of general or specific conditions conducive to mistreatment.
The third consequence is closely associated with the two previous ones. In a number of instances the CPT - after investigating the conditions of detention in a particular country - may not find it appropriate to confine itself to merely suggesting immediate or short-term measures (such as, for example, administrative action) or even such measures as legislative improvements. It may find it necessary to recommend long-term measures, at least whenever it has become apparent that unacceptable conditions exist in a country as a result of deep-rooted factors that cannot be alleviated simply by judicial or legislative fiat or by resort to other legal techniques. In such cases, educational and similar long-term strategies may prove essential.
A fourth consequence flows from all the above remarks, namely that for the CPT to accomplish its preventive function effectively, it must aim at a degree of protection that is greater than that upheld by the European Commission and European Court of Human Rights when adjudging cases concerning the ill-treatment of persons deprived of their liberty and their conditions of detention.”
In a document titled “CPT standards” [CPT/Inf/E (2002) 1 - Rev. 2015] the CPT summarised the relevant standards flowing from its General Reports with a view to “[giving] a clear advance indication to national authorities of its views regarding the manner in which persons deprived of their liberty ought to be treated and, more generally, to stimulate discussion on such matters”. The relevant part of the document concerning conditions of detention reads (pp. 17-24, footnotes omitted):
“II. Prisons
Imprisonment
Extract from the 2nd General Report [CPT/Inf (92) 3]
...
Overcrowding is an issue of direct relevance to the CPT’s mandate. All the services and activities within a prison will be adversely affected if it is required to cater for more prisoners than it was designed to accommodate; the overall quality of life in the establishment will be lowered, perhaps significantly. Moreover, the level of overcrowding in a prison, or in a particular part of it, might be such as to be in itself inhuman or degrading from a physical standpoint.
A satisfactory programme of activities (work, education, sport, etc.) is of crucial importance for the well-being of prisoners. This holds true for all establishments, whether for sentenced prisoners or those awaiting trial. The CPT has observed that activities in many remand prisons are extremely limited. The organisation of regime activities in such establishments - which have a fairly rapid turnover of inmates - is not a straightforward matter. Clearly, there can be no question of individualised treatment programmes of the sort which might be aspired to in an establishment for sentenced prisoners. However, prisoners cannot simply be left to languish for weeks, possibly months, locked up in their cells, and this regardless of how good material conditions might be within the cells. The CPT considers that one should aim at ensuring that prisoners in remand establishments are able to spend a reasonable part of the day (8 hours or more) outside their cells, engaged in purposeful activity of a varied nature. Of course, regimes in establishments for sentenced prisoners should be even more favourable.
Specific mention should be made of outdoor exercise. The requirement that prisoners be allowed at least one hour of exercise in the open air every day is widely accepted as a basic safeguard (preferably it should form part of a broader programme of activities). The CPT wishes to emphasise that all prisoners without exception (including those undergoing cellular confinement as a punishment) should be offered the possibility to take outdoor exercise daily. It is also axiomatic that outdoor exercise facilities should be reasonably spacious and whenever possible offer shelter from inclement weather.
...
The CPT would add that it is particularly concerned when it finds a combination of overcrowding, poor regime activities and inadequate access to toilet/washing facilities in the same establishment. The cumulative effect of such conditions can prove extremely detrimental to prisoners.
Extract from the 7th General Report [CPT/Inf (97) 10]
In the course of several of its visits during 1996, the CPT once again encountered the evils of prison overcrowding, a phenomenon which blights penitentiary systems across Europe. Overcrowding is often particularly acute in prisons used to accommodate remand prisoners (i.e. persons awaiting trial); however, the CPT has found that in some countries the problem has spread throughout the prison system.
As the CPT pointed out in its 2nd General Report, prison overcrowding is an issue of direct relevance to the Committee’s mandate (cf. CPT/Inf (92) 3, paragraph 46).
An overcrowded prison entails cramped and unhygienic accommodation; a constant lack of privacy (even when performing such basic tasks as using a sanitary facility); reduced out-of-cell activities, due to demand outstripping the staff and facilities available; overburdened health-care services; increased tension and hence more violence between prisoners and between prisoners and staff. This list is far from exhaustive.
The CPT has been led to conclude on more than one occasion that the adverse effects of overcrowding have resulted in inhuman and degrading conditions of detention.
...
The problem of prison overcrowding is sufficiently serious as to call for cooperation at European level, with a view to devising counter strategies. Consequently, the CPT was most pleased to learn that work on this subject has recently begun within the framework of the European Committee on Crime Problems (CDPC). The CPT hopes that the successful conclusion of that work will be treated as a priority.
Extract from the 11th General Report [CPT/Inf (2001) 16]
...
Prison overcrowding
The phenomenon of prison overcrowding continues to blight penitentiary systems across Europe and seriously undermines attempts to improve conditions of detention. The negative effects of prison overcrowding have already been highlighted in previous General Reports. As the CPT’s field of operations has extended throughout the European continent, the Committee has encountered huge incarceration rates and resultant severe prison overcrowding. The fact that a State locks up so many of its citizens cannot be convincingly explained away by a high crime rate; the general outlook of members of the law enforcement agencies and the judiciary must, in part, be responsible.
	In such circumstances, throwing increasing amounts of money at the prison estate will not offer a solution. Instead, current law and practice in relation to custody pending trial and sentencing as well as the range of non-custodial sentences available need to be reviewed. This is precisely the approach advocated in Committee of Ministers Recommendation No R (99) 22 on prison overcrowding and prison population inflation. The CPT very much hopes that the principles set out in that important text will indeed be applied by member States; the implementation of this Recommendation deserves to be closely monitored by the Council of Europe.”
“19. The European Court of Human Rights is approached with an ever-increasing number of complaints from prisoners who allege that they are detained in inhuman or degrading conditions, having to share cells with large numbers of fellow-inmates, which leaves them with very little living space. The Court, in its judgments, is obliged to decide whether or not the holding of prisoners in cells offering a very limited living space per person (usually less than 4m²) constitutes a violation of Article 3.
The role of the CPT, as a preventive monitoring body, is different. Its responsibility does not entail pronouncing on whether a certain situation amounts to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment within the meaning of Article 3, ECHR. However, in the course of its visits the Committee has been confronted with prison conditions that beggared belief and were, as described in one visit report, an ‘affront to a civilised society’. Hence, in a number of visit reports it has stated that the conditions observed in grossly overcrowded prisons could be considered as amounting to ‘inhuman and degrading treatment’.
The CPT has never considered that its cell-size standards should be regarded as absolute. In other words, it does not automatically hold the view that a minor deviation from its minimum standards may in itself be considered as amounting to inhuman and degrading treatment of the prisoner(s) concerned, as long as other, alleviating, factors can be found, such as, in particular, the fact that inmates are able to spend a considerable amount of time each day outside their cells (in workshops, classes or other activities). Nevertheless, even in such cases, the CPT would still recommend that the minimum standard be adhered to.
On the other hand, for the Committee to say that conditions of detention could be considered as amounting to inhuman and degrading treatment, the cells either have to be extremely overcrowded or, as in most cases, combine a number of negative elements, such as an insufficient number of beds for all inmates, poor hygiene, infestation with vermin, insufficient ventilation, heating or light, lack of in-cell sanitation and in consequence the use of buckets or bottles for the needs of nature. In fact, the likelihood that a place of detention is very overcrowded but at the same time well ventilated, clean and equipped with a sufficient number of beds is extremely low. Thus, it is not surprising that the CPT often enumerates the factors that constitute appalling detention conditions, rather than just referring to inadequate living space. In addition – but by no means in every case – other factors not directly related to the conditions are taken into account by the CPT when assessing a particular situation. These factors include little out-of-cell time and generally a poor regime; reduced outdoor exercise; deprivation of contacts with relatives for several years, etc.
The Appendix to this document contains a non-exhaustive list of factors (other than the amount of living space per prisoner) to be taken into consideration when assessing detention conditions in prison.
Conclusion
This document seeks to give guidance to practitioners and other interested parties, by clearly stating the CPT’s minimum standards regarding living space for prisoner(s) in a given cell. Ultimately, it is for the courts to decide whether a particular person has experienced suffering that has reached the threshold of inhuman or degrading treatment within the meaning of Article 3, ECHR, taking into account all kinds of factors, including the individual’s personal constitution. The number of square metres available per person is but one factor, albeit often a very significant or even decisive one.
Conditions where inmates are left with less than 4m² per person in multiple-occupancy cells, or single cells measuring less than 6m² (both excluding a sanitary annexe) have consistently been criticised by the CPT, and authorities have regularly been called upon to enlarge (or withdraw from service) single cells or reduce the number of inmates in multiple-occupancy cells. The CPT expects that these minimum living space standards will be systematically applied in all prison establishments in Council of Europe member states, and hopes that more and more countries will strive to meet the CPT’s “desirable” standards for multiple-occupancy cells.”
“State of repair and cleanliness
- Cells, including furniture, should be in a decent state of repair and every effort should be made to keep the living areas clean and hygienic.
- Any infestation with vermin needs to be tackled vigorously.
- Inmates should be provided with the necessary personal hygiene products and cleaning materials.
Access to natural light, ventilation and heating
- All living accommodation for prisoners (both single- and multiple-occupancy cells) should have access to natural light as well as to artificial lighting which is sufficient for reading purposes.
- Equally, there needs to be sufficient ventilation to ensure a constant renewal of the air inside the cells.
- Cells should be adequately heated.
Sanitary facilities
- Each cell should possess a toilet and a washbasin as a minimum. In multiple-occupancy cells the sanitary facilities should be fully partitioned (i.e. up to the ceiling).
- In those few prisons where no in-cell sanitary facilities are available, the authorities must ensure that prisoners have ready access to the toilet whenever needed. Today, no prisoner in Europe should be obliged to ‘slop out’, a practice that is degrading both for the prisoners and for the staff members who have to supervise such a procedure.
Outdoor exercise
- The CPT considers that every prisoner should be offered a minimum of one hour of outdoor exercise every day. Outdoor exercise yards should be spacious and suitably equipped to give inmates a real opportunity to exert themselves physically (e.g., to practise sports); they should also be equipped with a means of rest (e.g., a bench) and a shelter against inclement weather.
Purposeful activities
- The CPT has long recommended that prisoners should be offered a range of varied purposeful activities (work, vocation, education, sport and recreation). To this end, the CPT has stated since the 1990s that the aim should be for prisoners – both sentenced and on remand – to spend eight hours or more a day outside their cells engaged in such activities, and that for sentenced prisoners the regime should be even more favourable.”
The CPT visited Croatia four times: in 1998, 2003, 2007 and 2012. Neither of these visits concerned Bjelovar Prison. In the report concerning its last visit in 2012 [CPT/Inf (2014) 9], the CPT addressed in general the problem of overcrowding and the efforts of the domestic authorities in dealing with that problem. The relevant parts of the report read:
“B. Prison establishments
Preliminary remarks
...
prison overcrowding
The overall prison population of Croatia has increased by 1,200 inmates to 5,400 (i.e. more than 25%) since the CPT’s last visit in 2007, while the official capacity of the prison estate has risen by only some 400 places to 3,771. Overcrowding is thus becoming more acute within the prison system. The delegation observed the negative impact of prison overcrowding on many aspects of prison life in the establishments visited, notably in Zagreb and Sisak County Prisons. Originally conceived as prisons (zatvori) for remand prisoners and persons serving sentences of up to six months’ duration, 50 percent of the population now held in these establishments are convicted prisoners serving sentences of up to five years. At Zagreb County Prison, the resultant increase in the number of prisoners has meant, for example, that rooms previously assigned for common activities have been converted into cellular accommodation.
Recognising the ever worsening serious problem of overcrowding and the need to combat it, the Croatian Government adopted an Action Plan for the Improvement of the Prison System of the Republic of Croatia from 2009 to 2014 which envisages the construction of new prison establishments in Glina, Zagreb and Šibenik, with a combined total of 2,072 places. It also envisages a set of additional measures, such as recruiting more staff and enhancing the initial and in-service training provided to staff. The delegation visited the recently inaugurated building at Glina State Prison which can accommodate up to 420 inmates and was shown the building site of a new section of Zagreb County Prison which, once completed in 2016, will raise the capacity of the prison by 382 places. Representatives of the Ministry of Justice informed the delegation that the extension had been funded with the assistance of a loan from the Council of Europe Development Bank (CEB) and that another loan application with the CEB had been completed for the construction of the new State Prison in Šibenik with a proposed capacity of 1,270 places.
These steps demonstrate a commitment by the Croatian authorities to tackle overcrowding. However, as already stressed by the CPT in its previous reports to the Croatian authorities, providing additional accommodation cannot offer a lasting solution to the problem of prison overcrowding, at least not without adopting, in parallel, policies designed to limit or modulate the number of persons sent to prison. In this respect, the Committee takes note of the efforts invested by the Ministry of Justice since 2007 in elaborating a legal framework and putting into place a probation system at the national level, which includes the possibility for State Prosecutors, Courts and Probation Offices to enlarge the scope and number of persons subject to alternative measures such as community work and protected supervision. At least 15 percent of the current convicted prison population (i.e. those inmates serving sentences of up to one year) could potentially benefit from non-custodial measures once the new Law on Probation is adopted.
The CPT recommends that the Croatian authorities pursue their efforts to combat prison overcrowding taking into account the recommendations adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, in particular Recommendation Rec(99)22 concerning prison overcrowding and prison population inflation, Recommendation Rec(2003)22 on conditional release (parole), Recommendation Rec(2006)13 on the use of remand in custody and Recommendation Rec2010(01) on the Council of Europe probation rules. The Committee would like to receive updated information on the impact of the measures being taken to tackle prison overcrowding.
Prisons
Preliminary remarks
recommendations
- the Croatian authorities to pursue their efforts to combat prison overcrowding taking into account the recommendations adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, in particular Recommendation Rec(99)22 concerning prison overcrowding and prison population inflation, Recommendation Rec(2003)22 on conditional release (parole), Recommendation Rec(2006)13 on the use of remand in custody and Recommendation Rec(2010)01 on the Council of Europe probation rules (paragraph 28).
Conditions of detention of the general prison population
recommendations
...
- the Croatian authorities to take steps to reduce cell occupancy levels in all the prisons visited (as well as in other prisons in Croatia), so as to provide for at least 4 m² of living space per prisoner in multi-occupancy cells; for this purpose, the area taken up by any in-cell sanitary facilities should not be counted (paragraph 36);
- the smaller cells (measuring 7m²) at Zagreb County Prison to accommodate not more than one person (paragraph 36);
...
- the Croatian authorities to improve the programme of activities, including work and vocational training opportunities, for prisoners at Glina State Prison, Zagreb and Sisak County Prisons and, where appropriate, at other prisons in Croatia (paragraph 40);
...”
The European Prison Rules are recommendations of the Committee of Ministers to member States of the Council of Europe on the minimum standards to be applied in prisons. The 1987 European Prison Rules (featuring as an appendix to Recommendation No. R (87) 3) were adopted on 12 February 1987. On 11 January 2006 the Committee of Ministers, noting that the 1987 Rules “needed to be substantively revised and updated in order to reflect the developments which ha[d] occurred in penal policy, sentencing practice and the overall management of prisons in Europe”, adopted Recommendation Rec(2006)2 on the European Prison Rules. The new, 2006 version of the Rules featured as an appendix to this Recommendation. It reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“Part I
Basic principles
All persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated with respect for their human rights.
Persons deprived of their liberty retain all rights that are not lawfully taken away by the decision sentencing them or remanding them in custody.
3 Restrictions placed on persons deprived of their liberty shall be the minimum necessary and proportionate to the legitimate objective for which they are imposed.
Prison conditions that infringe prisoners’ human rights are not justified by lack of resources.
Life in prison shall approximate as closely as possible the positive aspects of life in the community.
All detention shall be managed so as to facilitate the reintegration into free society of persons who have been deprived of their liberty.
...
Scope and application
1.  The European Prison Rules apply to persons who have been remanded in custody by a judicial authority or who have been deprived of their liberty following conviction.
2.  In principle, persons who have been remanded in custody by a judicial authority and persons who are deprived of their liberty following conviction should only be detained in prisons, that is, in institutions reserved for detainees of these two categories.
3 The Rules also apply to persons:
who may be detained for any other reason in a prison; or
who have been remanded in custody by a judicial authority or deprived of their liberty following conviction and who may, for any reason, be detained elsewhere.
...
Part II
Conditions of imprisonment
...
Allocation and accommodation
...
1.  The accommodation provided for prisoners, and in particular all sleeping accommodation, shall respect human dignity and, as far as possible, privacy, and meet the requirements of health and hygiene, due regard being paid to climatic conditions and especially to floor space, cubic content of air, lighting, heating and ventilation.
2.  In all buildings where prisoners are required to live, work or congregate:
the windows shall be large enough to enable the prisoners to read or work by natural light in normal conditions and shall allow the entrance of fresh air except where there is an adequate air conditioning system;
artificial light shall satisfy recognised technical standards; and
there shall be an alarm system that enables prisoners to contact the staff without delay.
3.  Specific minimum requirements in respect of the matters referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be set in national law.
4.  National law shall provide mechanisms for ensuring that these minimum requirements are not breached by the overcrowding of prisons.
5.  Prisoners shall normally be accommodated during the night in individual cells except where it is preferable for them to share sleeping accommodation.
6.  Accommodation shall only be shared if it is suitable for this purpose and shall be occupied by prisoners suitable to associate with each other.
7.  As far as possible, prisoners shall be given a choice before being required to share sleeping accommodation.
8.  In deciding to accommodate prisoners in particular prisons or in particular sections of a prison due account shall be taken of the need to detain:
untried prisoners separately from sentenced prisoners;
male prisoners separately from females; and
young adult prisoners separately from older prisoners.
9.  Exceptions can be made to the requirements for separate detention in terms of paragraph 8 in order to allow prisoners to participate jointly in organised activities, but these groups shall always be separated at night unless they consent to be detained together and the prison authorities judge that it would be in the best interest of all the prisoners concerned.
10.  Accommodation of all prisoners shall be in conditions with the least restrictive security arrangements compatible with the risk of their escaping or harming themselves or others.
...
Hygiene
1 All parts of every prison shall be properly maintained and kept clean at all times.
2 When prisoners are admitted to prison the cells or other accommodation to which they are allocated shall be clean.
3 Prisoners shall have ready access to sanitary facilities that are hygienic and respect privacy.
4 Adequate facilities shall be provided so that every prisoner may have a bath or shower, at a temperature suitable to the climate, if possible daily but at least twice a week (or more frequently if necessary) in the interest of general hygiene.
5 Prisoners shall keep their persons, clothing and sleeping accommodation clean and tidy.
6 The prison authorities shall provide them with the means for doing so including toiletries and general cleaning implements and materials.
...
Clothing and bedding
...
Every prisoner shall be provided with a separate bed and separate and appropriate bedding, which shall be kept in good order and changed often enough to ensure its cleanliness.
Nutrition
1 Prisoners shall be provided with a nutritious diet that takes into account their age, health, physical condition, religion, culture and the nature of their work.
...
Prison regime
1 The regime provided for all prisoners shall offer a balanced programme of activities.
2 This regime shall allow all prisoners to spend as many hours a day outside their cells as are necessary for an adequate level of human and social interaction.
3 This regime shall also provide for the welfare needs of prisoners.
...
Work
1 Prison work shall be approached as a positive element of the prison regime and shall never be used as a punishment.
2 Prison authorities shall strive to provide sufficient work of a useful nature.
...
Exercise and recreation
1 Every prisoner shall be provided with the opportunity of at least one hour of exercise every day in the open air, if the weather permits.
2 When the weather is inclement alternative arrangements shall be made to allow prisoners to exercise.
3 Properly organised activities to promote physical fitness and provide for adequate exercise and recreational opportunities shall form an integral part of prison regimes.
4 Prison authorities shall facilitate such activities by providing appropriate installations and equipment.
5 Prison authorities shall make arrangements to organise special activities for those prisoners who need them.
6 Recreational opportunities, which include sport, games, cultural activities, hobbies and other leisure pursuits, shall be provided and, as far as possible, prisoners shall be allowed to organise them.
7 Prisoners shall be allowed to associate with each other during exercise and in order to take part in recreational activities.
Education
1 Every prison shall seek to provide all prisoners with access to educational programmes which are as comprehensive as possible and which meet their individual needs while taking into account their aspirations.
...
Part VIII
Sentenced prisoners
Objective of the regime for sentenced prisoners
1 In addition to the rules that apply to all prisoners, the regime for sentenced prisoners shall be designed to enable them to lead a responsible and crime-free life.
2 Imprisonment is by the deprivation of liberty a punishment in itself and therefore the regime for sentenced prisoners shall not aggravate the suffering inherent in imprisonment.
Implementation of the regime for sentenced prisoners
1 The regime for sentenced prisoners shall commence as soon as someone has been admitted to prison with the status of a sentenced prisoner, unless it has commenced before.
2 As soon as possible after such admission, reports shall be drawn up for sentenced prisoners about their personal situations, the proposed sentence plans for each of them and the strategy for preparation for their release.
3 Sentenced prisoners shall be encouraged to participate in drawing up their individual sentence plans.
4 Such plans shall as far as is practicable include:
work;
education;
other activities; and
preparation for release.
...
Work by sentenced prisoners
1 A systematic programme of work shall seek to contribute to meeting the objective of the regime for sentenced prisoners.
...
Education of sentenced prisoners
1 A systematic programme of education, including skills training, with the objective of improving prisoners’ overall level of education as well as their prospects of leading a responsible and crime-free life, shall be a key part of regimes for sentenced prisoners.
...”
The relevant parts of the Recommendation No. R (99) 22 of the Committee of Ministers to Member States concerning Prison Overcrowding and Prison Population Inflation, of 30 September 1999, read:
“The Committee of Ministers ...
Considering that prison overcrowding and prison population growth represent a major challenge to prison administrations and the criminal justice system as a whole, both in terms of human rights and of the efficient management of penal institutions;
Considering that the efficient management of the prison population is contingent on such matters as the overall crime situation, priorities in crime control, the range of penalties available on the law books, the severity of the sentences imposed, the frequency of use of community sanctions and measures, the use of pre-trial detention, the effectiveness and efficiency of criminal justice agencies and not least public attitudes towards crime and punishment;
Affirming that measures aimed at combating prison overcrowding and reducing the size of the prison population need to be embedded in a coherent and rational crime policy directed towards the prevention of crime and criminal behaviour, effective law enforcement, public safety and protection, the individualisation of sanctions and measures and the social reintegration of offenders;
Considering that such measures should conform to the basic principles of democratic States governed by the rule of law and subject to the paramount aim of guaranteeing human rights, in conformity with the European Convention on Human Rights and the case-law of the organs entrusted with its application;
Recognising moreover that such measures require support by political and administrative leaders, judges, prosecutors and the general public, as well as the provision of balanced information on the functions of punishment, on the relative effectiveness of custodial and non-custodial sanctions and measures and on the reality of prisons;
Bearing in mind the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
...
Recommends that governments of member states:
- take all appropriate measures, when reviewing their legislation and practice in relation to prison overcrowding and prison population inflation, to apply the principles set out in the Appendix to this Recommendation;
- encourage the widest possible dissemination of the Recommendation and the report on prison overcrowding and prison population inflation elaborated by the European Committee on Crime Problems.
Appendix to Recommendation No. R (99) 22
Basic principles
Deprivation of liberty should be regarded as a sanction or measure of last resort and should therefore be provided for only, where the seriousness of the offence would make any other sanction or measure clearly inadequate.
The extension of the prison estate should rather be an exceptional measure, as it is generally unlikely to offer a lasting solution to the problem of overcrowding. Countries whose prison capacity may be sufficient in overall terms but poorly adapted to local needs should try to achieve a more rational distribution of prison capacity.
Provision should be made for an appropriate array of community sanctions and measures, possibly graded in terms of relative severity; prosecutors and judges should be prompted to use them as widely as possible.
Member states should consider the possibility of decriminalising certain types of offence or reclassifying them so that they do not attract penalties entailing the deprivation of liberty.
In order to devise a coherent strategy against prison overcrowding and prison population inflation a detailed analysis of the main contributing factors should be carried out, addressing in particular such matters as the types of offence which carry long prison sentences, priorities in crime control, public attitudes and concerns and existing sentencing practices.
Coping with a shortage of prison places
In order to avoid excessive levels of overcrowding a maximum capacity for penal institutions should be set.
Where conditions of overcrowding occur, special emphasis should be placed on the precepts of human dignity, the commitment of prison administrations to apply humane and positive treatment, the full recognition of staff roles and effective modern management approaches. In conformity with the European Prison Rules, particular attention should be paid to the amount of space available to prisoners, to hygiene and sanitation, to the provision of sufficient and suitably prepared and presented food, to prisoners’ health care and to the opportunity for outdoor exercise.
In order to counteract some of the negative consequences of prison overcrowding, contacts of inmates with their families should be facilitated to the extent possible and maximum use of support from the community should be made.
Specific modalities for the enforcement of custodial sentences, such as semiliberty, open regimes, prison leave or extra-mural placements, should be used as much as possible with a view to contributing to the treatment and resettlement of prisoners, to maintaining their family and other community ties and to reducing the tension in penal institutions.
...
Measures relating to the post-trial stage
The implementation of community sanctions and measures – The enforcement of custodial sentences
In order to make community sanctions and measures credible alternatives to short terms of imprisonment, their effective implementation should be ensured, ...
Parole should be regarded as one of the most effective and constructive measures, which not only reduces the length of imprisonment but also contributes substantially to a planned return of the offender to the community.
...”
“In response to the CM’s earlier decision, the authorities have provided additional information in April, indicating the adoption of various structural measures in view of complying with the judgments in this group, accompanied by statistical data showing an important and continuing drop in the prison population and an increase in living space to at least 3m2 per detainee. In addition, a preventive remedy was established within the deadline set by the Torreggiani and Others pilot judgment and steps were taken to establish a compensatory remedy through the adoption of a Law-Decree, later in June. The CM welcomed the authorities’ commitment to resolve the problem of prison overcrowding and the significant results achieved in this area and invited them to provide further information regarding the implementation of the preventive remedy, notably in the light of the monitoring to be undertaken in this context.”
In its Commentary to the European Prison Rules, the Council of Europe Committee on Crime Problems explained the scope of the requirements for adequate accommodation and prison regimes under the Rules. The relevant part of the Commentary reads:
“Rule 18 includes some new elements. The first, in Rule 18.3, is intended to compel governments to declare by way of national law specific standards, which can be enforced. Such standards would have to meet wider considerations of human dignity as well as practical ones of health and hygiene. The CPT, by commenting on conditions and space available in prisons in various countries has begun to indicate some minimum standards. These are considered to be 4 m2 for prisoners in shared accommodation and 6 m2 for a prison cell. These minima are, related however, to wider analyses of specific prison systems, including studies of how much time prisoners actually spend in their cells. These minima should not be regarded as the norm. Although the CPT has never laid down such a norm directly, indications are that it would consider 9 to 10 m2 as a desirable size for a cell for one prisoner. This is an area in which the CPT could make an ongoing contribution that would build on what has already been laid down in this regard. What is required is a detailed examination of what size of cell is acceptable accommodation of various numbers of persons. Attention needs to be paid to the number of hours that prisoners spend locked in the cells, when determining appropriate sizes. Even for prisoners who spend a large amount of time out of their cells, there must be a clear minimum space, which meets standards of human dignity.
...
Rule 25 underlines that the prison authorities should not concentrate only on specific rules, such as those related to working, education and exercise, but should review the overall prison regime of all prisoners to see that it meets basic requirements of human dignity. Such activities should cover the period of a normal working day. It is unacceptable to keep prisoners in their cells for 23 hours out of 24, for example. The CPT has emphasised that the aim shall be that the various activities undertaken by prisoners should take them out of their cells for at least eight hours a day ... “
The United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Mandela Rules), A/C.3/70/L.3, 29 September 2015, as the global key standards for the treatment of prisoners adopted by the United Nations General Assembly, in the relevant part provide:
“I. Rules of general application
Basic principles
Rule 1
All prisoners shall be treated with the respect due to their inherent dignity and value as human beings. No prisoner shall be subjected to, and all prisoners shall be protected from, torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, for which no circumstances whatsoever may be invoked as a justification. The safety and security of prisoners, staff, service providers and visitors shall be ensured at all times.
...
Rule 4
The purposes of a sentence of imprisonment or similar measures deprivative of a person’s liberty are primarily to protect society against crime and to reduce recidivism. Those purposes can be achieved only if the period of imprisonment is used to ensure, so far as possible, the reintegration of such persons into society upon release so that they can lead a law-abiding and self-supporting life.
To this end, prison administrations and other competent authorities should offer education, vocational training and work, as well as other forms of assistance that are appropriate and available, including those of a remedial, moral, spiritual, social and health- and sports-based nature. All such programmes, activities and services should be delivered in line with the individual treatment needs of prisoners.
...
Accommodation
Rule 12
Where sleeping accommodation is in individual cells or rooms, each prisoner shall occupy by night a cell or room by himself or herself. If for special reasons, such as temporary overcrowding, it becomes necessary for the central prison administration to make an exception to this rule, it is not desirable to have two prisoners in a cell or room.
Where dormitories are used, they shall be occupied by prisoners carefully selected as being suitable to associate with one another in those conditions. There shall be regular supervision by night, in keeping with the nature of the prison.
Rule 13
All accommodation provided for the use of prisoners and in particular all sleeping accommodation shall meet all requirements of health, due regard being paid to climatic conditions and particularly to cubic content of air, minimum floor space, lighting, heating and ventilation.
Rule 14
In all places where prisoners are required to live or work:
(a) The windows shall be large enough to enable the prisoners to read or work by natural light and shall be so constructed that they can allow the entrance of fresh air whether or not there is artificial ventilation;
(b) Artificial light shall be provided sufficient for the prisoners to read or work without injury to eyesight.
Rule 15
The sanitary installations shall be adequate to enable every prisoner to comply with the needs of nature when necessary and in a clean and decent manner.
Rule 16
Adequate bathing and shower installations shall be provided so that every prisoner can, and may be required to, have a bath or shower, at a temperature suitable to the climate, as frequently as necessary for general hygiene according to season and geographical region, but at least once a week in a temperate climate.
Rule 17
All parts of a prison regularly used by prisoners shall be properly maintained and kept scrupulously clean at all times.
Personal hygiene
Rule 18
Prisoners shall be required to keep their persons clean, and to this end they shall be provided with water and with such toilet articles as are necessary for health and cleanliness.
In order that prisoners may maintain a good appearance compatible with their self-respect, facilities shall be provided for the proper care of the hair and beard, and men shall be able to shave regularly.
Clothing and bedding
Rule 19
Every prisoner who is not allowed to wear his or her own clothing shall be provided with an outfit of clothing suitable for the climate and adequate to keep him or her in good health. Such clothing shall in no manner be degrading or humiliating.
...
Rule 21
Every prisoner shall, in accordance with local or national standards, be provided with a separate bed and with separate and sufficient bedding which shall be clean when issued, kept in good order and changed often enough to ensure its cleanliness.
Food
Rule 22
Every prisoner shall be provided by the prison administration at the usual hours with food of nutritional value adequate for health and strength, of wholesome quality and well prepared and served.
Drinking water shall be available to every prisoner whenever he or she needs it.
Exercise and sport
Rule 23
Every prisoner who is not employed in outdoor work shall have at least one hour of suitable exercise in the open air daily if the weather permits.
Young prisoners, and others of suitable age and physique, shall receive physical and recreational training during the period of exercise. To this end, space, installations and equipment should be provided.
...
Rules applicable to special categories
Prisoners under sentence
...
Privileges
Rule 95
Systems of privileges appropriate for the different classes of prisoners and the different methods of treatment shall be established at every prison, in order to encourage good conduct, develop a sense of responsibility and secure the interest and cooperation of prisoners in their treatment.
Work
Rule 96
Sentenced prisoners shall have the opportunity to work and/or to actively participate in their rehabilitation, subject to a determination of physical and mental fitness by a physician or other qualified health-care professionals.
Sufficient work of a useful nature shall be provided to keep prisoners actively employed for a normal working day.
...
Education and recreation
Rule 104
Provision shall be made for the further education of all prisoners capable of profiting thereby, including religious instruction in the countries where this is possible. The education of illiterate prisoners and of young prisoners shall be compulsory and special attention shall be paid to it by the prison administration.
...
Rule 105
Recreational and cultural activities shall be provided in all prisons for the benefit of the mental and physical health of prisoners.”
On the basis of its visits to places of detention in diverse situations where it monitored conditions of detention and treatment of prisoners, the ICRC first published in 2005 a document titled “Water, Sanitation, Hygiene and Habitat in Prisons”, which was updated in 2012. In 2009 it held an international roundtable in order to discuss developments in the establishment of international guidance on the basis of which it published Supplementary guidance to the Water, Sanitation, Hygiene and Habitat in Prisons standards (available at ).
The ICRC observed that there is no universal standard for detainee accommodation space and that different organisations and fora had made recommendations in this context affecting various groups of countries. Likewise, the ICRC noted that in the absence of universal standards, national standards had been developed by numerous countries but they vary widely. For instance in Europe standards ranged from 4 sq. m in Albania to 12 sq. m in Switzerland. Moreover, some jurisdictions prescribed greater space for pre-trial detainees, others specified greater space requirements for women (for example, Iceland, Poland and Slovenia), and others still differentiated between adults and juveniles (for example, Hungary and Latvia).
In the absence of a universal standard, and based on its experience, the ICRC developed specifications concerning space requirements. For the multi-occupancy accommodation of prisoners this recommendation was 3.4 sq. m per person, including bunk beds and toilet facilities. The ICRC emphasised, however, that this was a recommended specification and not a standard. It stressed that in practical terms the amount of space required by a detainee could not be assessed only on the basis of a specific area measurement. A number of other factors contributed to the assessment of space requirements, including management factors and the facilities and services available in the prison. According to the ICRC, this reflected a comprehensive approach that provided a more accurate picture of the reality for detainees.
The ICRC therefore considered that the space factor alone was a limited measurement of the quality of life and conditions of detention. As such, it was merely a starting point when evaluating the conditions in which detainees were held. However, space norms could not be specified separately from the overall environment and thus the appropriateness of the ICRC’s recommended specifications in any given situation would depend on a number of other factors including: the specific individual needs of, for example, sick, old or young prisoners, women and/or people with disabilities; the physical condition of the buildings; the amount of time spent in the accommodation area; the frequency and extent of opportunities to take physical exercise, work and be involved in other activities outside the accommodation area; the number of people in the accommodation area (to allow a degree of privacy and avoid isolation); the amount of natural light and the adequacy of the ventilation; other activities being undertaken in the accommodation area (such as cooking, washing, drying); other services available (such as toilets and showers); and the extent of supervision provided.
In particular, with regard to the amount of time spent in the cell, the ICRC emphasised that the longer a detainee was held in a confined accommodation space in any twenty-four hour period, the greater the amount of space he or she would require. In other words, the more hours a detainee spent engaged in positive activities in a safe, secure environment outside the accommodation area each day, the greater the possibility of mitigating the negative effects of close confinement. Positive activities in this context include work and education, meeting visitors, engaging in organised exercise or sport, spending extended periods of unstructured time in outdoor exercise areas, and participating in hobbies and recreation programmes.
The ICRC also made a distinction between the general accommodation requirements and accommodation requirements in emergency situations (such as political crisis, natural disasters, fire, riots, health crises in which large numbers of detainees needed to be separated from the others or events which required the transfer of detainees from a prison that had been damaged to another prison). The ICRC’s initial indication that in such situations 2 sq. m per prisoner should be provided had been subsequently criticised by the experts. The emphasis was thus placed not on the indication of minimum requirement of personal space but the necessity of returning a prison to normal conditions (including minimum space specifications) as soon as possible. In particular, it was emphasised that in such instances it is necessary to avoid a situation in which the restrictions introduced to deal with the emergency situation developed into a chronic deficiency.