The case originated in an application (no. 48108/07) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Moldovan national, Mr Valentin Beșleagă (“the applicant”), on 1 November 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Postică a lawyer practising in Chisinau. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent at the time, Mr L. Apostol. The Russian Government were represented by their Agent at the time, Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 12 July 2010 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The Russian Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the Russian Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant, who was born in 1948, lives in Corjova, a village under the formal control of Moldovan authorities, but where agents of the selfproclaimed “Transdniestrian Moldovan Republic” (“MRT”, see Ilaşcu and Others v. Moldova and  [GC], no. 48787/99, § 90, ECHR 2004VII for further details) frequently intervened during the events in question, notably by blocking the participation of the local population in elections held in Moldova.
On 3 June 2007 local elections were to be held in , including in Corjova. The applicant, who is an ambulance driver, submitted his candidature for the position of Mayor of Corjova.
On 1 June 2007, at 11 p.m., the applicant’s ambulance was stopped by the “MRT” road militia and his documents (Moldovan national identity card and driving licence) were taken away from him without any explanation.
On 2 June 2007 the applicant went to the “MRT” militia station located in Dubăsari and asked for the return of his documents. He was then arrested and placed in a detention cell. A few hours later a person came to his cell and, without presenting himself, asked him about his work and his electoral propaganda. The applicant later found out that the visitor had been a judge and that, following that discussion in the cell, the judge adopted a decision, finding him guilty of the administrative offence of unlawful electoral propaganda and sentencing him to 15 days’ administrative detention.
The applicant submits that he was not allowed to contact his relatives or to find a lawyer, and was not issued with a copy of the court’s decision, which prevented any possibility of lodging an effective appeal against the decision of 2 June 2007.
During his detention the applicant was placed in a cell which, according to him was damp and cold. Food was given once a day. When the applicant’s relatives, alerted by his absence, contacted the local authorities in order to find out about his fate, they were informed of the applicant’s detention. However, their requests to transmit food to him were allegedly rejected.
On 17 June 2007 the applicant was released from detention and he was issued with a copy of the decision of 2 June 2007. The time-limit for lodging an appeal had already expired by that time. Upon release, he was allegedly coughing and was diagnosed with chronic acute bronchitis. He also claims that his eyesight worsened considerably.
In the meantime, on 6 June 2007, the applicant complained to the Moldovan prosecutor’s office of his unlawful detention. Based on this complaint, a criminal investigation was initiated on 12 June 2007, the applicant and witnesses were subsequently heard. Three high-ranking “MRT” officers were charged and were declared wanted persons. However, on 4 August 2010 the investigation was suspended due to the fact that the three accused were hiding from it in the “MRT”.