The case originated in an application (no. 33883/06) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Mr Dumitru Gheorghe (“the applicant”), on 8 August 2006.
The applicant was represented by Mr I. Oprea Popa, a lawyer practising in Bucharest. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs I. Cambrea, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been denied access to court.
On 27 January 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1944 and lives in Bucharest.
In 1984, the applicant, a professional photographer, took a number of photographs of landscapes in Călăraşi County that had been commissioned for commercial publication in an album. The album was not, in the event, published, but the photographs were retained by F.G., who was in charge of the album project.
.  In 2004, the applicant discovered by chance that an album named “Călăraşi County” had been published by a company run by F.G. in 1999. He noticed that of the 143 photographs of landscapes from Călăraşi County contained in the album, 135 were photographs taken by him and left in the possession of F.G. in 1984. However, F.G. was credited as the photographer, and not the applicant.
.  The applicant lodged a criminal complaint against F.G. with the Romanian Copyright Office (“the RCO”) on 25 February 2004, claiming that F.G. had committed one of the offences provided for by Articles 140142 of Law 8/1996 on copyright and neighbouring rights (“Law 8/1996”). He joined a civil action to the criminal complaint, seeking compensation amounting to EUR 50,000 for pecuniary and nonpecuniary damage.
.  On 29 June 2004, a report was drawn up by the RCO following an investigation carried out at the headquarters of the company that had published the album.
.  After finalising its investigation and concluding that the provisions of Article 140 § 1 let. a) of Law 8/1996 had been infringed, the RCO forwarded the applicant’s complaint, together with the accompanying documents, to the Călăraşi Police Department on 5 November 2004.
.  On 8 November 2004, an expert report was ordered by the Călăraşi Police Department. The report, dated 24 December 2004, confirmed that the photographs had been taken by the applicant.
.  On 21 April 2005, the prosecutor’s office attached to Călăraşi County Court decided not to open a criminal investigation on the ground that the limitation period for the punishment of F.G. had expired.
.  The applicant lodged a complaint against that decision with the Chief Prosecutor. The latter confirmed the decision not to open an investigation.
.  A complaint lodged by the applicant with the Călăraşi County Court was allowed on 24 November 2005. The court held that the period between 27 April 1999 (the date of publication of the album) and 25 February 2004 (the date on which the applicant lodged his complaint with the RCO) was less than five years – the term of limitation provided by law. It added that the procedure stipulated by Law 8/1996 was a special procedure for the punishment of offences related to copyright, which was justified by the complexity and exceptional nature of such cases. Therefore, the court held that in the light of the special provisions applicable to the file, the date from which the term of limitation of five years should have been calculated was not the date on which the RCO forwarded the file to the police (5 November 2004) but the date on which the applicant lodged his complaint with the RCO (25 February 2004).
.  Accordingly, the Călăraşi County Court remitted the file to the prosecutor’s office in order for it to initiate criminal proceedings.
.  On 17 February 2006, the Bucharest Court of Appeal allowed an appeal by the prosecutor against the judgment of 24 November 2005 and held that the case had become time-barred, given that the police had received the criminal complaint only on 5 November 2004 – more than five years after the offence had been committed. No reference was made to the civil complaint lodged by the applicant.
The relevant provisions of Law 8/1996 read as follows:
“The duties and powers of the Romanian Copyright Office shall be:
...
d) to observe and monitor, at the request and expense of the holders of protected rights, activities that might give rise to infringements of the legislation on authors’ rights and neighbouring rights;
...
f) to issue statements of their findings on infringements of the law, under the terms provided by the Code of Criminal Procedure, or, in the case of certain offences, to notify the bodies competent to initiate criminal proceedings.”
“(1) Violations of the rights set forth and guaranteed by the present law shall entail civil or criminal responsibility, or responsibility for committing a contravention, as the case may be, under the law. The procedural provisions shall be those provided under the present law, in conjunction with those of the ordinary law.”
“An offence punishable by imprisonment of between one month and two years, or a fine of between two hundred thousand and three million lei, with the exception of more serious offences, shall be found to have been committed if a person who does not have the authorisation or consent, as the case may be, of the holder of the rights acknowledged by the present law:
makes a work publicly known ...
“The criminal procedure shall be set in motion in the case of the offences listed under Articles 140, 141, and 142 paragraphs a), c), j), l), n), and o) by a preliminary complaint [being lodged] by the injured party within the meaning of the present law.”
.  The provisions of the Criminal Code setting out the method of calculating the periods of limitation, as in force at the relevant time, read as follows:
“(1) Limitation periods for criminal responsibility are as follows:
...
d) five years, when the law provides for imprisonment of more than one year, but no more than five years, for the offence committed;
...
(2) The terms mentioned in the present article are calculated from the date on which the offence was committed”.
“(1) The limitation periods provided for in Article 122 shall be interrupted by any procedural action that has been initiated and has been communicated to the defendant during the criminal trial.
(2) The limitation periods shall be renewed following any interruption.”
.  The relevant provisions of the CCP in force at the time of the relevant facts read as follows:
“The aim of a civil action is to establish the civil liability of the accused and the liability for the payment of damages of any other person who may be held legally responsible.
A civil action can be brought together with a criminal action in a criminal trial, by way of joining the proceedings.”
“The findings contained in a final judgment of the criminal court concerning the issue whether the act in question was committed and the identification of the perpetrator and establishment of his guilt are binding on the civil court when it examines the civil consequences of the criminal act.”
“(1) In the event of a conviction or an acquittal, or the termination of the criminal trial, the court shall deliver a judgment in which it also decides on the civil action.”