The case originated in two applications (nos. 51111/07 and 42757/07) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Russian nationals, Mr Mikhail Borisovich Khodorkovskiy and Mr Platon Leonidovich Lebedev (“the applicants”), on 16 March 2007 and 27 September 2007 respectively.
The applicants were represented by Mr A. Drel, Mr J. Glasson QC and Lord D. Pannick QC, lawyers practising in London. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr Galperin.
The applicants complained, in particular, about their conviction for misappropriation and money laundering, and about other events related to the criminal proceedings against them. They alleged, in addition, that their prosecution had been motivated by political reasons, in breach of Article 18 of the Convention.
On 24 March 2014 the applications were communicated to the Government.
The first applicant was born in 1963 and the second applicant was born in 1956.
Before the applicants’ first arrest in 2003, the first applicant was the Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) of and a major shareholder in OAO Neftyanaya Kompaniya Yukos (Yukos plc), the head company of the Yukos group of companies (further referred to as “Yukos”), which at the relevant time was one of the largest oil companies in Russia. The second applicant was the first applicant’s business partner and a close friend. From 1998 the second applicant was a director at Yukos-Moskva Ltd. He was also a major shareholder in Yukos plc. Furthermore, the applicants controlled a large number of other mining enterprises, refineries, banks and financial companies. In 2002-2003 Yukos began to pursue a number of ambitious business projects which would have made it one of the strongest non-State players on the market. In particular, Yukos was engaged in merger talks with the US-based Exxon Mobil and Chevron Texaco companies.
The applicants were also active as political lobbyists. From at least 2002 the first applicant openly funded opposition political parties, and a number of his close friends and business partners became politicians.
The first applicant asserted that his political and business activities had been perceived by the leadership of the country as a breach of loyalty and a threat to national economic security. He alleged that as a counter-measure the authorities had launched a massive attack on him personally, his company, colleagues and friends. A more detailed description of the applicants’ political and business activities prior to their arrest can be found in Khodorkovskiy and Lebedev v. Russia, nos. 11082/06 and 13772/05, §§ 8-41, 25 July 2013.
On 20 June 2003 the General Prosecutor’s Office (the GPO) initiated a criminal investigation into the privatisation of a large mining company, Apatit plc (criminal case no. 18/41-03). In 1994 20% of Apatit plc’s shares were acquired by a company allegedly controlled by the applicants. The case was opened under Article 165 of the Criminal Code (“misappropriation of assets” falling short of embezzlement), Article 285 (“abuse of official powers”) and Article 315 (“deliberate non-compliance with a court order”) of the Criminal Code.
In the following years the charges against the applicants within case no. 18/41-03 (hereinafter – the “main case”) were repeatedly supplemented and amended. Thus, within that case the applicants were also charged with corporate tax evasion (Article 199 of the Criminal Code). The applicants were suspected of selling Yukos oil through a network of trading companies registered in low-tax zones, in particular in the town of Lesnoy, Sverdlovsk region. According to the GPO, tax cuts were obtained by those companies by deceit, since the companies existed only on paper and never conducted any real business in the low-tax zones which would have granted eligibility for a preferential tax regime. The GPO suspected that the applicants registered and controlled those companies through their friends and partners, in particular Mr Moiseyev, senior manager and shareholder of Group Menatep Limited, Mr Pereverzin, director of two Yukos companies registered in Cyprus (see paragraph 116 below), and Mr Malakhovskiy, director of Ratibor (see paragraph 108 below).
Case no. 18/41-03 led to the applicants’ conviction at their first trial in 2005. The facts related to that trial (the “first trial”) were at the heart of several applications lodged with the Court in 2003-2006 (see Summary of the Court’s main findings in the applicants’ previous cases at paragraph 34 et seq. below).
In October 2005, on completion of the first trial, both applicants were transferred from Moscow to two remote Russian penal colonies to serve their sentences. The first applicant was sent to penal colony FGU IK-10, located in the town of Krasnokamensk, Chita Region. The second applicant was sent to correctional colony FGU IK-3 in the Kharp township, located on the Yamal peninsula (Yamalo-Nenetskiy region, Northern Urals, north of the Arctic Circle).
The applicants’ prison terms as imposed in the 2005 judgment subsequently expired; however, they both remained in prison on account of new accusations brought against them within the related but separate court proceedings which are at the heart of the present case (the “second trial”).
On an unspecified date the GPO severed from the applicants’ case a new case concerning Mr Pereverzin, Mr Malakhovskiy and Mr Valdez-Garcia, directors of Yukos trading companies. The charges against Mr Pereverzin included, in particular, embezzlement and money laundering (“legalizatsiya”) committed in a group which also included the applicants.
In June 2006 the trial of Mr Pereverzin, Mr Malakhovskiy and Mr Valdez-Garcia started at the Basmanniy District Court of Moscow. That trial was held in camera and was presided over by Judge Yarlykova.
On 1 March 2007 Mr Pereverzin and Mr Malakhovskiy were found guilty; Mr Valdez-Garcia fled from Russia and escaped conviction. He alleged that in 2005 he had been ill-treated while in custody. In particular, Mr Valdez-Garcia claimed that he had been beaten by investigator Mr Kz. and received multiple injuries. However, the Russian authorities refused to institute a criminal investigation into those allegations.
On 21 June 2007 the Moscow City Court upheld the conviction on appeal.
Mr Aleksanyan was one of the lawyers acting for the first and second applicants. In 2006 he was arrested and prosecuted in a related but separate case (see Aleksanyan v. Russia, no. 46468/06, 22 December 2008). The accusations against Mr Aleksanyan were brought to trial, but in 2010 they were dropped due to the expiry of the statute of limitations.
In 2004, while the applicants’ first trial was underway, the GPO decided that certain episodes related to the applicants’ business operations were to be severed from the main criminal case (no. 18/41-03) against the applicants.
On 2 December 2004 the GPO opened criminal case no. 18/325556-04, which concerned “money laundering” by Mr Moiseyev and other “unidentified persons”.
On 27 December 2004 the GPO informed the applicants of that decision. However, the applicants were not questioned in relation to those new charges and were not given any details or informed about the nature of the investigation.
On 14 January 2005 the first applicant’s defence complained before the Meshchanskiy District Court (which conducted the first trial) that the GPO was conducting a parallel investigation but refusing to give the defence any information about its goals or about any charges which might result from it.
According to the Government, criminal case no. 18/325556-04 was eventually joined with criminal case no. 18/41-03. The outcome of this particular criminal investigation is unclear.
In late 2002 Yukos plc was subjected to a series of tax audits and ensuing tax proceedings, as a result of which it was found guilty of repeated tax fraud, in particular for using an illegal tax-evasion scheme involving the creation of sham companies in 2000-2003.
On 15 April 2004 proceedings were started against Yukos plc in respect of the 2000 tax year and it was prevented from disposing of certain assets pending the outcome of the case.
On 26 May 2004 Moscow City Commercial Court ordered it to pay a total of 99,375,110,548 roubles (RUB) (approximately 2,847,497,802 Euros (EUR)) in taxes, interest and penalties.
Yukos plc appealed and the appeal proceedings began on 18 June 2004. On 29 June 2004 the appeal court dismissed the company’s complaints, including those alleging irregularities in the procedure and a lack of time to prepare its defence.
On 7 July 2004 Yukos plc filed an unsuccessful cassation appeal against the 26 May and 29 June 2004 judgments and simultaneously challenged those judgments by way of supervisory review before the Russian Supreme Commercial Court. Yukos plc claimed, among other things, that the case against it was time-barred; under Article 113 of the Russian Tax Code, a taxpayer was liable to pay penalties for a tax offence only for a three-year period, which ran from the day after the end of the relevant tax term.
The Presidium of the Supreme Commercial Court sought an opinion from the Constitutional Court, which confirmed on 14 July 2005 that the three-year time limit under Article 113 should apply. However, where a taxpayer had impeded tax supervision and inspections, the running of the time-limit stopped once the tax audit report had been produced. On the basis of that ruling, on 4 October 2005 the Presidium dismissed Yukos plc’s appeal, finding that the case was not time-barred, because Yukos plc had actively impeded the relevant tax inspections and the Tax Ministry’s tax audit report for 2000 had been served on Yukos plc on 29 December 2003, that was, within three years.
In April 2004 the Russian authorities also brought enforcement proceedings, as a result of which Yukos plc’s assets located in Russia were attached; its domestic bank accounts partly frozen and the shares of its Russian subsidiaries seized. On 2 September 2004 the Tax Ministry found Yukos plc had used essentially the same tax arrangement in 2001 as in 2000. Given that the company had recently been found guilty of a similar offence, the penalty imposed was doubled.
Overall: for the tax year 2001, Yukos plc was ordered to pay RUB 132,539,253,849.78 (approximately EUR 3,710,836,129); for 2002, RUB 192,537,006,448.58 (around EUR 4,344,549,434); and, for 2003, RUB 155,140,099,967.37 (around EUR 4,318,143,482). Yukos plc was also required to pay bailiffs an enforcement fee, calculated as 7% of the total debt, the payment of which could not be suspended or rescheduled. It was required to pay all those amounts within very short deadlines and it made numerous unsuccessful requests to extend the time available to pay.
On 20 July 2004 the Ministry of Justice announced the forthcoming sale of Yuganskneftegaz plc, Yukos plc’s main production entity. On 19 December 2004 76.79% of the shares in Yuganskneftegaz plc were auctioned to cover Yukos plc’s tax liability. Two days earlier, bailiffs had calculated Yukos plc’s consolidated debt at RUB 344,222,156,424.22 (EUR 9,210,844,560.93).
Yukos plc was declared insolvent on 4 August 2006 and liquidated on 12 November 2007.
The above case concerned the second applicant’s arrest and detention pending the first trial. The Court found several breaches of Article 5 of the Convention on account of the second applicant’s pre-trial detention. It also found that there was no failure on the part of the State to fulfil its obligation under Article 34 with regard to the second applicant’s temporary inability to meet one of his lawyers.
The above case concerned the first applicant’s arrest and detention pending the first trial. The Court found no violation of Article 3 of the Convention in respect of the conditions of his pre-trial detention between 25 October 2003 and 8 August 2005. It found a violation of Article 3 in respect of the conditions of pre-trial detention between 8 August and 9 October 2005 and the conditions in the courtroom before and during the trial. The Court further found several breaches of Article 5 in respect of the first applicant’s arrest and pre-trial detention.
The Court found no violation of Article 18 of the Convention in respect of the first applicant’s complaint that the State had used the criminal prosecution for a political end and in order to appropriate the company’s assets. While the Court admitted that the applicant’s case might raise a certain suspicion as to the authorities’ real intent, it reiterated that claims of political motivation for a prosecution required incontestable proof, which had not been presented (see Khodorkovskiy, cited above, § 260).
The above cases concerned certain aspects of the second applicant’s detention pending the first trial that had not been examined in Lebedev (cited above), and the first trial of both applicants.
The Court found a violation of Article 3 in respect of the conditions of the second applicant’s detention in the remand prison and in the courtroom. It also found several breaches of Article 5 of the Convention in respect of the second applicant’s pre-trial detention.
With regard to the first trial, the Court found no violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention on account of the alleged partiality of the trial judge. However, it found a violation of Article 6 § 1, taken in conjunction with Article 6 § 3 (c) and (d), on account of breaches of lawyer-client confidentiality and the unfair taking and examination of evidence by the trial court.
The Court further found no violation of Article 7 of the Convention with respect to the allegedly unforeseeable interpretation of the tax law which led to the applicants’ conviction.
It found a violation of Article 8 of the Convention on account of the fact that the applicants had been sent to remote correctional facilities to serve their sentences.
The Court also found a violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 in respect of the first applicant on account of the imposition of civil liability for tax arrears payable by Yukos.
The Court found no violation of Article 18 of the Convention in respect of the applicants, confirming its position as stated in Khodorkovskiy, cited above, § 260, that the standard of proof in cases where applicants allege bad faith of the part of the authorities is high (Khodorkovskiy and Lebedev, cited above, § 903). It stated, in particular, that whereas it was prepared to admit that some political groups or government officials had had their own reasons to push for the applicants’ prosecution, this did not make the applicants’ prosecution illegitimate, in that the accusations against them had been serious, and even if there had existed a mixed intent behind their prosecution, this did not dispense them from responding to the accusations (ibid. § 908).
Finally, the Court found that the authorities had failed to respect their obligation under Article 34 of the Convention, as a result of harassment of the first applicant’s legal team by enforcement agencies.
The above case concerned complaints by Yukos plc of irregularities in the proceedings concerning its tax liability for the 2000 tax year and about the unlawfulness and lack of proportionality of the 2000-2003 tax assessments and their subsequent enforcement.
The Court found a violation of Article 6 § 1 and 3 (b) of the Convention as regards the 2000 tax assessment proceedings on account of the insufficient time available to Yukos plc to prepare the case at first instance and on appeal.
The Court also found a violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 regarding the imposition and calculation of the penalties concerning the 2000-2001 tax assessments on account of the retroactive change in the rules on the applicable statutory time-limit and the consequent doubling of the penalties due for the 2001 tax year.
It also found that there had been no violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 as regards the remainder of the 2000-2003 tax assessments. Likewise, it held that there had been no violation of Article 14 of the Convention, taken in conjunction with Article 1 of Protocol No. 1. The Court found, in this regard, that Yukos plc had failed to show that other Russian taxpayers had used or were continuing to use the same or similar tax arrangements and that it had been singled out.
The Court further found a violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 in the enforcement proceedings against Yukos plc. Given the pace of the enforcement proceedings, the obligation to pay the full enforcement fee and the authorities’ failure to take proper account of the consequences of their actions, the Russian authorities had failed to strike a fair balance between the legitimate aims sought and the measures employed.
Finally, the Court held that there had been no violation of Article 18, taken in conjunction with Article 1 of Protocol No. 1. It found that Yukos plc’s debt in the enforcement proceedings resulted from legitimate actions by the Russian Government to counter the company’s tax evasion. Noting, among other things, Yukos plc’s allegations that its prosecution was politically motivated, the Court accepted that the case had attracted massive public interest. However, apart from the violations found, there was no indication of any further issues or defects in the proceedings against Yukos plc which would have enabled the Court to conclude that Russia had misused those proceedings to destroy Yukos plc and take control of its assets.
At the relevant time the applicants were serving their sentences following their conviction in the first trial. The first applicant was serving his sentence in penal colony FGU IK-10, located in the town of Krasnokamensk, Chita Region (see Khodorkovskiy and Lebedev, cited above, § 322). The second applicant was serving his sentence in correctional colony FGU IK-3 in the Kharp township on the Yamal peninsula (see paragraph 12 above).
On 14 December 2006 the investigator ordered the transfer of both applicants to a pre-trial detention facility (SIZO-1 or FBU IZ-75/1 of the Zabaykalskiy Region) in the town of Chita. The second applicant was transferred there on 17 December 2006 and the first applicant on 21 December 2006. The applicants remained in the Chita remand prison until their transfer to a remand prison (SIZO-1) in Moscow in February 2009 as the criminal case was referred by the GPO to the Khamovnicheskiy District Court of Moscow for trial (see paragraph 72 below).
On 3 February 2007 the investigator decided to sever several episodes from criminal case no. 18/41-03 and to open a new case. The new case was assigned case number 18/432766-07. The Deputy General Prosecutor ordered that the investigation in that case was to be conducted in the Chita region.
On 5 February 2007 the applicants were charged with the crimes punishable under two provisions of the Criminal Code: “embezzlement” (Article 160) and “Money laundering” (Article 174 (1)). According to the bill of indictment, those crimes had been committed by the applicants in Moscow in their capacity as former senior managers of Yukos plc and affiliated companies.
On 7 February 2007 a group of lawyers for the applicants travelled from Moscow to Chita. At Domodedovo airport (Moscow) the applicants’ lawyers were stopped and detained for one hour by police working in the airport security unit. Their papers were verified and their belongings were also checked using special equipment and X-ray apparatus. In the course of the searches confidential papers being carried by the lawyers were examined and video-recorded.
On the same day, in the pre-flight security zone of Chita airport, GPO investigators approached Ms Moskalenko, one of the lawyers for the first applicant, and ordered her to sign a formal undertaking not to disclose information from the case materials in file no. 18/432766-07. She made a handwritten note on the form, stating that she had been coerced into signing the form and that she had not been given access to the documents in case file no. 18/432766-07. On 8 and 15 February 2007 Ms Moskalenko filed a formal complaint with the GPO, stating that the two episodes in the airports amounted to harassment of the applicants’ lawyers and breach of their professional privilege.
In February 2007 the applicants lodged a complaint under Article 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (the “CCrP”) about the decision to investigate the new cases in Chita. They claimed that since the acts imputed to them had been committed in Moscow, they ought to be investigated in Moscow, and that the applicants should be transferred to a remand prison there.
On 6 March 2007 the GPO initiated disbarment proceedings in respect of Ms Moskalenko, referring to her absence from Chita when the first applicant was studying the materials of the case. The first applicant was obliged to issue a statement confirming that he was fully satisfied with Ms Moskalenko’s work. On 8 June 2007 the Qualifications Commission of the Bar refused to disbar Ms Moskalenko.
On 20 March 2007 the Basmanniy District Court found that the GPO’s decision to conduct the investigation in Chita had been arbitrary and that the investigation should be conducted in Moscow. That ruling was upheld on 16 April 2007 by the Moscow City Court. However, the applicants remained in the Chita remand prison.
In July 2007 the defence filed an application with the Prosecutor General, asking that a criminal case be opened in respect of the GPO officials who had failed to follow the order contained in the Basmanniy District Court’s decision of 20 March 2007 concerning the proper place of the investigation. However, this request was refused.
On 25 December 2007 the Supreme Court of Russia, at the GPO’s request, examined the case by way of supervisory review and ordered the lower court to reconsider whether Moscow was the proper place for the investigation in the applicants’ case.
On 30 January 2008 the Basmanniy District Court held that the GPO’s decision to designate Chita as the place of investigation did not breach the applicants’ constitutional rights and did not hinder their access to justice. Consequently, the court confirmed the validity of that decision. On 7 April 2008 the Moscow City Court upheld the lower court’s ruling.
On 28 March 2007 the first applicant lodged a complaint before a judge under Article 125 of the CCrP. He complained about actions by the GPO investigators, specifically that he had been given no details about the parallel investigations; that conducting the investigation in Chita was unlawful, since all of the operations imputed to the applicants had taken place in Moscow; that the courts which authorised his detention in the Chita remand prison lacked jurisdiction; and that the GPO had harassed his lawyers by subjecting them to unlawful searches, threatening them with criminal prosecution and trying to disbar Ms Moskalenko, one of his lawyers. The applicant claimed that all of these elements, taken in aggregate, amounted to an abuse of process. He sought a court order directing the GPO to stay the proceedings. The applicant insisted on his personal attendance at the examination of the motion by the court, but the court decided that it was impossible to transport him from Chita to Moscow.
On 27 June 2007 Judge Yarlykova of the Basmanniy District Court of Moscow examined the complaint. The applicant’s lawyer challenged the judge on the ground that she had earlier presided at the trial of Mr Pereverzin, Mr Malakhovskiy and Mr Valdez-Garcia, and could therefore have preconceived ideas about the first applicant’s guilt. However, Judge Yarlykova refused the recusal application, and dismissed the complaint on the merits.
On 19 September 2007 the Moscow City Court upheld the ruling by Judge Yarlykova. In particular, the Moscow City Court agreed with her that under Russian law a judge was not competent to supervise procedural decisions taken by the prosecution bodies in the performance of their functions, and that the judge’s only role in this respect was to verify that the constitutional rights of the participants in criminal proceedings had been respected.
On 16 April 2008 the first applicant resubmitted his complaint of 28 March 2007 seeking discontinuation of the criminal proceedings against him and Mr Lebedev. He also referred to various breaches of the domestic procedure, to bad faith on the part of the authorities and to infringements of the rights of the defendants and professional privilege of the applicants’ lawyers. The applicant lodged this complaint before the Basmanniy District Court of Moscow, but the judge transmitted the motion to a court in Chita, referring to the fact that the investigation was taking place there.
On 29 September 2008 Judge Ivanoshchuk of the Ingondinskiy District Court of Chita rejected the motion, on the ground that the investigator’s actions were not subject to judicial review. On 26 December 2008 that decision was confirmed by the Chita Regional Court.
According to the applicants, the bill of indictment and the appended written materials ran to 188 volumes.
When the materials of the case file were given to the defence for examination, the applicants and their lawyer had access to one copy of the file, which they were only allowed to study in the presence of an investigator. When they wished to discuss materials or legal issues in private, the investigator removed the case file.
According to the applicants, they were not allowed to keep copies of the case file in their cells.
Having received the bill of indictment together with the case file, the defence asked the prosecution to clarify the charges. In their view, the prosecution had failed to demonstrate which facts it intended to prove through which item(s) of evidence. They also submitted that the amounts of oil allegedly misappropriated by the applicants were defined in a random manner, and that the bill of indictment was badly written. However, their request was rejected and the prosecution decided that the bill of indictment was acceptable as it stood and was ready to be submitted to the court.
On 14 February 2009 case no. 18/432766-07 was referred by the GPO to the Khamovnicheskiy District Court of Moscow for trial. In the Khamovnicheskiy District Court the case was assigned no. 1/23-10. The applicants were transferred from the Chita remand prison to a remand prison in Moscow (see paragraph 52 above).
On 3 March 2009 the trial began with a preliminary hearing, held in camera. The case was heard by a single judge, Judge Danilkin. He was assisted by four secretaries.
The prosecution team was composed of five prosecutors. The defence team was composed of over a dozen lawyers.
From 17 March 2009 the hearings were public. The two applicants were held in a glass dock which, unlike the rest of the room, was not air-conditioned and was poorly ventilated. The applicants were brought to the courtroom each day in handcuffs and were heavily guarded.
The applicants sought the court’s permission to sit outside the glass dock near their lawyers, but permission was not granted. According to the applicants, while in the glass dock they were unable either to discuss the case with their lawyers confidentially or to review documents. All their conversations during the hearings were within earshot of the guards. Furthermore, the judge reviewed all the documents which the defence lawyers wished to show their clients.
At the preliminary hearing the defence filed several motions, all of which were rejected. Thus, the defence sought the discontinuation of the proceedings for abuse of process. However, Judge Danilkin ruled that it was premature to terminate the case without assessing the entire body of evidence and hearing the parties’ positions. The applicants appealed but to no avail: on 1 June 2009 the Moscow City Court ruled that Judge Danilkin’s ruling was not amenable to appeal by the defence.
The defence further complained that the prosecution had failed to submit to the court a list of the defence witnesses who were to be called to the court by a subpoena. The defence contended that they were thus unable to secure the presence of those witnesses at the trial. The defence referred to Article 220 (4) of the CCrP in this respect. Judge Danilkin replied that the absence of a list of defence witnesses to be summoned did not invalidate the bill of indictment, and that the defence would be free to request that the witnesses be summoned during the trial if need be.
The defence asked the judge to order discovery of evidence and suppress certain items of evidence contained in the prosecution case file, but all motions to that end were refused.
The defence challenged the territorial jurisdiction of the Khamovnicheskiy District Court, but this objection was dismissed by the judge.
The defence repeated their request to have the bill of indictment reformulated in order to connect the evidence and factual assertions on which the prosecution case relied and to clarify the prosecution’s legal arguments. Judge Danilkin refused that motion, stating that the law did not require the prosecution to do a better job and to re-write the bill.
At the preliminary hearing the prosecution requested an extension of the applicants’ detention on remand and on 17 March 2009 that request was granted. The court did not set a time-limit for the extension in its order. The applicants argued that in the subsequent months detention orders were extended with delays; as a result, some periods were not covered by any valid detention order. In addition, in the applicants’ opinion, the review of the detention order of 17 March 2009 was unnecessarily delayed.
Over the following months the applicants’ detention on remand was repeatedly extended. In the opinion of the defence, those extensions were unlawful. The first applicant went on hunger strike in protest against the extensions. In 2011 the Supreme Court acknowledged that the applicants’ detention had been unlawful and issued a special ruling in this respect, addressed to the Chair of the Moscow City Court.
The Khamovnicheskiy District Court of Moscow concluded the preliminary hearing on 17 March 2009 and proceeded to the prosecution’s presentation of the case.
The prosecution presented their case between 21 April 2009 and 29 March 2010. According to the prosecution, between 1998 and 2003 the applicants, as owners and/or managers of the companies which had a controlling stake in Yukos plc, misappropriated 350 metric tonnes of crude oil produced by Yukos’s subsidiaries and subsequently laundered the profits by selling the oil through a chain of affiliated trading companies. The sums thus accumulated were transferred to the accounts of hundreds of foreign and Russian companies, controlled by the applicants. The prosecution claimed that those acts amounted to misappropriation or embezzlement (Article 160 of the Criminal Code) and money laundering (Article 174.1 of the Criminal Code).
The facts and the legal arguments relied on in the prosecution case are described in more detail below. The following summary is based on the text of the judgment with which the second trial concluded; it reflects only those elements of the case as presented by the prosecution which were retained by the court as the basis for its conclusions.
Yukos was created in the course of the privatisation of the State oil sector in 1995. The first applicant was a majority shareholder of Group Menatep Limited, which acquired a large block of shares in Yukos plc at one of the privatisation auctions. As a result, Group Menatep Limited became the majority shareholder in Yukos. The second applicant also owned an important block of shares in Group Menatep Limited and was its director. Thus, as majority shareholders in Group Menatep Limited, both applicants could play a decisive role in shaping Yukos’s business strategy. In 1997 the first applicant was elected President of the Board of Directors of Yukos.
In addition, in order to secure the loyalty of certain senior executives in Yukos, the applicants created a secret parallel system for distribution of the group’s profits. Thus, in 1996 the applicants concluded an oral agreement with Yukos senior executives, under which Group Menatep Limited undertook to pay 15% of Yukos’s profits Tempo Finance Limited. Those Yukos senior executives were the beneficiaries of Tempo Finance Limited. Such payments were regularly made between 1996 and 2002, when they amounted to several hundred million United States dollars (USD). In 2002 the agreement between Group Menatep Limited and Tempo Finance Limited was reformulated and concluded in writing. As a result, the applicants secured the loyalty of several leading Yukos senior executives and obtained not only strategic but also operative control over the group (pages 569 et seq. of the judgment). The influence of the minority shareholders within Yukos was thus reduced to a minimum.
Through Yukos the applicants gained partial control over Yukos’ main subsidiaries, in which Yukos owned 50% or more of the shares: oil-extracting companies, refineries, crude-oil storage terminals, etc. Yukos’ biggest oil-extracting subsidiaries were Yuganskneftegaz plc, Samaraneftegaz plc and Tomskneft plc (hereinafter “production entities”). Again, the applicants had recourse to various techniques in order to reduce the influence of the minority shareholders in those companies.
The applicants initially controlled the production entities on the basis of “management agreements”. Thus, on 19 February 1997 such an agreement was imposed on Yukos plc by Rosprom Ltd, another company which belonged to the applicants and in which the second applicant was a deputy president of the executive board (pravleniye) in 1997-1998. Under that agreement Yukos plc delegated to Rosprom the power to take decisions which would otherwise be within the competence of the executive bodies of Yukos plc. The management agreement was approved by the general meeting of shareholders of Yukos. On 14 April 1998 Rosprom signed an agreement in similar terms with Tomskneft plc.
In 1998 the applicants registered new companies which operated under “management agreements” with the production entities belonging to the Yukos group. Thus, Yukos Explorations and Production Ltd was to operate the group’s oil-extracting facilities, whereas Yukos Refining and Marketing Ltd was created to operate the refineries. Both Yukos Explorations and Production Ltd and Yukos Refining and Marketing Ltd were controlled by Yukos Moskva Ltd, in which the first applicant was head of the board of directors (from 3 July 1998 until 31 March 2000). From 2000 Yukos plc was administered by Yukos Moskva Ltd.
Although from 2000 onwards the first applicant was no longer the head of the board of directors of Yukos Moskva Ltd and became merely one of its directors, he continued to define the group’s policy as the major shareholder in Group Menatep Limited and, in this capacity, was able to influence the production entities’ operative decisions. The second applicant was the deputy head of the board of directors of Yukos Refining and Marketing Ltd and Yukos Moskva Ltd and was de facto the financial director of those companies and of the group as a whole.
The system of “management agreements” made it possible to protect the mother company (Yukos plc) from civil and other liability for abusive interference in the business of its subsidiaries (page 308 of the judgment). Under those agreements the managing companies – such as Rosprom, Yukos Refining and Marketing Ltd and Yukos Explorations and Production Ltd – were required to act in the best interests of the production entities. However, in reality they acted in the applicants’ interests only.
The applicants thus created a vertically-integrated group of companies where all important decisions were taken by them and their accomplices and then imposed on the production entities. The latter thus lost any independence. This enabled the applicants to redirect sales of the oil extracted by the production entities and prevent the minority shareholders in those entities and in Yukos plc from sharing the profits generated by the sales of crude oil.
In 1996 the applicants used their influence to compel the two production entities – Yuganskneftegaz plc and Samaraneftegaz plc – to conclude “general agreements” with Yukos. Those agreements contained an undertaking by the production entities not to sell their produce independently in the future, but only through Yukos. The agreements defined the principles for calculating the price of oil, which was based on the price of “oil well fluid” and provided for an independent evaluation of market prices for this “oil well fluid”. On the basis of those general agreements Yukos and its production entities concluded contracts for the sale of crude oil on conditions which were unfavourable to the production entities. Those deals were concluded “on the basis of malicious collusion with the representative of another party” and were thus contrary to Article 179 of the Civil Code (page 647 of the judgment; page 9 of the decision of the court of appeal). In 1998 a general agreement in similar terms was signed with Tomskneft plc.
Some of the directors representing the minority shareholders in the production entities objected to the practice of concluding contracts under such conditions, and even threatened Yukos with lawsuits. They claimed that the prices indicated in those contracts were much lower than the market price and that the production entities were thus deprived of their profits. However, the applicants overcame their resistance. To do so, they requested and obtained approval for the existing schemes of oil sales from the general meetings of shareholders. Those approvals covered all past sales and future sales for the next three years. The prosecution, with some exceptions, did not specify how many votes the applicants had at the general meeting of shareholders, how many votes they needed to approve the sales of oil, and in what way these approvals were in breach of the Public Companies Act.
In order to obtain these approvals the applicants used various techniques. In particular, general meetings of the shareholders in the production entities were always presided by one of the Yukos executives. In addition, although Yukos and other companies affiliated with the production entities and owning shares in them ought to have been regarded as “interested parties” under the Public Companies Act of 1995 and, as such, should have been excluded from the voting, they did not acknowledge a conflict of interests and voted at those meetings along with other shareholders (page 9 of the decision of the court of appeal).
In some cases, where the applicants did not have the necessary number of votes, they succeeded in neutralising the resistance of “dissident shareholders” by having their shares seized by a court. Thus, in 1999 a Kaluga court opened proceedings against a group of “dissident shareholders” in Tomskneft plc. In those proceedings a certain Mr V. challenged those persons’ title to the shares in Tomskneft plc. According to the documents, Mr V. owned one share in Tomskneft plc. However, in reality he was not even aware of those proceedings or of the fact that he owned any shares. The lawyers working for the applicants had obtained from him, by deceit, a power of attorney. They then purchased one share in Tomskneft plc in his name, brought a lawsuit against the “dissident shareholders” and lodged a request for interim measures. Those measures consisted, inter alia, of a temporary prohibition on voting by the “dissident shareholders” at the general meetings. On 16 March 1999 a judge in a district court in the Kaluga Region issued an injunction against the “dissident shareholders”, as requested by the “plaintiff”. The applicants’ lawyers brought with them a court bailiff to the next general meeting of shareholders of 23 March 1999. Referring to the injunction of the Kaluga court, he prevented “dissident shareholders” from voting. As a result, the applicants obtained a qualified majority at the general meeting and all the contracts of sales between Tomskneft plc and Yukos were approved. A few days later the injunction was lifted, the applicants having already obtained what they wanted.
At some point in 2000 the production entities started to sell the oil to Yukos and to the trading companies at auctions. However, the auctions were manipulated by its organiser, who was a senior Yukos executive and loyal to the applicants. Thus, the conditions for prospective buyers were formulated in such a way as to exclude any external competitor. Only the companies affiliated with the applicants, and controlled by them, participated in those auctions. The lead appraising expert who was supposed to define a fair price for the crude oil had previously worked with the applicants in the Menatep bank, and therefore acted in their interests. As a result, the price of crude oil in the sales contracts was much lower than the real market price which the production entities would have received if they sold the oil independently.
In order to accumulate profits from the sale of oil extracted by the production entities and, at the same time, to minimise tax liability, the applicants registered over a dozen different trading companies on the territory of several low-tax zones in Russia. Thus, such trading companies were registered in Mordoviya, Kalmykia, the Chelyabinsk Region and the Evenk Autonomous Region, and in the districts known as ZATOs, in particular in Lesnoy ZATO and Trekhgorniy ZATO. The judgment cited the limited-liability companies Mitra, Grunt, Business-Oil, Vald-Oil, Erlift, Flander, Muskron, Alebra, Kverkus, Kolrein, Staf, Kvadrat, Fargoil, Ratibor and others as examples.
Some of those companies were created by private individuals who agreed to be nominal owners of those companies but who had never participated in their business activities and had only signed documents (page 503 of the judgment). Thus, Fargoil was registered in the name of Mr S. as the sole owner, whereas Ratibor was created by Ms V. When asked to do so, Mr S. and Ms V. ceded their shares to companies indicated by the applicants’ accomplices.
In essence those trading companies were sham entities, which were created for the sole purpose of avoiding payment of the full amount of taxes for which the Yukos group would otherwise have been liable had it sold oil directly from Moscow. The difference between the very low price paid to the production entities and the high price paid by the final buyer of the oil was concentrated partly in the Russian trading companies and partly in foreign trading companies (see below).
The Russian trading companies existed only on paper, had the same nominal directors (Mr Pereverzin, Mr Malakhovskiy and several other persons) and held their money in accounts in two Moscow-based banks affiliated with the applicants: DIB bank and Trust bank. All their business operations – preparing contracts, signing shipment orders, submitting tax returns, making bank transfers, etc. – were conducted in Moscow, by a group of employees working for Yukos and its affiliates. Physically the oil and its derivatives did not change hands: the crude oil was transported directly from the wells to the refineries and then, after processing, to end-customers. The intermediate companies were necessary only for concentrating profits and avoiding taxes. Although de facto the applicants controlled the trading companies, de jure the companies were presented as independent traders.
The prosecution provided data on money flows between the trading companies and the production entities and compared the price paid to the latter with the market price of oil. Thus, for example, in 1998 Yuganskneftegaz plc sold through the trading companies 25,322,612,411 tonnes of crude oil for RUB 6,622,270,514; Samaraneftegaz plc sold 7,450,791,000 tonnes for RUB 2,097,566,309; Tomskneft plc sold 199,506 tonnes for RUB 41,577,050. In total, according to the prosecution, the applicants and their accomplices thus misappropriated 32,972,909,411 tonnes of crude oil in 1998, worth RUB 25,645,695,514.
It appears that the value of the “misappropriated” oil was calculated on the basis of the “world market price” indicated in the judgment. Thus, for example, in January 1998 the market price of crude oil at the world market varied between RUB 667.7 per ton and RUB 673.77 per ton, while the production entities received RUB 435.96 per ton. In December 1998 the world market price of crude oil varied between RUB 1229.68 and RUB 1340.84 per ton, whereas the production entities were paid at a rate of RUB 250.08 per ton.
The judgment contained conflicting information on the price paid by Yukos or the trading companies to the production entities. Thus, on page 14 of the judgment it is indicated that in July and September 1998 they were paid RUB 250.08 per ton, while the market price varied between RUB 369.40 (in July) and RUB 638.99 (in September). At the same time, according to a report by the Khanty-Mansyisk branch of the Antitrust Committee, quoted by the court on page 177 of the judgment, Yuganskneftegaz plc was selling oil to Yukos in July-September 1998 for RUB 144.5–207.58 per ton, whereas the average market price in that region was RUB 288 per ton.
As follows from the judgment (pages 164 and 354; pages 29 and 30 of the decision of the court of appeal), in order to avoid transactions between the production entities and trading companies being subjected to tax audits, the applicants tried to ensure that the price at which the trading companies purchased oil from the production entities did not deviate from the average market price by more than 20%.
In order to obscure the modus operandi of the scheme, the applicants regularly re-directed sales and money flows from existing trading companies to new ones. From January 2000 all sales of oil extracted by the production entities went through Yukos-M. As from December of that year, most of the sales of Yukos oil were conducted through Y-Mordoviya. In the spring of 2001 some of the oil sales were re-directed to Ratibor, Sprey and Terren. However, the nature of the sales always remained the same: the production entities were selling oil to the trading companies at a very low price. That price was defined at farcical auctions, staged every month by the applicants’ accomplices. Thus, in February 2000 the oil was sold by the production entities to Yukos-M at RUB 750 per ton, whereas on 31 January 2000 the world market price for the “Urals (Med)” and “Urals (R’dam)” oil was on average RUB 5,535.59. In November 2000 the production entities were receiving RUB 1,200 per ton of oil from the trading companies, whereas the world market price was RUB 6,040.77 per ton on average. The overall price of oil sold in 1998-2000 through that scheme amounted to RUB 158,492,156,000. The judgment concluded that the pecuniary damage caused by the applicants to the production entities (Samaraneftegaz plc, Yuganskneftegaz plc and Tomskneft plc) was equal to that amount.
In 2001 sales of crude oil and oil derivatives were channelled essentially through Fargoil, another trading company controlled by the applicants. All profits were concentrated in Fargoil’s accounts, in two banks controlled by the applicants: Menatep Spb and DIB. For example, according to the prosecution, in 2001 the applicants misappropriated oil worth RUB 147,394,294,000. Part of that amount was spent to cover the operating costs of production entities; the remaining part remained in the hands of the applicants and their accomplices. Their net profit from the operations conducted through Fargoil in 2001 amounted to RUB 65,837,005,000.
From January 2002 Fargoil was buying oil from Ratibor, which, in turn, received oil from the production entities by “winning” at the monthly auctions. From September 2002 Ratibor was removed from the scheme and all sales went through Evoil, which started to “win” at the auctions and sell the oil on to Fargoil. By the end of 2002 Evoil acquired from the production entities 24,512,893 tonnes of oil, for which it paid only RUB 48,636,878,082. According to the judgment, this represented 20-25% of the real market price for this oil on the world market. In July-August 2003 the applicants decided again to redirect money flows by including in the sales scheme a new trading company, Energotrade, also headed by Mr Malakhovskiy as director. Energotrade replaced Fargoil as the main buyer of oil from Evoil, which, in turn, purchased it from the production entities.
Yukos plc was also involved in the sales scheme. At some stage Yukos plc played the role of the initial buyer of oil from the production entities; later Yukos plc was replaced with other trading companies and participated in the sales mostly as a commissioner, while the trading companies, such as Fargoil, remained nominal owners of the oil extracted by the production entities. In 2002, as a commissioner, Yukos plc received 0.2% of the gross product of the sales of oil on the international market. The gross product of sales which Yukos plc, as a commissioner, transferred to the accounts of Fargoil, as the nominal owner of the oil, amounted in 2002 to RUB 144,546,628,965. Thus, given the world price of oil, and the costs of production and logistics, in 2002 the net profit to the applicants and their accomplices amounted, for the sales conducted through Fargoil, to RUB 104,852,978,164. As regards the sales of oil and its derivatives on the internal market, in 2002 Fargoil received RUB 75,627,685,010.33 (gross money inflow). The net profit to the applicants and their accomplices, after deduction of the production costs of the oil and its derivatives, amounted to RUB 25,164,128,293 for that period. The prosecution referred to the amounts misappropriated by the applicants as a result of the operations on the internal market and abroad in 2003.
According to the prosecution, between 1998 and 2000 the applicants misappropriated oil worth RUB 492,486,604,892. In 2001-2003 the applicants misappropriated oil worth RUB 811,549,054,000, while their net profits from operations with oil amounted to RUB 399,939,564,505.
In addition to setting up many Russian trading companies, the applicants created a network of foreign firms registered in various off-shore zones, such as Cyprus, Lichtenstein, Gibraltar, the British Virgin Islands, the Isle of Man, etc.
Since the price of crude oil at the border (i.e. in a contract between a Russian trading company and a foreign trading company) was well known, the applicants ensured that the price of Yukos oil would be on average 1 rouble more than the price of oil exported by other big oil companies (page 336 of the judgment).
From 1997 most of Yukos’s international oil sales went through a long chain of intermediaries, which usually took the following form: a production entity – Yukos plc itself or one of the Russian trading companies – an off-shore trading company, controlled by the applicants – a Swiss trading company controlled by the applicants – the real foreign buyer of the oil. The applicants included so many intermediaries in the scheme in order to make it deliberately opaque. Only at the last stage of the chain was the oil sold for the market price. The international sales went through foreign trading companies such as South Petroleum Ltd (Gibraltar), PFH Atlantic Petroleum Ltd (Cyprus), Baltic Petroleum Trading Ltd (Isle of Man), and then to Behles Petroleum SA (Switzerland). Behles Petroleum played a central role in the international sales scheme, since the applicants needed a Swiss counterpart in order to have a veneer of respectability. Behles Petroleum was a real trading company, in the sense that it had personnel involved in selling oil to end-customers.
From 2000 the sales scheme was reorganised. Henceforth most of the revenue from foreign sales of Yukos oil went to two Cyprus companies: Routhenhold Holdings Ltd and Pronet Holdings Ltd. Both companies had Mr Pereverzin as director. Mr Pereverzin was the applicants’ business partner and worked with them in the Menatep bank in the 1990s. Routhenhold Holdings and Pronet Holdings served as a “final point” in the sales chain for Yukos export operations. Those and other trading companies in Cyprus were registered at the applicants’ request by ALM Feldmans, a Moscow-based law firm, which also organised the opening of the necessary bank accounts, submitted the necessary forms and reports, etc.
In order to extract capital accumulated in the accounts of Russian trading companies such as Ratibor and Fargoil, the applicants also employed another method. Thus, at their request in 2000 ALM-Feldmans registered two companies in Cyprus: Nassaubridge Management Ltd and Dansley Ltd. Nassaubridge subsequently became the sole owner of Fargoil, while Dansley became the sole owner of Ratibor. The money “earned” by Fargoil and Ratibor was then transferred to Nassaubridge and Dansley in the guise of dividends.
Throughout the period under examination the applicants created a number of interconnected companies abroad, which were intended to serve as a “safety cushion” in the event of lawsuits brought by shareholders in Yukos or the production entities or by the State.
Thus, in 2001 a minority shareholder in Tomskneft plc started a public campaign against the applicants, accusing them of misappropriation of the oil extracted by Tomskneft plc. In order to protect themselves against possible audits and lawsuits, the applicants created, through their accomplices, several new letter-box companies, also registered in off-shore zones. These included: Wellington Interests Ltd, Arley Ltd, Beserra Ltd, Corden Ltd, Casphrain Ltd, Neptune Human Resources Ltd, Travis Ltd, Worcester Ltd, Zulfa Hodlings Ltd, and others. The off-shore trading companies transferred money to “cushion companies” under different agreements. Thus, South Petroleum transferred USD 60,293,115 to Wellington Interests under an agreement, dated 1997, which described that amount as a “loan” from South Petroleum to Wellington Interests. South Petroleum subsequently signed an agreement with Corden, stipulating that the former ceded to the latter the right to reclaim from Wellington Interests money due under the 1997 loan agreement, in exchange for a payment of USD 6,008,200. Thus, South Petroleum sold Wellington Interests’ debt to Corden for about 10% of its price. The remaining 90% was henceforth in new hands and was better protected from possible lawsuits. South Petroleum also transferred USD 15,940,000 to Arley. That money transfer was presented as a payment for promissory notes issued by Arley. However, those promissory notes were not supported by the debtor’s assets and their real economic value was close to zero. As a result, the accounts of the trading companies were drained and the money was concentrated in the “cushion companies”. South Petroleum and Baltic Petroleum Trading also transferred considerable sums of money to their corporate owners in the guise of payment of dividends. Thus, South Petroleum and Baltic Petroleum Trading transferred USD 32,848,000 as dividends to their founding company – Jurby Lake Ltd, a company registered in the Isle of Man.
In January 2000 the authorities in certain States started investigations in respect of some of the off-shore companies affiliated with the applicants on suspicion of money laundering. The applicants, having decided that it was not safe to work through those companies, changed the structure for distributing and laundering the profits derived from the sale of Yukos oil. For that purpose the applicants again turned to the law firm ALM Feldmans. The latter registered the company Wildlife Resources Corporation on British Virgin Islands. By concluding fake agreements for the exchange of oil sales, the applicants organised the transfer of USD 20,005,000 from Jurby Lake to Wildlife Resources Corporation.
To secure funding of ongoing operations the applicants needed to return part of the capital from the Russian trading companies and foreign firms which were involved in the sales of oil, and which accumulated significant amounts of money in their accounts (such as Ratibor, Fargoil, Energotrade, etc.). To do so, they used the “promissory notes scheme”. Under that scheme, promissory notes were used as a vehicle for transferring money from the trading companies to the production entities. The same scheme was used to transfer money to “empty” companies which were later used for investment purposes. As a result of this chain of transactions, promissory notes were exchanged for real money. The money was also redistributed in the form of loans between the different companies making up the Yukos group.
In 1997-1998 Menatep bank, which owned a large block of Yukos plc shares, borrowed money from two foreign banks – Daiwa Europe and West Merchant Bank. Thus, Menatep borrowed over USD 100,000,000 from Daiwa on a security of 336,551,055 simple shares in Yukos (which represented 13.82% of its shareholding capital), and over USD 125,000,000 from West Merchant Bank on a security of 340,908,790 simple shares in Yukos plc (15.24% of its shareholding capital).
After the financial crisis of August 1998 Menatep defaulted; as a result, Daiwa Europe and West Merchant retained the shares. The applicants decided to return the shares to Yukos by buying them back from the two banks, but not openly. In the official negotiations with the two banks, the applicants persuaded their managers that Menatep was insolvent and that, in view of the financial crisis in Russia, it would be unable to repay the full amount of the two loans. Representatives of Daiwa and West Merchant proposed a restructuring plan, but the applicants artificially protracted the negotiations. At the same time the applicants conducted secret parallel negotiations with Standard Bank of London. As a result, Standard Bank of London agreed, for a commission, to buy the shares from Daiwa Europe and West Merchant and transmit it to DIB bank, controlled by the applicants. In 1999 DIB bank signed an agency agreement with the Standard Bank of London and transferred a pre-payment to it; on the basis of that agreement Standard Bank approached Menatep’s two creditors (Daiwa and West Merchant) and acquired their claims against Menatep, together with the shares, at a significant discount. Standard Bank of London paid the two banks about 50-60% of the original amount of the loan, received the shares, and immediately thereafter transferred those shares to DIB bank. DIB bank paid Standard Bank the price of the shares and its commission. Later DIB bank sold Yukos plc shares to several companies controlled by the applicants, including Yukos Universal Ltd and Wilk Enterprises Ltd.
To finance the above operation the applicants decided to use money from Yukos plc itself. However, they did not wish to show who was really purchasing the shares. To give the whole scheme a gloss of legality, the applicants organised the following chain of transactions. The necessary sums of money were accumulated in the accounts of Flander and Alebra, two Russian trading companies involved in the operations with Yukos oil. Yukos issued 35 promissory notes, worth RUB 6,228,253,842, at an interest rate of 30% per annum. The date of issue for those promissory notes was indicated as 1 October 1999; they were due for payment after 28 December 2000. Yukos then transmitted those promissory notes to MQD International Ltd, a company registered in the British Virgin Islands. MQD, acting through a network of intermediary foreign companies (such as Jerez Ltd and Mezview International Ltd), then sold the promissory notes to DIB, which re-sold them to Flander and Alebra. Flander and Alebra paid RUB 7,257,663,538.11 for those notes, an amount which already included the interest accrued. This sum went to Mezview International, which transferred it to Yukos Universal Limited. The latter, in turn, paid it to DIB bank in exchange for the Yukos shares. As a result of that operation, Yukos Universal and Wilk Enterprises received Yukos shares, whereas Flander and Alebra received Yukos plc promissory notes, which Yukos would have to buy back when the time came. In essence, the buyback of the Yukos shares for the benefit of the applicants was funded by Yukos plc itself, with money earned from the oil extracted by its subsidiaries.
In 1999 the Central Bank of Russia withdrew Menatep bank’s licence and a liquidation procedure was initiated. In the process of liquidation, the applicants, on behalf of Yukos, proposed to some of Menatep’s foreign creditors that the latter’s debts could be covered by Yukos’s money; at the same time, the applicants sought to extinguish Menatep’s financial obligations to Yukos itself. As a result of a chain of transactions, which were economically unfavourable to Yukos, Menatep extinguished its debts whereas Yukos paid some of Menatep’s creditors significant amounts of money (page 589 of the judgment). This enabled the applicants to avoid a major conflict with Menatep’s foreign creditors.
In the early 2000s the applicants started to prepare the group for the listing of Yukos shares on the international stock market. For that purpose they reorganised the internal structure of the group, made it more transparent for international investors and even started to include some of the Yukos trading companies (such as Ratibor or Fargoil) in the consolidated financial reports that were prepared in accordance with the international rules of accounting (Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, GAAP). At the same time, the applicants did not disclose to the auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) their links to some of the companies which participated in the sales chain, such as Behles Petroleum, South Petroleum and Baltic Petroleum (page 567 of the judgment), and did not disclose the true nature of the operation for the secret buyback of Yukos shares from Daiwa and West Merchant banks.
Under the Russian accounting rules, most of the Yukos affiliates were considered as independent actors. The system of subsidiaries was organised in such a way as to conceal some of the affiliation links from the Russian authorities and the public in general (page 606 of the judgment). In the official tax returns for 1999-2004, submitted by Yukos plc to the Russian tax authorities under the then applicable rules of accounting, none of the companies registered in the Lesnoy and Trekhgorniy ZATOs was included in the list of “persons affiliated with Yukos plc” (pages 326 and 328 of the judgment). At the general meetings of Yukos shareholders in 2002 and 2003 the first applicant addressed the shareholders, but did not mention the risks related to transactions with affiliated companies, which required approval by the competent bodies of Yukos. Many Russian minority shareholders were not aware of the existence of “consolidated financial reports” prepared under the GAAP rules (page 611 of the judgment), because these were available only in English and were only published on the company’s website. The prosecution concluded that the applicants deliberately misinformed the shareholders about the inner structure of the company and the affiliation links between Yukos and the trading companies.
Finally, even after the reorganisation and inclusion of some of the Yukos subsidiaries in the GAAP reports, those companies remained bound by secret obligations and “equity option contracts” with the companies affiliated with the applicants, which were not mentioned in the consolidated reports. Those secret agreements permitted the applicants to assume control of those companies or their funds at any moment.
According to the prosecution, although the applicants reinvested a large part of the profits from the sale of oil to Yukos and its subsidiaries, and included the financial results of those subsidiaries in the consolidated report under the GAAP system, this served only the interests of the applicants themselves. It raised the capitalisation of Yukos and inflated the price of its shares. Thus, in 1999 under the Russian accounting rules, Yukos’s profits amounted to USD 228 million, whereas, according to the consolidated report which included trading companies and was prepared under the international rules (US GAAP), Yukos’s profits amounted to USD 1,152 million. In 2000-2002 the applicants, through Yukos Capital, concluded a number of very profitable deals with small blocks of Yukos shares. By attracting foreign investors on the open market and selling them a small part of Yukos’s capital, the applicants tried to legalise their own status as lawful owners of the shares. The applicants concealed from the foreign investors the fact that they fully controlled the company and its profits.
After the start of the criminal case against the applicants, many of the documents concerning Yukos’s foreign affiliates were physically removed from Yukos’s offices and transferred to the companies’ foreign offices, out of reach of the Russian authorities. The applicants never provided information about the foreign subsidiaries to the Russian authorities and kept all documents in their offices abroad. As a result, when the applicants lost control over the “mother company”, i.e. Yukos plc, they were still able to control some of the “daughter companies” abroad, which had accumulated significant assets.
According to the prosecution, after their arrests in July and October 2003 the applicants continued to withdraw capital from the trading companies which were formally affiliated with Yukos and which accumulated proceeds from the sales. Those funds were transferred to companies controlled by the applicants, specifically to Yukos Capital S.à.r.l. In September and October 2003 a large proportion of the funds concentrated in the Yukos affiliates (USD 2.6 billion) was withdrawn from their accounts and transferred for the purchase of a large block of shares in Sibneft plc, another large Russian oil company (pages 562 et seq. of the judgment). Using that block of Sibneft shares as security, Yukos plc borrowed USD 2.6 billion from Société Générale, a French bank. That amount was transferred to the accounts of Yukos and its subsidiaries so that they might continue their usual operations.
While in remand prison, the first applicant, acting through his lawyer and in consort with the second applicant, ordered his accomplices and business partners to transfer money from the accounts of Nassaubridge and Dansley to the accounts held by the company Brittany Assets Limited in Citibank and Barclays Bank, and onwards to Yukos Capital S.à.r.l. (page 23 of the decision of the court of appeal). Some of those sums were returned to Yukos and its subsidiaries, that is, the production entities and trading companies. However, this money was transferred in the guise of a loan with interest, so that Yukos plc became indebted to Yukos Capital. In total, Yukos Capital provided over USD 2 billion to Yukos and its affiliates in loans. According to the prosecution, those loans were supposed to maintain the process of oil extraction in the expectation that the company would remain in the hands of the applicants.
In the course of the proceedings the prosecution submitted to the court a large volume of documentary evidence and expert evidence. That evidence was intended to demonstrate the applicants’ leading role in setting up the schemes described above, to prove the unlawfulness thereof, and to quantify the losses of the minority shareholders and the amounts of property “misappropriated” and “laundered” by the two applicants. The case for the prosecution relied, to a large extent, on evidence obtained as a result of multiple searches and seizures in the premises of Yukos, in the applicants’ houses, in the offices of the lawyers who provided legal services to Yukos and to the applicants personally, and in the banks which managed the accounts and assets of Yukos and its affiliates.
In response, the defence sought to have evidence obtained by the prosecution in the course of many searches and seizures conducted in 2003-2007 removed from the case file. Some of those motions were not examined directly at the trial, the court having decided that they would be resolved in the judgment.
According to the applicants, the court ultimately rejected all the motions lodged by the defence for the removal of evidence.
The motions which were ruled on in the judgment concerned the following items (pages 628 et seq. of the judgment):
•	seizures in the Trust Bank and Activ Bank in 2004-2005;
•	search warrants ordering search and seizure in the premises of ALM Feldmans of 12 November 2004 and 14 December 2004;
•	record of the search in the premises of ALM Feldmans on 12 November 2004 (seizure of documents) and 15 December 2004 (search);
•	search warrant for the premises at 88a, Zhukovka village, of 8 October 2003;
•	record of the search of 9 October 2003;
•	seizure warrants concerning documents in the possession of PwC, dated 3 March 2005 and 7 June 2005;
•	record of the seizures of 14 March 2005 and 8 July 2005 in the premises of PwC;
•	record of the seizures in the premises of PwC of 19 January 2007 and 8 February 2007;
•	seizure warrant by the Basmanniy District Court of Moscow of 26 December 2006;
•	records of the seizures of 9, 10, 12, 16 and 19 January 2007, based on the search warrant of 26 December 2006.
The defence pointed out that the contested evidence was obtained on the basis of search and seizure warrants issued by the prosecution without prior approval by a court. In the opinion of the defence, seizures in the banks, law firms and audit companies could not have been conducted on the sole basis of a decision by the prosecutor. The defence referred, inter alia, to Ruling no. 439-O of the Constitutional Court of 8 November 2005, which indicated that a search in a lawyer’s office was possible only with the prior approval of a court. According to the defence, only the seizures of 29 December 2006 and 17 January 2007 had been based on a court warrant (issued on 26 December 2006 and 15 June 2007 respectively). Other seizures (those of 14 March 2005, 8 July 2005, 9, 10, 12, 16 and 19 January 2007 and 8 February 2007) had been conducted without such a court warrant and their results were therefore invalid.
The court refused to remove evidence from the case file. It held that the CCrP required a court warrant only for seizures where a document to be seized contained information about the bank accounts and deposits of private individuals (Article 183 of the CCrP, read in conjunction with Article 29, part 2 point 7). However, all of the documents seized in the Natsionalniy Bank Trust, Investitsionniy Bank Trust (previously known as DIB bank) and Aktiv Bank concerned the bank accounts of legal persons. In addition, the lawfulness of the seizures in those three banks had already been confirmed in the judgment concerning Mr Malakhovskiy and Mr Pereverzin of 1 March 2007. With reference to Article 90 of the CCrP, the court ruled that those court findings in the previous case “can be considered established without additional verification” (page 631 of the judgment).
As to the seizure in the law offices of ALM Feldmans, the court noted that Ruling No. 439-O was adopted by the Constitutional Court on 8 November 2005, whereas the impugned searches had been carried out in 2004. In addition, the documents seized from ALM Feldmans did not concern the “provision of legal assistance to persons or organisations”. The documents obtained concerned the operations of one of the partners in ALM Feldmans, Mr Iv., who managed the accounts of several commercial organisations which had been used by the members of the organised group to legalise the assets which they had misappropriated. The court also referred to the rulings of the Basmanniy District Court of 21 September 2007 and 30 October 2007, whereby the defence motion to exclude evidence had been dismissed.
The court refused to suppress documents obtained as a result of the seizures in the office of Mr Drel, the lawyer for the two applicants, during the search at 88a, Zhukovka village, of 9 October 2003. The court found that the documents seized were not from his case files and did not concern the provision of legal assistance to persons and organisations. The documents in question concerned Mr Drel’s participation in the financial operations in favour of persons who were part of the organised criminal group. The office of ALM Feldmans was registered at a different address in Moscow. The reference by the applicants’ lawyers to section 8 of the Advocacy Act was misplaced. Article 182 of the CCrP did not contain any requirement to obtain a court warrant in the event of a search in a lawyer’s office. In addition, the lawfulness of the search in the premises located at 88a Zhukovka village had been confirmed by the judgment of 16 May 2005, in the first case against the applicants.
Seizures in the premises of PwC on 3 March 2005 and 7 June 2005 were found to be lawful, since in the period before 5 June 2007 Articles 29 and 183 of the CCrP did not require a court warrant for a seizure in an office of an audit firm.
The court found that the seizures of documents in the premises of PwC on 10, 12, 16, 19 January and 8 February 2007 had been lawful, having been authorised by the Basmanniy District Court. Given the volume of documents to be seized, one warrant from the Basmanniy District Court sufficed to cover several consecutive days of seizure.
The defence sought to exclude documents obtained during the search of 17 December 2004, conducted in Mr Pereverzin’s flat without a court order. However, the court found that those documents were to be admitted: the search was conducted without a court warrant because it was an “urgent search”, and immediately afterwards the investigator applied to a court and obtained approval for the search (ruling of the Basmanniy District Court of 17 December 2005). Under Article 165 part 5 and 182 of the CCrP the investigator had a right to examine objects and documents obtained during the search before having obtained a court’s approval for the search itself (page 636 of the judgment).
Furthermore, the defence sought exclusion of a number of documents produced by the prosecution: some did not contain either signatures or official stamps, or had been added to the case file without the necessary formalities. Pages were missing from some other documents. Some of the documents had been obtained during searches at which no inventory of objects and documents seized had been made. However, the court dismissed those objections as unfounded, irrelevant or unimportant.
The defence objected to the use of a written record of the questioning of witness Mr A. by the investigators. According to the defence, his oral submissions, audio-recorded by the investigator and also submitted to the court, differed significantly from what was set out in the written record. However, the court ruled that the law did not require word-for-word recording of the oral submissions, and that Mr A. had made no objections to the written record of his questioning and had later confirmed his testimony before the court. Thus, the record accurately reflected the essence of his depositions.
The defence sought the exclusion of allegedly unlawful intercepts of telephone conversations between Ms Bakhmina and Mr Gololobov, two Yukos lawyers, in order to check the veracity of the transcripts. The court initially granted that request and ordered the GPO to produce the relevant audio recordings, made in late 2004. However, on 29 September 2009 the court received a letter from the GPO whereby the latter refused to produce the recordings on the ground that it might jeopardise the interests of investigations in other cases, specifically case no. 18/41-03, which concerned 20 suspects. As a result, on 16 November 2009 the court rejected the motion to listen to the audio records.
The defence sought the exclusion of other allegedly unlawfully obtained evidence. In particular, they argued that the order to sever criminal case no. 18/432766-07 from case no. 18/41-03 had been unlawful, that copies of procedural documents related to other criminal cases could not be admitted in evidence, that there was no inventory of the materials contained in the original (“old”) case file, and that, as a result, the defence was unable to establish whether the “old” case file contained any potentially important exculpatory material.
The defence also claimed that the prosecution’s method of collecting evidence within the “new” case largely consisted of inspecting the materials of the “old” case and regularly adding parts of the “old” case file to the new one. The defence claimed that this was not a proper way to collect evidence and that all the documents so added were inadmissible.
The defence also sought the removal of documents translated from foreign languages, since the translation was sub-standard and contained gross errors. However, the court concluded that the translations were appropriate.
The defence claimed that information from the Yukos website was obtained more than a year after the arrest of the two applicants and was therefore unreliable. The defence sought examination of the disc on which the investigator recorded the content of the website, but the court rejected that motion.
The defence sought the exclusion of several expert reports obtained by the investigators at the pre-trial investigation stage and submitted to the court. According to the defence, all this prosecution evidence had been obtained before the applicants were formally charged; as a result, the applicants or their lawyers had not participated in the preparation of those reports, were unable to put questions to the experts, to include their experts in the expert team and to enjoy other rights granted to the defence by Article 198 of the CCrP.
The defence also alleged that the prosecution expert witnesses had had at their disposal certain materials which had not formed part of the case file subsequently submitted to the trial court for examination. The defence alleged that the prosecution did not verify what sort of “source materials” the experts had and did not include it in the case file – they only attached the expert reports as such. Accordingly, in the second trial it was impossible to compare those “source materials” with the experts’ conclusions and to verify whether they had been adequately interpreted by the experts.
The defence sought the exclusion of expert report no. 2601-12/2000, prepared by experts from the private evaluation agency Kvinto-Konsalting Ltd., which concerned the evaluation of the share price of several corporate entities which were to some extent affiliated with Yukos, with a view to establishing whether certain exchanges of these company’s shares for Yukos’ shares had occurred on an equivalent basis.
The court concluded that on 2 October 2000 investigator Shum. commissioned an expert examination and explained to the two experts – Mr Koz. and Mr Rus. – their rights and responsibilities. The expert report was prepared in accordance with the law and duly signed by the experts, who had all necessary qualifications. The applicants received a copy of that expert report in 2007, when they became suspects in the second criminal case.
The defence sought the removal of an expert report of 24 June 2004 (“evaluation report”), prepared on the basis of the investigator’s decision of 15 April 2004. It likewise concerned evaluation of the share price of several corporate entities where were to some extent affiliated with Yukos.
The defence stated that they had not been informed about the decision of 15 April 2004 to commission such a report; that the expert report did not contain certain elements which were mandatory under Article 204 of the CCrP; that in essence the examination was “repetitive” (povtornaya); that the experts were invited to answer legal questions falling outside their professional competency; that the experts were not given all necessary materials; and, at the same time, that some of the materials given to them had not been part of the case file in the applicants’ case.
However, the court ruled that when the investigator had ordered the examination, the applicants had had no status within the criminal proceedings. When they received a copy of the expert report, namely at the time they were given access to the materials of the case file under Article 217 of the CCrP, they had been able to ask the investigator for further examinations, but had failed to do so.
The court heard expert Mr Shk. and concluded that the examination had been conducted with all the necessary diligence and all formalities had been respected. The questions put to the experts were not “legal” but related to the regulations in the sphere of evaluation activity. The materials of the expert examination were severed from the “main case” (case-file no. 18/41-03) in accordance with the law. The law did not require that all the materials which served as a basis for the experts’ conclusions be severed at the same time as the expert report (page 645 of the judgment).
The applicants sought the exclusion of an expert report prepared by Mr Yeloyan between 8 February and 28 March 2006 (“informational and accounting assessment”).  The expert had to establish whether there had been any discrepancies in the balance sheets of four Yukos subsidiaries, including Yukos-M and Y-Mordoviya, and the details of oil purchase transactions carried out by these companies in 2000. According to Mr Yeloyan’s findings, there were no discrepancies in the balance sheets of the Yukos subsidiaries. He also provided the requested information concerning the oil purchase transactions.
According to the judgment, the expert report had been prepared within case no. 18/325543-04 and was later joined to case no. 18/41-03 in accordance with the law and on the basis of the investigator’s decision of 8 February 2006. The court repeated that it had no doubt that Mr Yeloyan was competent to conduct the expert examination entrusted to him. The fact that Mr Yeloyan had participated in other examinations at the investigator’s request was not indicative of any bias. The court also observed that the applicants had no procedural status as suspects or accused within case no. 18/325543-04 and therefore had no procedural rights in respect of materials and evidence obtained within that investigation.
The applicants sought the exclusion of an expert report prepared by Mr Yeloyan and Mr Kupriyanov between 22 and 25 January 2007 (“economic and accounting assessment”). The experts had to establish (i) how Neftetrade 2000, one of Yukos subsidiaries, distributed profit to foreign trading companies in 2001 and how the latter used it; and (ii) from which entities Neftetrade 2000 received funds in order to pay profits to the foreign trading companies. In their report the export stated the amounts that corresponded to the distributed profits. According to their findings, the funds for the payment of profits were received through the sale of promissory notes to Yukos-M and Alta-Trade.
The examination was ordered on 22 January 2007 on the basis of a decision by the investigator in the context of criminal case no. 18/41-03. All materials concerning this expert examination were severed from the “main case” and attached to case file no. 18/432766-07, which was later submitted to the Khamovnicheskiy District Court of Moscow. The experts were given access to the materials of case no. 18/41-03 and to the accounting databases of DIB bank and the Moscow branch of Menatep SPB bank for 2001.
The defence sought to obtain disclosure of the “source materials” which had served as a basis for the expert conclusions, as well as the questioning of Mr Yeloyan and Mr Kupriyanov. However, this was refused. The court concluded that the investigator’s decision had been lawful, that the experts had been independent and qualified and had had access to all necessary source materials (without, however, reviewing those materials directly). The applicants had received a copy of their report and were able to ask the prosecution to conduct additional expert examinations.
The defence sought the removal from the file of expert report no. 8/17 of 2 February 2007, prepared by Mr Chernikov and Mr Migal, police experts from the Moscow Region police forensic centre. The experts were requested to establish the quantity of oil purchased by Yukos plc, Yukos-M and Y-Mordoviya from Yuganskneftegaz plc, Tomskneft plc and Samaraneftegaz plc between 1998 and 2000 and to determine the cost of the oil having regard to the world market price for the “Urals (Med)” and “Urals (R’dam)” oil for the relevant period. The experts provided the requested figures in their conclusions. According to their findings, Yukos trading companies invariably purchased oil from oil-extracting Yukos subsidiaries at prices significantly lower than the world market price.
The court established that the applicants had been informed about the expert examination on 6 February 2007 (the first applicant) and 10 February 2007 (the second applicant). On those dates the applicants were handed a copy of the investigator’s decision ordering the examination and the expert report itself. Since at that point the pre-trial investigation was still pending, the applicants could have asked the investigator to put additional questions to the experts, to carry out the investigation in a specific expert institution or to appoint specific experts to the expert team. However, the defence did not file such a motion. The court concluded that the defence had failed to use their rights as provided by Article 198 of the CCrP.
The applicants also questioned the experts’ qualifications and competency to participate in such examinations, but the court dismissed that argument.
The defence’s next argument related to the questions which the investigator put to the experts. The court replied that those questions had been understood by the experts and they had not asked for any clarifications from the investigator.
The defence indicated that the investigator’s order did not specify which materials had been submitted by the prosecution to the experts for examination, and that the examination was started on the same day. However, the court held that the CCrP did not require the investigator to specify the materials which were handed to the experts for examination, and that the experts had been free to start working with the case file on the same day as the examination had been commissioned.
Finally, the court observed that any possible criticism by the defence as to the quality of the questions put to the experts, and to the quality of the answers received from the experts, would be analysed by the court when it examined the essence of the experts’ conclusions.
The defence filed a number of motions seeking the appearance of a number of prosecution expert witnesses at the trial, which the trial court refused.
In particular, on 9 November 2009 the second applicant submitted a written motion requesting that the court summon expert witnesses Mr Ivanov, Mr Kuvaldin, Mr Melnikov and Mr Shepelev, included in the prosecution’s list of witnesses.
On 16 November 2009 the trial court refused the motion on the ground that it had been filed too early, as it was the prosecution’s turn to present evidence.
On 28 June 2010 the defence filed a motion to summon experts Mr Yeloyan and Mr Kupriyanov (see paragraphs 159 and 161 above). In the motion the defence pointed out that the reports prepared by these experts, which substantiated the charges against the applicants, concerned a broad range of issues including Yukos cash flow, distribution of income, the range of suppliers and buyers, export supply volumes and the financial performance of particular companies. The defence further argued that it was particularly necessary to examine these experts at the hearing since the applicants had not been given the opportunity to study the order for an expert examination in the course of the preliminary investigation, to request the withdrawal of the experts, to request that the expert examination be conducted by different experts, to request that additional questions be put to the experts and to request that the investigative authorities allow them or their lawyers to be present during the examination in order to be able to provide explanations.
On 30 June 2010 the trial court refused the motion, stating that there were “no legal grounds for granting it having regard to the arguments of the defence”.
On 16 August 2010 the second applicant requested that experts Mr Chernikov and Mr Migal be summoned before the court. He stated that he and the first applicant wished to question the experts so as to exercise their rights as guaranteed by Article 47 § 4 (4) and (11), and to corroborate their motion challenging the experts and their request that the expert report be declared inadmissible as evidence.
On 24 August 2010 the trial court refused the motion and simultaneously ruled on the defence’s motion to declare expert report no. 8/17 of 2 February 2007, prepared by these experts, inadmissible as evidence (see paragraph 164 above). The court stated that it was able to rule on the defence’s motion concerning inadmissibility of evidence without summoning the expert witnesses.
On 9 September 2010 the defence again filed a motion to summon experts Mr Chernikov and Mr Migal (see paragraph 164 above).
On 17 September 2010 the trial court refused the motion on the ground that “having heard the arguments of the participants... [it did] not see any legal grounds for [granting it]”.
The defence started to present their case on 5 April 2010 and concluded on 22 September 2010. The applicants pleaded not guilty. Their position can be summarised as follows.
On the merits, the defence insisted that the prosecution had failed to prove that the applicants and their accomplices had been “shadow bosses” of Yukos and that the official executive bodies of Yukos and its subsidiaries had played no important role in the decision-making process.
The oil allegedly “stolen” from the production entities had never been physically appropriated by the applicants. It would have been physically impossible for the applicants to steal 350 million tonnes of crude oil. It could easily have been ascertained from the data collected by the automatic system which registered oil in the pipelines how much oil was extracted, refined and shipped abroad by the production entities. The tax returns and other financial reports by the production entities never indicated that any amount of oil had been “stolen” or had otherwise disappeared. When the State-owned company Rosneft purchased shares in the production entity Yuganskneftegaz plc at an auction organised to cover Yukos’s tax arrears, it paid a significant sum of money for that company, which showed that the company had still been in very good shape after many years of the alleged “theft” of oil.
In 2000-2003 all of the production entities were profitable companies; during that period the production entities spent RUB 247.1 billion on extracting oil and received RUB 297.5 billion for its sale. Therefore, the net profits of the production entities were over RUB 50 billion. Those profits remained within the production entities and were reinvested in order to increase the extraction volumes. The production entities knowingly shipped the oil to the end-customers.
The use of transfer prices for internal sales – i.e. sales between affiliated entities belonging to the same group – was normal practice in many Russian and foreign companies, such as, for example, Lukoil or TNK. The fact that those sales were conducted through a chain of several trading companies, managed by directors with limited powers, was also common business practice. The system of transfer pricing within the group was perfectly lawful and did not violate the rights of any party.
The use of transfer pricing did not infringe on the interests of the minority shareholders in the production entities, since, in any event, Yukos plc as the main shareholder was entitled to receive profits from its subsidiaries in the form of dividends. Transfer pricing only changed the form of redistribution of profits within the group.
The “international market price” of oil, calculated on the basis of the prices applicable to oil in the sea ports of Amsterdam or Rotterdam, was much higher than the domestic price prevailing in Russia at the time. It was wrong to compare the “international market price” with the price of “oil well fluid” which was extracted by the production entities in the Siberian oilfields. In any event, the prosecution failed to indicate at what moment the oil was misappropriated: when it was extracted, transported, shipped to end-customers, etc.
The conclusion of management agreements with the production entities and, more generally, the application of transfer pricing within the group brought stability and was in the interests of the production entities, which received profits and sufficient investments, and led to increased capitalisation of their shares.
The financial results of the companies which were “within the perimeter of consolidation of Yukos” were included in the consolidated financial reporting and submitted to all interested parties: shareholders, auditors, tax inspectors, etc. The public and the authorities had access to all crucial information, in particular on the prices of oil, the group’s consolidated income, the sales chain, etc. All of the financial documentation and the reports by Yukos and its affiliates were submitted to PwC for audit. Yukos employees never misinformed the auditors and provided them with accurate information. The withdrawal by PwC of their audit report was, in the applicants’ view, the result of very serious pressure exerted by the investigative authorities on PwC employees, who had been threatened with criminal prosecution.
The applicants alleged that the profits of the Yukos group were fairly reinvested in Yukos itself and its main subsidiaries. Thus, the group spent USD 4.5 billion on field production, reconstruction of refineries, gas stations, etc. Yukos covered all costs related to the transportation of oil through the pipelines. USD 9.431 billion were spent on the acquisition of new assets: shares in Sibneft, Arcticgaz, Mažeikių Nafta, Rospan International, Angarskaya Neftekhimicheskaya Kompaniya, Transpetrol, Sakhaneftegaz, Vostochno-Sibirskaya Neftyanaya Kompaniya, Urengoy INK, as well as the acquisition of additional blocks of shares in Yukos subsidiaries such as Yuganskneftegaz plc, Samaraneftegaz plc and Tomskneft plc. USD 2.6 billion were paid in dividends to the Yukos shareholders. Certain amounts were paid as bonuses to the company’s management and to external consultants. By 2003 the gross income of the group for the previous years was fully reinvested within the group; the USD 2.7 billion in cash which were on its accounts represented a loan from a French bank, Société Generale.
In respect of the accusations concerning the buyback of the Yukos shares from Daiwa and West Merchant banks, the applicants explained that those two banks acted at their own risk and, in any event, received a bigger proportion of the debt compared to what international creditors received from the Russian Government for the latter’s obligations after the 1998 crisis.
The applicants maintained that the validity of the agreements between Yukos and the production entities had been examined in dozens of court proceedings, and that the courts had repeatedly confirmed the lawfulness of those agreements and the contracts for the sale of oil concluded on the basis thereof. Furthermore, all of those agreements had been duly approved by the general meetings of shareholders, pursuant to the Public Companies Act.
The applicants explained the fact that the company’s auditors, PwC, had withdrawn their audit reports by alleging that threats and pressure were exerted on the auditors by the Russian authorities.
Finally, the applicants maintained that in previous court proceedings before the commercial courts concerning the tax-minimisation schemes employed by Yukos, the courts had calculated taxes due by Yukos to the State on the basis of the assumption that all of the oil belonged to Yukos itself. By making the applicants criminally liable for misappropriation of the oil, the authorities were in essence seeking to punish them again for acts which had been characterised as “tax evasion” in the earlier proceedings. The State’s position was self-contradictory: it had first recovered taxes due on the oil operations from Yukos itself, and then asserted that all of that oil had been misappropriated by the applicants. Under Russian law it was impossible to bring a person to criminal liability for the “laundering” of money acquired as a result of tax fraud.
Several persons appeared at the trial and were examined as witnesses for the defence. Thus, the court examined Mr Kasyanov (a former Prime Minister, who described the practice of transfer prices in vertically integrated companies), Mr Mirlin (who explained the difference between oil prices on the international and domestic markets), Mr Vasiliadis (whose evidence concerned the positive effects of transfer pricing for the production entities), Mr Haun (a specialist who compared the structure and operating mode of Yukos and other Russian companies), Mr Gerashchenko (a former head of the Central Bank, who testified about the withdrawal of PwC’s audit report) and Ms Dobrodeyeva (Mr Lebedev’s personal assistant, who testified about his absence from Russia on certain dates).
Mr Gilmanov and Mr Anisimov were former directors of Yuganskneftegaz plc and Samaraneftegaz plc. They testified that, after the conclusion of management agreements with Yukos Explorations and Production Ltd, the production entities retained a sufficient degree of independence in all areas except financial matters, and that those agreements had made sense because they increased the companies’ capitalisation. The production entities were not expected to maximise profits.
The court heard testimony from employees of Yukos companies, Mr F., Mr Kh., Mr Pr., Mr Pon., Mr S., Mr K., Mr Gar., Ms Gub., Ms Zh. and Mr Af. They testified that it would have been physically impossible to steal crude oil from the production entities in the amounts indicated in the bill of indictment. They also asserted that “general agreements” concluded between Yukos and the production entities were legal under Russian law, and that their legality had been confirmed in numerous decisions by the domestic courts.
The court heard Mr Wilson, a former auditor with PwC and later an internal auditor for Yukos. He explained that all profits within the “perimeter of consolidation” remained within the group and that the applicants were unable to misappropriate them.
The court heard Jacques Kosciusko-Morizet, one of Yukos’s independent directors. He testified that all decisions in the company had been taken by collective executive bodies, that PwC had never complained that it had received incomplete information from the applicants and that PwC had withdrawn its audit reports under pressure.
The court heard Mr Khristenko, Deputy Minister of Industry and Trade. He testified that there had been very few independent buyers of oil in Russia in 1998-2003, and that all of them were under the control of vertically integrated companies which imposed transfer prices on them. By definition, transfer prices within a company did not correspond to the market price. Similar testimony was given by Mr Gref, a former Minister of Economic Development.
The court rejected all but one request by the defence to call expert witnesses for the defence to testify orally at the trial (see paragraphs 203-208 below). The one request to which the prosecution did not object was to call Mr Haun, a US specialist in the energy industry. Mr Haun stated at the hearing that Yukos’ business practices had been normal for a vertically integrated company and that the internal organisation of the sales within the group benefited minority shareholders and subsidiaries. The court nevertheless refused to add his written opinion to the materials of the case (see paragraph 202 below).
At the hearing the prosecution asked the court for leave to read out the records of questioning at the preliminary investigation stage of 34 witnesses who were questioned at the trial, citing contradictions between their previous statements during the investigation and those before the court. The court granted leave.
The prosecution also asked the court for leave to read out the records of questioning during the preliminary investigation of a further 17 witnesses, stating that their statements before the court had been imprecise or incomplete due to the time that had elapsed since the events in question. The court granted leave.
On 1 and 7 June 2010, having heard Mr Haun in his capacity as a “specialist”, the court simultaneously refused to admit his written opinion on the same issues, prepared earlier. The court noted that when the written opinion was drafted Mr Haun had not had the procedural status of “specialist” and his written opinion was therefore inadmissible.
Following objections by the prosecution, the court refused to hear all other expert witnesses whose testimony was offered by the defence. According to the applicants, they were all distinguished experts in the relevant fields and had extensive practical experience. Each one had prepared a report which was ready to be submitted to the court. The expert witnesses’ qualifications and the reasons for the court’s refusal to hear them are summarised below.
Mr Dages is an expert in finance and economic analysis. He has testified in the United States courts at both federal and state level. He analysed the charges against the applicants and the case materials, with particular reference to Yukos’ activities and its accounting systems. In the applicants’ view, Mr Dages’ expertise in the US GAAP standards was particularly relevant, given that more than one volume of the bill of indictment concerned an analysis of Yukos’ accounting methods in accordance with the US GAAP standards.
On 7 June 2010 court refused to hear Mr Dages for the following reasons. It stated that, as a certified accountant in the United States, Mr Dages had no knowledge of Russian corporate law, had only superficial knowledge of the Russian accounting system, was not familiar with Yukos’ economic activity, had not provided Yukos with his services earlier, had not been involved in the proceedings as a “specialist” and had not studied the case materials.
Mr Delyagin is an expert in economics with expertise in price regulation issues for oil and oil products, pricing within oil companies and managing access to the main trunk pipeline system in Russia. He had commented publicly in the media on the case and had been present in the courtroom on a number of occasions before being called as an expert witness.
On 8 July 2010 the court refused to hear him, finding that the above comments disqualified him as an expert witness. In the court’s view, he had developed a subjective opinion about the charges against the applicants and the partiality of the court, which, together with the fact that Mr Delyagin had not studied the materials of the case, prevented the court from accepting him as an impartial and objective expert. The court further stated that it believed Mr Delyagin to have a stake, directly or indirectly, in the outcome of the case.
Professor Lopashenko is a legal expert in the area of criminal law, criminology and, in particular, organised and economic crimes. The defence asked for her to be summoned in order to hear her opinion on whether the classification of the activities underlying the charges against the applicants was consistent with criminal law.
On 8 July 2010 the court refused to call Professor Lopashenko, on the grounds that questions related to interpretation of criminal law fell within the exclusive competence of the court.
Professor Rossinskaya is a forensic scientist and director of the Forensic Expert Examination Institute of the Moscow State Law Academy. Associate Professor Savitskiy is an expert in accounting, credit and finance, and evaluation activities. The defence asked that they be summoned in relation to expert report no. 8/17 of 2 February 2007, prepared by Mr Chernikov and Mr Migal (see paragraph 164 above). According to the applicants, given that they had been denied the opportunity to question the prosecution experts Mr Chernikov and Mr Migal, it was particularly important that they be allowed to call their own experts to provide evidence in rebuttal.
On 9 and 10 August 2010 respectively the court refused to call Professor Rossinskaya and Associate Professor Savitskiy. It stated that, in its view, it was not within a “specialist’s” competence to assess an expert report. Where an expert report was incomplete or there existed any doubts as to its conclusion, that court could order additional expert examination. The court further stated that, since the defence did not refer to any other issues with regard to which the expert witnesses in question could be questioned as “specialists”, it concluded that they did not have the requisite special knowledge, hence their participation in the case as “specialists” should be ruled out.
Mr Romanelli is an expert in investment banking with over 30 years’ experience. The defence asked for him to be called in relation to the charges of money laundering.
On 17 August 2010 the court refused the motion on the grounds that Mr Romanelli had not been involved in the proceedings as a “specialist” and had not studied the case materials, leading the court to doubt his competence as a “specialist” capable of assisting with the examination of the criminal case against the applicants.
Ms Hardin is a forensic economic analyst whom the defence requested to hear in relation to the charges of money laundering. The court noted that she was an expert in the provision of consulting services and international corporate law, with extensive work experience in providing litigation support and in working with Russian companies both in Russia and abroad and was well familiar with Russian corporate law and accounting.
On 18 August 2010 the court refused the defence’s motion to call her as an expert witness, on the grounds that Ms Hardin had not been involved in the proceedings as a “specialist” and had not studied the case materials, leading the court to doubt her competence as a “specialist” capable of assisting with the examination of the criminal case against the applicants.
The defence produced documents which, in their view, proved the applicants’ innocence. They included the following items:
(i)  RSBU financial reporting of Yukos subsidiaries, certified by PwC;
(ii)  Yukos’s US GAAP financial statements;
(iii)  Yukos documentation describing production and sales processes and capital expenditure;
(iv)  legal explanations on Yukos’s international corporate structure;
(v)  reports by the State-appointed bankruptcy receiver for Yukos;
(vi)  copies of materials from the bankruptcy case examined by the Commercial Court of Moscow in respect of Yukos (case no. A40-11836/06-88-35B).
On 23 March and 21 September 2010 the court refused to admit that evidence to the case file, in each instance merely stating that “there were no legal grounds” to grant the request.
In addition, the defence sought to have summoned other witnesses (as opposed to expert witnesses) whose testimony might have been useful.
On 31 March 2009 the defence submitted to the court a request to summon 246 witnesses, including many high-ranking State officials such as Mr Putin, Mr Rushailo, Mr Skuratov, Mr Stepashin, Mr Patrushev, Mr Ustinov, Mr Kulikov, Mr Kudrin, Mr Bukayev, Mr Zhukov, Mr Pochinok, Mr Karasev, Mr Sobyanin, Mr Titov, Mr Filipenko, Mr Zubchenko, Mr Bogdanchikov, Mr Kudryashov, Mr Nozhin, Mr Tregub, Mr Sapronov and Mr Yusufov.
On the same date the District Court dismissed the request as “premature” having adduced the enclosed list of witnesses to the materials of the case. It stated, at the same time, that the request would be examined separately in respect of each person on the list.
On 13 April 2010 the defence again requested that Mr Putin, the then Prime Minister and former President of Russia, be summoned. The first applicant submitted before the court on 31 March 2009 that he had personally reported to Mr Putin on where the oil had been supplied and how Yukos money had been spent.
On the same date the District Court again dismissed the request as “premature”.
On 19 May 2010 the defence requested that Mr Putin be summoned, as well as Mr Sechin and Mr Kudrin. The second applicant stated before the court that the President, the government, members of parliament, the courts and all Russian companies were aware that the prices for oil produced in the Russian regions could not be compared to the global exchange prices for oil. He further submitted that the witnesses the defence sought to have summoned needed to clarify what was the difference, and why the legislation and the government of the Russian Federation respectively imposed and collected export duties from Russian oil companies on oil exported to the global markets.
Mr Sechin was at the time Deputy Chairman of the Russian Government and Chairman of Rosneft’s Board of Director, the company which acquired some of Yukos’s production entities. The defence wished to question him concerning transfer pricing practices, their technological and economic reasons and their purposes and implications. Furthermore, the defence wished to question him with regard to the preparation of the first applicant’s meeting with Mr Putin in 2002, in the course of which Mr Sechin had reviewed all the circumstances related to the activities of the Yukos group of companies. The defence wished to question him with respect to the circumstances and conditions of acquisition of Yukos shares by Rosneft.
Mr Kudrin was at the time Minister of Finance and Deputy Chairman of the Russian Government. On 31 March 2009 the first applicant informed the court that he had personally received explanations from Mr Kudrin concerning taxation of oil companies and specifically concerning the level of taxes that Yukos had to pay on the oil that was not only produced but also sold by Yukos; in the applicants’ view, this proved that Mr Kudrin did not consider the oil to be stolen. According to the second applicant, Mr Kudrin would be able to explain the relevant financial-law provisions to the prosecutor and, in particular, to clarify that the prosecutor’s definition of “proceeds” did not correspond to that set out in the law.
On the same date the District Court dismissed the request, finding that the questions the defence wished to put to the above three witnesses were too general in nature and irrelevant.
On 27 May 2010 the District Court again dismissed the request on the same grounds.
On 15 June 2010 the applicants asked that Mr Bogdanchikov, the then president of Rosneft, and Mr Pyatikopov, a representative of Rosneft, be summoned.
On 17 June 2010 the trial court granted the motion to summon Mr Pyatikopov, but refused to summon Mr Bogdanchikov, noting that he could be questioned at the hearing were he to appear, as provided for in Article 271 § 4 of the CCrP.
Mr Pyatikopov was summoned to the hearing but failed to appear. A copy of the summons has been provided to the Court.
On 9 July 2010 the defence again requested that a number of witnesses be summoned. In section 1 of their written request the defence pointed out that the District Court had previously granted its request to summon 36 witnesses. However, only some of them had actually come to the court. The defence asked the court to summon again those witnesses who had failed to appear. In section 2 of the request the defence asked the court to summon 26 witnesses, listed in the bill of indictment, who had not been questioned before the court, the majority of whom were former Yukos employees. In section 3 of their request the defence asked the court to order that Mr Malakhovskiy and Mr Pereverzin, who were charged in a separate set of proceedings as the applicants’ accessories, be transported to the hearing. In section 4 of their request the defence asked the court to summon ten witnesses who had been questioned during the investigation but were not listed in the bill of indictment. In section 5 of the request the defence again asked the court to summon a number of high-ranking State officials, including Mr Rushailo, Mr Skuratov, Mr Serdyukov, Mr Stepashin, Mr Patrushev, Mr Ustinov, Mr Kulikov, Mr Bukayev, Mr Zhukov, Mr Pochinok, Mr Karasev, Mr Sobyanin, Mr Titov, Mr Filipenko, Mr Zubchenko, Mr Bogdanchikov, Mr Kudryashov, Mr Nozhin, Mr Tregub, Mr Sapronov and Mr Yusufov, whose statements the defence considered relevant for the following reasons.
Mr Bogdanchikov, Mr Zubchenko, Mr Kudryashov, Mr Nozhin, Mr Tregub, Mr Sapronov and Mr Yusufov were senior executives of Rosneft at the relevant time; the defence wished to raise with them the same issues as with Mr Sechin.
Mr Bukayev was Tax Minister at the time. The defence wished to question him in relation to the tax authorities’ claims against Yukos in the Moscow Commercial Court, and with regard to the PwC audit and the circumstances of the inclusion of Yukos Capital in the creditors’ register for Yukos plc.
The defence also stated that, while the issues related to transfer prices and taxation fell within the competence of the Tax Ministry, the applicant had discussed them in depth with the relevant authorities, which were informed about the financial and business performance of the Yukos group of companies and had been able to verify that information. Given that Mr Bukayev, Mr Zhukov and Mr Pochinok had headed the competent authorities during the relevant periods, they could provide significant evidence in the case.
The defence pointed out that the Federal Security Service, the Ministry of the Interior and the GPO had all purchased oil products from Yukos plc and its subsidiaries. Since, according to the charges against the applicants, the sale of oil had allegedly served to conceal theft and money laundering, the relevant circumstances could be clarified by questioning Mr Kulikov, Mr Patrushev, Mr Rushaylo, Mr Serdyukov, Mr Skuratov, Mr Stepashin and Mr Ustinov, who held executive positions at the specified government and administrative authorities during the periods covered by the charges.
At the relevant time Mr Karasev, Mr Sobyanin, Mr Titov and Mr Filipenko had been governors of the regions in which Yukos operated. The defence wished to question them with regard to Yukos activities in the respective regions.
On 12 July 2010 the District Court examined the request. At the hearing the prosecution did not object to summoning Mr Bogdanchikov, the then president of Rosneft, as the latter had the status of a victim in the proceedings. The prosecution asked to court to adjourn the examination of the defence’s request in the part related to transporting Mr Malakhovskiy and Mr Pereverzin to the hearing. With these exceptions, the prosecution objected to the defence’s request, arguing that the statements of all the witnesses they sought to question would be irrelevant.
The District Court granted the request with regard to section 1 of the request – repeat summons of previously called witnesses; and section 2 – the questioning of 26 witnesses listed in bill of indictment. It partially granted the request with regard to section 5 and that Mr Bogdanchikov be summoned. The court adjourned the examination of the request with regard to section 3 – transporting Mr Malakhovskiy and Mr Pereverzin to the hearing, and dismissed the remainder, finding “no legal grounds to grant” it. The court added that the witnesses whom it refused to summon could be questioned at the hearing were they to appear, as provided for in Article 271 § 4 of the CCrP.
It is not clear whether Mr Bogdanchikov was ultimately summoned to the hearing. Mr Malakhovskiy and Mr Pereverzin were eventually examined (see paragraph 293 below).
On an unspecified date the trial court granted the applicants’ request to summon Ms Turchina, a PwC auditor who had participated in the audit of Yukos plc. The summons was sent to her but returned to the court as unclaimed on either 4 or 24 August 2010. The applicants asked the trial court to summon her again. On 22 September 2010 the trial court refused to repeatedly summon Ms Turchina, having stated that it had already duly summoned her, but the summons had been returned as unclaimed.
As regards those witnesses who lived abroad and did not want or were unable to come to Russia and testify directly, the defence sought their questioning via video-conference or using the mechanism of mutual legal assistance.
In particular, on 20 May 2010 the defence sought that Mr Rieger, Financial Controller and subsequently Chief Financial Officer of the Yukos group between 2003 and 2006, be summoned to the hearing. On the same date the court granted the motion. However, Mr Rieger, who lived in Germany, decided that it was not safe for him to travel to Russia, in view of: (i) problems he had previously experienced at passport control while leaving Russia, which he perceived as being linked to the case against the applicants; and (ii) lack of assurances on the part of the Russian Ambassador in Germany, who had been contacted twice by Mr Rieger’s lawyers, that he would be allowed to give evidence at the applicants’ trial without any hindrance and then freely return to Germany. In a letter of 23 July 2010 the International Criminal Law Department of the German Ministry of Foreign Affairs advised Mr Rieger’s lawyers that it would be preferable for him to give evidence via video-conference. In a letter of 29 July 2010 to the trial court, Mr Rieger suggested that arrangements be made through his and the applicants’ lawyers for a video-conference. He pointed out that the Khamovnicheskiy District Court had the necessary technical equipment and had previously conducted proceedings through video-conference. The court neither replied to that letter nor contacted the German authorities in order to organise a video-conference.
On 31 March 2009 the defence asked that the court request that the following witnesses, living abroad, be questioning in a foreign State: Mr Hunter, member of the Board of Directors of Tomskneft plc at the relevant time and head of the association of Yukos plc minority shareholders since 2004; Mr Kosciusko-Morizet (who was eventually questioned at the hearing, see paragraph 197 above); Mr Loze, member of the Board of Directors of Yukos plc in 2000-2004; and Mr Soublin, Chief Financial Officer of Yukos plc between 1999 and 2001. On the same date the court refused the motion, finding “no legal grounds for granting” it.
On 1 April 2010 the defence filed a similar motion with respect to Mr Misamore, Chief Financial Officer of Yukos plc between 2001-2005, Deputy Chairman of its Management Board and a member of the Executive Committee of its Board of Directors.  On the same date the court refused the motion, finding “no legal grounds for granting” it.
On 19 May 2010 the defence filed a similar motion with respect to the following witnesses: Mr Misamore; Mr Soublin, Chief Financial Officer of Yukos plc between 1998 and 2001; Mr Ivlev, Managing Partner of ALM Feldmans Law Office at the relevant time; Mr Sakhnovskiy, a member of Management Board of several Yukos companies at the relevant time; Mr Brudno and Mr Dubov, who had both held various posts at Rosprom Ltd., Menatep Bank, and Yukos companies at the relevant time.  On the same date the court refused the motion, finding “no legal grounds for granting” it.
On 27 May 2010 the defence filed a similar motion with respect to Mr Leonovich, former head of Yukos plc’s treasury, and Mr Gololobov, the Head of the Legal Department of Yukos plc at the relevant time. It also renewed its motion in respect of Mr Brudno, Mr Dubov and Mr Sakhnovskiy.  On the same date the court refused the motions, finding “no legal grounds for granting” them. It also stated that these witnesses could be questioned were they to appear before the court.
On 2 August 2010 the defence asked the court to add to the case file an affidavit by Mr Leonovich.
On 16 August 2010 the court refused the motion, finding no legal grounds either to consider the affidavit as “evidence” within the meaning of Article 74 of the CCrP or to adduce it to the criminal file under Articles 83 and 84 of CCrP.
On 20 September 2010 the defence sought admission to the case-file of affidavits from Mr Hunter, Mr Loze, Mr Soublin, Mr Misamore, Mr Leonovich and Ms Carey, members of the Board of Directors of Yukos plc.
On 22 September 2010 the court refused the motion, finding no legal grounds to consider the affidavits as “evidence” and adduce them to the criminal file under Articles 83 and 84 of CCrP.
The applicants sought to question the above witnesses, senior managers of the Yukos companies at the relevant time, or to adduce their affidavits, with a view to providing evidence on the following matters:
-  the charges of misappropriation of oil and “legalisation” brought against the applicants;
-  the relationship between Yukos and the production entities;
-  centralisation of the management of the operating companies Yukos-EP, Yukos-RM and Yukos-Moskva;
-  Yukos’ use of trading companies to buy all output from the production entities;
-  the way in which Russian and non-Russian corporate entities fitted into the vertically integrated structure;
-   the rationale for the use of offshore structures and the external audit of all offshore entities;
-  the use of offshore accounts to benefit Yukos and the production entities;
-  corporate governance structures within the Yukos group of companies;
- relations with minority shareholders;
-  Yukos’ pricing policies and compliance with the arm’s-length principle;
-  development and implementation of the budgeting process;
-  Yukos’ financial management in relation to capital expenditures, expenses, taxes, acquisitions, and payment of taxes and dividends;
-  pricing policies in other Russian oil companies such as Sibneft, Rosneft and Lukoil;
-  tax-optimisation methods;
-  the measures taken to monitor the physical trading of oil and sales revenues, and how those functions related to the monetary controls developed within Yukos;
-  Yukos’ internal audit policies and other internal control systems;
-  Yukos’ external audit system;
-  Consolidated Financial Reporting under the US GAAP principles and external audit of the company;
- the role of auditors and outside consultants, including PwC, and the work to prepare Yukos so that it could issue US GAAP consolidated statements;
-  PwC’s withdrawal of its audit report in June 2007;
-  preparation for Yukos to be listed on the New York Stock Exchange and the reasons why it did not complete the listing;
-  work performed by ALM Feldmans Law Office for Yukos plc.
The defence filed a number of motions seeking to obtain court orders for the disclosure of documentary evidence in the possession of third parties.
On 15 June 2010 the defence sought a disclosure order against Transneft, a State-owned company which controlled the oil pipeline, in respect of documents containing information about the amounts of oil transferred by Yukos and its production entities Yuganskneftegaz plc, Tomskneft plc and Samaraneftegaz plc, into the State-controlled system of pipelines between 1998 and 2003, as well as invoices for the payment for Transneft services. The defence also sought a disclosure order against several refineries which subsequently received the oil from Transneft for processing. The defence sought to show that all the oil extracted by the production entities had been transferred directly into the Transneft oil pipeline, which had been duly registered, and subsequently to refineries, and that therefore there could have been no misappropriation or embezzlement of the oil by Yukos plc.  On the same date the court refused the motion, finding “no legal grounds for granting” it.
On 17 June 2010 the defence sought a disclosure order against Rosneft (a State-owned company which had purchased Yuganskneftegaz plc) and Tomskneft plc in respect of stocktaking reports on assets and liabilities since 1998, and copies of all stock sheets and collation statements (i.e. documents containing an inventory of the property of those companies). The defence sought to prove that neither of the two Yukos production entities had suffered any losses.  On the same date the court refused the motion with respect to Rosneft, finding “no legal grounds for granting” it.
On 21 June 2010 the trial court refused the motion with respect to Tomskneft plc, without stating reasons for its refusal. It noted that the defence could resubmit its motion once Tomskneft plc’s representative had been questioned at the hearing .
On 29 June 2010 the defence sought a disclosure order against Samaraneftegaz plc in respect of stocktaking reports of assets and liabilities since 1998, and copies of all stock sheets and collation statements. The defence sought to prove that Samaraneftegaz plc had suffered no losses as a Yukos production entity.
On 30 June 2010 the court refused the motion, finding “no legal grounds for granting” it.
On 6 July 2010 the defence again filed a motion seeking a disclosure order against Samaraneftegaz plc.
On the same date the court refused the motion, stating that it had been examined and dismissed previously. At the same time, the court granted the defence’s motion of 1 July 2010 and ordered disclosure against Rosneft, Yuganskneftegaz plc, Tomskneft plc and Samaraneftegaz plc in respect of documents related to the net cost of crude oil and to the income received from the sale of the crude oil.
On 29 July 2010 the defence filed a motion seeking disclosure of information related to the oil prices applied in transactions by Sibneft and Rosneft subsidiaries in 1998-2003. Those documents were supposed to demonstrate that Yukos’s pricing practices were not significantly different from those of the other oil companies which also employed transfer pricing.
On 5 August 2010 the court refused the motion, finding “no legal grounds for granting it, in that the prices set by the said companies were not benchmark prices”.
On the same date the first applicant resubmitted the motion, pointing out that the concept of benchmark prices was not used in Russia and that it would be important for the court to know whether the prices Yukos had used to purchase oil from its subsidiary production entities had differed from other producers. He also asked the court to set out its reason should it refuse the motion again.
On 16 August 2010 the court refused the motion, stating that it had been examined on 5 August 2010.
The defence further sought disclosure orders against the investigating authorities. According to the defence, when the applicants’ second case had been severed from case no. 18/41-03 (see paragraph 53 above), the prosecution had failed to include an inventory of all the materials from the original case file and other cases that had been severed from it. The defence suspected that some of the materials obtained by the GPO, including those obtained in the course of the searches but not subsequently included in the case file for the “second” case, could in fact be “exculpatory” materials.
In particular, on 7 September 2010 the defence filed a motion seeking a disclosure order against the investigation authorities with respect to the file for criminal case no. 18-41/03 including material evidence, records of investigating actions and other documents containing information on the financing of the Yukos group of companies, and especially of its production units, with a view to maintaining their production capacity and creating conditions for the extraction and processing of larger quantities of oil with the proceeds from the sale of oil and oil products.
On 14 September 2010 the defence filed a motion seeking a disclosure order against the investigation authorities in respect of the file of criminal case no. 18-325543/04 (see paragraph 160 above), including material evidence, records of investigating actions and other documents containing information on the sale of oil by Yuganskneftegaz plc, Tomskneft plc and Samaraneftegaz plc to Yukos plc in 2000-2003 and the use of lower prices in order to reduce the production entities’ tax base.
On 17 September 2010 the court refused the above motions, finding “no legal grounds for granting” them.
The defence further argued that it had been unlawful to attach to the case file only the expert reports, without the source materials on which those reports had been based. The defence sought to obtain access to all those source materials.
Thus, on 9 September 2010 the defence filed a motion seeking a disclosure order against the investigation authorities with respect to source materials examined by experts Yeloyan and Kupriyanov between 22 and 25 January 2007 (see paragraph 161 above).
On 14 September 2010 the defence filed a motion seeking disclosure order against the investigation authorities with respect to source materials of the “informational and accounting assessment” (see paragraph 159 above).
On 17 September 2010 the court refused the above motions, finding “no legal grounds for granting” them.
On 27 August 2010 the defence asked the court to add to the case file a copy of the official record of the GPO’s questioning of Mr Aleksanyan in the latter’s criminal case. However, the court refused, stating that the copy of the record had not been officially certified.
On 27 November 2009 Mr Putin, the then Prime Minister of Russia, and Mr Fillon, the then Prime Minister of France, gave a joint press conference following Russian-French talks. The relevant part was reported on the English-language version of the Russian Government’s official webpage as follows:
“Question: Messrs prime ministers. You spoke about commerce and cooperation, but there is also an issue of human rights...
...Are you going to do something about this, Mr Putin?
Also, Mr Khodorkovsky spoke about the need not to forget about human rights. Have you talked to your Russian colleague about this, Mr Fillon?
Vladimir Putin: By virtue of our competence we have to deal with industry and the economy, although the issues you raised are very important and government bodies should always keep an eye on them...
... Now a few words about other cases you’ve mentioned. Mr Madoff was sentenced for life in the United States and nobody gave a damn. Everyone says: ‘Good guy, it serves him right.’ Now Britain is considering the extradition of a hacker who stole a million dollars. He may be turned over to the United States, where he may be sentenced to 60 years in prison. Why don’t you ask about him?
Some of those who went on trial in Russia have stolen billions of dollars! They are also charged with attempts on the lives of specific people in the course of their commercial activities. And these episodes have been proved in court.
As you know, Al Capone was formally tried in the 1930s in the United States for tax evasion, and in fact he was suspected for a whole combination of crimes. Tax evasion was proven in court and he was sentenced under the legislation in force.”
At the 7th meeting of the Valdai Discussion Club, a Moscow-based think tank of political scientists, which ran from 31 August to 7 September 2010, Polish journalist Adam Michnik also asked Mr Putin about the first applicant. On 10 September 2010, in an interview to newspaper Novaya Gazeta, Mr Michnik gave the following account of his question and Mr Putin’s answer:
“...[My] second question to Putin was as follows: if Khodorkovsky is released would that not be a sign that this ‘legal nihilism’ had been overcome? ...He started to say passionately: ‘The head of his security department killed people! How could he not have known about that! He has blood on his hands!’”
In October 2010, during the “Russia Calling” Investment Forum at the VTB Capital investment group, Mr Putin referred to the Yukos case in response to a question from a foreign investor. On 5 October 2010 the news portal pravo.ru reported his statement as follows:
“Yukos is a special case, I have said this many times. You have a criminal case there, the problem is not just non-payment of taxes. There the people are convicted of murder, they have dead bodies linked to them...
They (the heads of Yukos security service) do not give anybody away, but can you imagine that they arranged the murders on their own initiative? ...
 This (the criminal offence) is proven by a court. Therefore let us take Yukos out of the picture.”
On 16 December 2010 Mr Putin had a question-and-answer session with the general public, which was broadcast live in Russia on television and radio. The relevant part was reported on the English-language version of the Russian Government’s official webpage as follows:
“N. Simakova: Good afternoon, Mr Putin.
I have a very simple question. Do you think it fair that Mikhail Khodorkovsky is still in prison? ...
Vladimir Putin: ... As for Khodorkovsky, I have expressed my opinion on this on many occasions. But if you want me to repeat myself again now, I will. It is my conviction that “a thief should be in jail” [a quotation from a famous Soviet film starring Vladimir Vysotsky]. Khodorkovsky has been convicted, by court, for embezzlement, pretty major embezzlement. We’re talking about tax evasion and fraud involving billions of roubles. Then, very importantly, there was also the matter of his personal tax evasion.
But the new embezzlement charges he now faces run to sums of 900 billion roubles in one case and 800 billion roubles in another.
If we look at other countries’ legal practices, in the United States Bernard Madoff got 150 years behind bars for a similar fraud scheme involving similar sums of money. Russia by comparison, I believe, seems a lot more liberal. Anyway, we must start from the fact that Khodorkovsky’s guilt has been proved in court.
In addition, as you are probably well aware, and now I am not talking about Khodorkovsky directly, but I note that the Yukos security chief is currently serving time for murder. The mayor of Nefteyugansk, Vladimir Petukhov, got in their way and so they killed him. One woman in Moscow refused to hand over her small property, and they killed her, too. And then killed the assassin they hired to carry out those killings. All they found was his brains, splattered all over his garage. Do you think the security chief decided to carry out these crimes all by himself?
So we have the court system, ours is, by the way, one of the most humane in the world, and this is their bread and butter. I start by accepting the court ruling.”
On the same date, after the question-and-answer session with the general public, Mr Putin had a meeting with journalists. One of the journalists asked about his earlier comments concerning the first applicant. The relevant part was reported on the English-language version of the Russian Government’s official webpage as follows:
“Question: ...And one more question, if you don’t mind: Don’t you think that you exert pressure on judges with your remarks about Mikhail Khodorkovsky?
Vladimir Putin: ...Regarding pressure on judges, well, you asked the question, so I need to answer it. I don’t really think this is pressure. I was referring to the verdict of the court, the verdict of guilty on previous charges. The court had already made its decision. How could I have influenced it? As for the current trial, the court will be unbiased, I’m sure. As you know, the sums in question are much bigger than last time. In the first case it was about 25 or 30 billion worth of unpaid personal taxes, while now it is 800 or 900 billion. This is what will be put on trial.”
On 2 November 2010 the parties made final submissions. Judge Danilkin announced that the judgment would be pronounced on 15 December 2010.
According to the defence, although the court secretaries were supposed to prepare the trial records on a daily basis, by 2 November 2011 they had finalised only a part of the record from the start of the trial until 17 January 2010. As a result, the judgment did not contain any reference to the trial record. The applicants inferred from this that the court must have relied in its conclusions overwhelmingly on the written materials which had been presented by the prosecution at the start of the trial.
On 15 December 2010 Judge Danilkin informed the parties and the public that pronouncement of the judgment was postponed until 27 December 2010.
Judge Danilkin started reading out the judgment of the Khamovnicheskiy District Court of Moscow on 27 December 2010 and continued until 30 December 2010. The applicants were found guilty under Article 160 § 3 (a) and (b) of the Criminal Code of misappropriation or embezzlement of oil extracted by the three production entities, and under Article 174.1 § 3 of the Criminal Code of laundering illicitly acquired profits. The value of the property so embezzled was calculated on the basis of six years’ output of the Yukos oilfields, multiplied by the price of Russian oil (URALS) at the ports of Rotterdam and Amsterdam.
The judgment ran to 689 pages of compact text. It contained no headings, no paragraph numbers, and no references to the trial record.
According to the applicants, the text of the judgment read out by Judge Danilkin on 27 and 30 December 2010 differed from the written text subsequently received by the parties. They referred to the parts of the judgment which did not appear in the text which was read out by the judge or which appeared in different parts of that judgment (see also paragraph 316 below). The judgment is summarised below.
As follows from the written judgment, the court’s conclusions relied on a large number of documents. First, the District Court examined official documents related to companies which were part of the Yukos group: charters of incorporation, minutes of the board meetings, staff service records, payroll lists of various companies, formal orders and directives issued by the applicants within the group, etc.
Second, the trial court relied on a large number of unofficial documents and memos which were prepared within the Yukos group for internal use. Those internal documents described the responsibilities of the leading executives in various fields, the legal issues and risks related to particular modes of operation by the trading companies within the group and the structure of oil sales, and summarised the ownership structure within the group, tax issues, etc. Some of those documents specified the roles of the first and second applicants in the group’s management. The court examined e-mail correspondence between key employees who administered the system of sales; that correspondence described their functions, the projects they were in charge of, their bonuses, their subordination to a particular Yukos senior executive, etc. The court also had at its disposal correspondence by the lawyers who prepared Yukos for listing on the American stock exchange and described the plans for the sale and the risks related to affiliation. The lawyers also evaluated the potential growth of the tax burden in the event of the disclosure of affiliations, with a view to the company’s possible listing in the US. Some of the memorandums of the lawyers working for Yukos concerned the “promissory notes scheme” and indicated that the transactions with the promissory notes were likely to be declared “sham” and that those responsible for such transactions risked criminal liability under Articles 160, 174 and 201 of the Criminal Code (page 471 of the judgment). Some of those documents were available in paper form and had been countersigned by one of the applicants. A large proportion of those documents, plans, memos and internal correspondence existed only in electronic format and had been obtained from the hard drives of a server seized in the Yukos headquarters (88a, Zhukovka village) by the investigative team during the searches. Some of the servers, according to the judgment, were located in the premises of the law firm ALM Feldmans (pages 550 and 595 of the judgment).
Third, the court examined sales contracts and shipment orders concerning the oil extracted by the production entities and sold through the trading companies. In particular, the court examined the contracts between Yukos and Transneft, a State company which controlled the oil pipeline, to track the oil’s routes of transportation from the oil wells to the refineries of end-customers.
The trial court compared the internal prices of oil within the group (transfer prices) with the “world market prices”, based on the data provided by an international assessment agency, Platts, and by the Russian assessment agency Kortes. The court also examined the forensic audit report which assessed the “market price of oil”.
The court examined official reports, tax audits and other documents issued by the governmental bodies which were supposed to oversee Yukos’s business operations. It also scrutinised audit reports prepared by PwC and other audit firms in respect of Yukos plc and the trading companies, and information about customs clearance of Yukos oil provided by the Customs Committee.
The trial court relied on the official correspondence between Yukos and its partners, including minority shareholders. In particular, it examined correspondence related to the investigations conducted in the past by foreign minority shareholders with a view to ascertaining the trading companies’ affiliation with the applicants and proving the latter’s abusive conduct.
The court relied on a number of expert reports, including those on evaluation of the share price of entities affiliated with Yukos, on the consistency of the balance sheets of the Yukos subsidiaries, on the distribution of profits by certain Yukos subsidiaries to foreign trading companies and on the quantity of oil purchased by Yukos and its trading companies from the production entities (see paragraphs 153-169 above).
The court relied on other judgments related to the business activities of the Yukos group. In particular, the court relied on:
-  the judgment of the Meshchanskiy District Court of 16 May 2005 in respect of the two applicants;
-  the judgment of the Basmanniy District Court of 13 March 2006 in respect of Mr Velichko (who participated in the liquidation or reorganisation of several trading companies registered in low-tax zones);
-  the judgment of the Basmanniy District Court of 1 March 2007 in respect of Mr Malakhovskiy and Mr Pereverzin, stating as follows in this respect:
“[the applicants’ guilt is proved] by the judgment of the Basmanniy District Court of Moscow of 1 March 2007 in respect of [Mr] Malakhovskiy and [Mr] Pereverzin, according to which:
-  the activities of Ratibor and Fargoil were of a sham character... aimed exclusively at the realisation of the criminal intent of all the members [emphasis added] of the organized group to steal the property of others, that is, of the oil that belonged to Yuganskneftegaz plc, Samaraneftegaz plc and Tomskneft plc, and subsequently sell it on the foreign and domestic markets;
-  [Mr] Malakhovskiy, who during the period between 2001 and 2003 was the head of the sham companies Ratibor, Energotrade and Alta-Trade, and [Mr] Pereverzin, who between 1 April 2000 and 31 December 2002 was the head of Routhenhold Holdings Ltd and Pronet Holdings Ltd registered in Cyprus, were members of a criminal group which forged documents on the turnover through these companies of oil products stolen from the production entities and then, by means of financial and other transactions, ensured the legalisation of illegally obtained assets, having transferred them as dividends to the foreign companies that were shareholders of the sham companies[.]”;
-  the judgment of 7 February 2007 by the Kuvshinovskiy Town Court of the Sverdlovsk Region in respect of Mr Ivannikov (former head of the administration of the Lesnoy ZATO);
-  the judgment of the Miass Town Court of the Chelyabinsk Region of 16 July 2007 in respect of Mr Lubenets (former head of the administration of the Trekhgorniy ZATO);
-  the judgment of the Basmanniy District Court of 4 April 2008 in respect of Ms Karaseva (director of Forest-Oil, one of the Yukos trading companies);
-  the judgment of the Commercial Court of Moscow of 28 April 2005 in the corporate case of Yukos plc;
-  three judgments of the Arbitral Tribunal of the Moscow Chamber of Commerce of 19 September 2006, in the proceedings of Yukos Capital against Yuganskneftegaz plc, whereby the latter was obliged to repay to the former the amounts of loans received from Yukos Capital in 2004 (those judgments were later quashed by a decision of the Commercial Court of Moscow of 18 May 2007, confirmed on appeal; the decision of the Commercial Court of Moscow was, in turn, quashed by the Dutch courts in a final decision of 25 June 2010 by the Supreme Court of the Netherlands).
The court also relied on the contents of the trial record in the criminal case against Mr Malakhovskiy and Mr Pereverzin (see paragraphs 14 and 17 above). In particular, the court stated that the applicants’ guilt was corroborated by:
“-  the statement of... [Mr] Valdez-Garcia in the course of the court hearing at the Basmanniy District Court of Moscow in the criminal case against [Mr] Malakhovskiy and [Mr] Pereverzin, reflected in the trial record of 18 December 2006 and studied by [this] court, according to which Fargoil was selling oil for export under commission agency contracts with Yukos plc and Yukos Export Trade...
-   the statement of... [Ms V.] in the course of the court hearing at the Basmanniy District Court of Moscow in the criminal case against [Mr] Malakhovskiy and [Mr] Pereverzin, reflected in the trial record of 30 September 2006 and studied by [this] court, according to which... she had never been involved in commercial activity, had not set up any legal entities... and did not know [Mr] Malakhovskiy...
-   the statement of... [Ms A.] in the course of the court hearing at the Basmanniy District Court of Moscow in the criminal case against [Mr] Malakhovskiy and [Mr] Pereverzin, reflected in the trial record of 22 September 2006 and studied by [this] court, according to which... since she had been working in the law firm ALM Feldmans and in 2003 became its managing partner. [She stated that] a contract on legal services was concluded between ALM Feldmans and Yukos plc. All the services under the contract were performed by [Mr] Ivlev who was able to involve other lawyers in the work...
-   the statement of... [Mr Sh.] in the course of the court hearing at the Basmanniy District Court of Moscow in the criminal case against [Mr] Malakhovskiy and [Mr] Pereverzin, reflected in the trial record of 14 September 2006 and studied by [this] court, according to which he had been a lawyer at the law firm ALM Feldmans since 2001. [As such] under [Mr] Ivlev’s instructions he performed certain tasks related to legal services provided to Yukos plc...
-  the statement of... [Mr E.] in the course of the court hearing at the Basmanniy District Court of Moscow in the criminal case against [Mr] Malakhovskiy and [Mr] Pereverzin, reflected in the trial record of 14 September 2006 and studied by [this] court, according to which since 2001, under [Mr] Ivlev’s instructions, she represented Dansley Ltd...
-   the statement of... [Mr] Valdez-Garcia in the course of the court hearing at the Basmanniy District Court of Moscow in the criminal case against [Mr] Malakhovskiy and [Mr] Pereverzin, reflected in the trial record of 18 December 2006 and studied by [this] court, according to which Nassaubridge Management Ltd, registered in Cyprus was the sole shareholder of Fargoil... Given that Fargoil belonged de facto to Yukos plc, he believed that all the profit of Fargoil, through Nassaubridge Management Ltd, went to the main shareholders in Yukos plc [including the applicants and three other people]...”
The trial court heard a large number of witnesses. In particular, it examined persons who had been directors of the trading companies or provided accounting services to them, and former managers of Yukos and its subsidiaries, etc. The former employees of Yukos’s tax and financial departments explained certain principles underlying the functioning of the system of sales, and described money flows within the group. The court heard Mr Pereverzin and Mr Malakhosvkiy on their role in the management of the network of Russian and foreign trading companies. The court heard, as a witness, Mr Khristenko, the Minister of Trade and Industry, and Mr Gref, a former minister, who outlined the situation on the internal oil market at the relevant time and the transfer pricing methods used by many oil companies at that time. The court heard the Yukos auditors, who explained that they had not been given full information about the affiliation links between Yukos and certain of the trading companies. Mr Rebgun, the receiver of the company’s assets in the bankruptcy proceedings, described the situation with the Yukos-affiliated companies from 2004. Several lawyers from ALM Feldmans described their role in the registration and maintenance of off-shore companies at the request of employees of the Yukos group.
The judgment mentioned Mr P-n as one of the witnesses heard by the trial court. However, according to the applicants, that person had never testified orally before the court. The judgment also referred to witness testimony by Mr R-y, who had not appeared in person and whose written testimony had not been read out. According to the applicants, the judgment referred to the testimony of Mr Valdez-Garcia, whereas that evidence had not been examined directly but was only referred to by the prosecutor in his closing statement.
The trial court examined transcripts from the tapping of telephones used by Yukos employees in October-November 2004, namely the exchanges between Mr Gololobov and Ms Bakhmina. From the content of the exchanges the court concluded that, while in prison, the applicants, acting through their lawyers, continued to give orders aimed at the laundering of profits from the sale of oil.
Finally, the trial court relied on a number of records from the questioning of witnesses by the prosecution in the course of the investigation, or by other courts in other Yukos-related proceedings. In particular, the court examined records of the questioning of Mr Valdez-Garcia, Mr Log. and Mr Yu.
In the judgment the trial court analysed evidence which supported the case for the defence. Thus, the court analysed witness testimony by Mr Kasyanov, Mr Mirlin, Mr Gilmanov, Mr Anisimov, Ms Lysova, Mr Gerashchenko and Mr Kosciusko-Morizet. The court discarded their testimony as unreliable, self-contradictory, irrelevant, or not based on first-hand experience. In particular, the court decided that some of the witnesses had financial ties with the applicants, were indebted to them otherwise and therefore could not be trusted (Mr Gilmanov, Mr Anisimov, Mr Kosciusko-Morizet). As to the submissions by Mr Haun, the court dismissed them on the grounds that (a) Mr Haun was not a specialist in Russian law; (b) he had not worked in Yukos; (c) he could not have assessed the compliance of the transfer pricing arrangements with Russian law; and (d) his attempt to compare transfer pricing in Yukos and other companies (Lukoil, TNK) was misplaced, since he was not aware of the details of the functioning of those companies. Certain elements in the submissions of witnesses for the defence (Mr Kasyanov, Mr Haun and others) were interpreted by the court as supporting the case for the prosecution.
The trial court dismissed the applicants’ objection concerning a lack of territorial jurisdiction. The court noted that the crimes imputed to the applicants were committed in concert with Mr Ivlev and other lawyers from the ALM Feldmans law office, located in Sechenovskiy Lane in Moscow. In particular, lawyers from ALM Feldmans created and maintained companies in Cyprus which were used for laundering the profits from misappropriated oil. The Sechenovskiy Lane address was within the territorial jurisdiction of the Khamovnicheskiy District Court which, under Article 32 of the CCrP, was therefore competent to hear the entire case.
The acts imputed to the applicants were characterised by the court under Article 160 part 3 of the Criminal Code (large-scale misappropriation or embezzlement with abuse of position) and Article 174.1 part 3 of the Criminal Code (large-scale laundering of money or of other assets acquired as a result of commission of a crime, with abuse of position and committed by a group acting in concert). The episode related to the alleged misappropriation of Tomskneft plc shares was excluded, due to the expiry of the statutory time-limits. The judgment specified that since the value of the property misappropriated by the applicants exceeded RUB 250,000 they were guilty of “large-scale misappropriation”, pursuant to the footnote to Article 158 of the Code. Similarly, since the sums laundered by the applicants exceeded RUB 6 million, the money laundering was also qualified as “large-scale money laundering”. The court found that the applicants had committed the crimes by abusing their positions within the companies they had controlled.
The judgment stressed that the applicants were not charged with physical theft of the oil extracted and refined by the production entities. The acts incriminated to them consisted in misappropriation of that oil through a chain of fraudulent deals involving it (page 647 of the judgment). Thus, there was no need to conduct a stocktaking of the oil which the production entities had allegedly “lost”: that loss was not physical but consisted of the loss of profit as a result of the misappropriation of oil profits in the applicants’ interests (page 655 of the judgment). Thus, in 2002 the trading companies generated profits of USD 3.932 billion, whereas the production entities generated only RUB 4.154 billion during the same period.
The trial court decided that the applicants were the leaders of an organised criminal group (Article 35 part 3 of the Criminal Code) which designed and implemented the scheme to misappropriate the oil. The court found that, de facto, all important decisions within Yukos were taken by the first applicant, whereas other persons and bodies who had the power to take decisions under the law and in accordance with the charter of incorporation of Yukos and its subsidiaries held those powers only nominally, and retained independence only in respect of relatively small operations. The fact that both applicants ceased to be senior executives of Yukos in 1999-2001 did not mean that they had lost control of the group. Although agreements between Yukos and the production entities were approved by the general meetings of shareholders, those approvals were obtained through deceit and manipulation. The Public Companies Act required approval of large transactions by a majority of “disinterested shareholders”; however, the applicants obtained approval only through the votes of shareholders who were controlled by them and were thus “interested” in the outcome of the transactions.
The trial court noted as established that where the parties to a commercial transaction had no free will, where they did not act independently but in the interests of a third party, and where they did not derive benefits from the transaction, those factors were indicative of the sham nature of such a transaction.
The court considered that the applicants did not employ the system of transfer pricing, but that they simply forced the production entities to sell their oil for artificially low prices, which resulted in a reduction of the profits of the production entities and, in turn, deprived the minority shareholders, including the State itself, of their dividends. The fact that the production entities received payments for the oil did not mean that there had been no misappropriation; this legal concept also covered situations where misappropriation of property is followed by inadequate compensation for that property (page 652 of the judgment).
The court held that it was correct to calculate the cost of the oil misappropriated by the applicants on the basis of the “world market prices”. The “domestic price” of the oil in the regions where the oil was extracted did not reflect the real price, since it was calculated on the basis of the prices of other Russian oil companies which also employed transfer pricing mechanisms (page 675 of the judgment). When calculating the value of the oil misappropriated by the applicants, the court used the overall price of the oil, and not the margin which remained in the applicants’ hands: according to Ruling no. 51 of the Plenary Supreme Court of Russia of 27 December 2007, where misappropriated property is replaced with another asset of a lower value, the “scale” of misappropriation is calculated on the basis of the value of property.
The court further found that, having misappropriated the oil that belonged to Yukos production entities, the applicants had put in place a scheme whereby the stolen oil had been either sold or converted into oil products which were also subsequently sold, and that the applicants had derived profit from such sales. The court qualified this activity as laundering of money or of other assets acquired as a result of commission of a crime.
The court dismissed the applicants’ arguments that, in the tax proceedings in which the State had recovered unpaid taxes of Yukos, those taxes had been calculated as if all of the oil belonged to Yukos itself. The court decided that previous judgments by the commercial courts concerned only tax matters and did not define the legal title to the oil. The commercial courts in the tax proceedings (which ended with the judgment by the Moscow City Commercial Court of 26 May 2004) took as their starting point the assumption that Yukos was the de facto owner of the oil at issue. In its judgment of 21-28 April 2005 the Moscow City Commercial Court defined the owner of an asset as a person who de facto exercised all powers of the legal owner in respect of that asset (page 659 of the judgment). In accordance with the position of the Constitutional Court of Russia as expressed in Ruling no. 139-O of 25 July 2001, the tax authorities were entitled to establish the real owner of property which was the object of a transaction on the basis of the de facto relations between the parties and irrespective of what was written in the contracts between them (page 660 of the judgment). While the commercial courts had established that Yukos was a de facto owner of the oil and benefited from its sales through the trading companies, the commercial courts did not find that Yukos was a de jure owner of that oil. Thus, the commercial courts’ conclusions in the previous proceedings did not contradict the court’s conclusions in the current proceedings as to the applicants’ guilt with regard to “misappropriation” of the oil which belonged to the production entities.
The court took note of over sixty judgments by the commercial courts confirming the validity of the general agreements between Yukos and the production entities. However, the commercial courts at the relevant time had based their findings on the presumption that the parties to those agreements were independent and had acted in good faith. The “sham” character of those agreements became evident only as a result of an investigation which discovered the links of affiliation and the lack of independence of the parties involved.
In the opinion of the court, there was no overlap between the charges the applicants faced in the first and second trials. In 2005 the applicants were convicted for tax evasion related to the operation of trading companies in the low-tax zones in 1999-2000. In the second trial the applicants stood accused of misappropriation of the oil belonging to the production entities in the period 1998-2003. The objects of the crime of “tax evasion” and of the crime of “misappropriation” were distinct, as were the periods concerned. The court noted that Article 174.1 of the Criminal Code provided that the crime of money laundering could not be committed in respect of money acquired as a result of tax evasion – a crime punishable under Articles 198, 199.1 and 199.2 of the Criminal Code. However, in the applicants’ case the “money laundering” concerned not the sums of unpaid taxes but the “misappropriated” assets. Thus, the applicants first “misappropriated” the oil by concentrating profits from its sale on the trading companies’ accounts, and then committed the crime of “tax evasion”, since the trading companies located in Lesnoy ZATO (the low-tax zone) claimed and obtained tax cuts unlawfully. “Tax evasion” was therefore a form of maximising the profits from “misappropriation”. Consequently, the “laundering” of money accumulated on the accounts of the trading companies concerned not the proceeds of the crime of “tax evasion” but the proceeds of “misappropriation”.
The court disagreed with the applicants’ claim that the group’s inner structure had been transparent to the public and the authorities. The court established that in previous court proceedings the applicants never acknowledged their affiliation with the trading companies, such as Fargoil, Mitra and others, and that they did not disclose those facts in their relations with the Russian authorities. As to the consolidated financial reporting for foreign investors, such reports did not contain an exhaustive and clear list of affiliated companies, their operations and the profits accumulated by them. All publications or statements by the company concerning Yukos’s affiliation links with the trading companies were half-hearted and evasive, and at no point did Yukos disclose a complete and detailed breakdown of internal organisation within the group. That information was not given to the shareholders; consolidated reports prepared under the GAAP rules were always published in English, while the shareholders had no access to a Russian-language version of the reports. Even the auditors from PwC did not have a full picture of what was happening within the group, let alone individual Russian shareholders.
The court accepted the applicants’ contention that part of the profits from the sale of oil was returned to Yukos. However, even though the applicants maintained the operations of the production entities, reinvested in equipment and even increased the production entities’ output, they did so only to maximise their own profits and the capitalisation of Yukos. The applicants decided what to do with the profits and where to invest them at their own will, without taking into account the opinions and interests of other shareholders in the production entities. Similarly, the buyback of the shares in the production entities and in Yukos itself was decided by the applicants themselves, without any involvement by the minority shareholders. Those deals served the applicants’ interests alone. The reinvestment of USD 2.6 billion in the production entities in 2003, in the form of loans by Yukos Capital, served only the purpose of securing control over the production entities in the capacity of their largest creditor. Although certain sums were reinvested in the production entities, this was not done on a gratuitous basis but on a reciprocal basis in the form of buying promissory notes or providing loans.
Both applicants were sentenced to 14 years’ imprisonment, which included the remaining part of the sentence the applicants were serving under the judgment of 16 May 2005.
Within the criminal cases several private persons, companies and a State agency introduced civil claims against the applicants. They included Mr Belokrylov and Mr Demchenko, Rosneft, Tomskneft plc, Samaraneftegaz plc, Sandheights Ltd. and the Federal Property Agency.
The court decided that the question of civil damages was not ready for decision and relinquished jurisdiction in favour of a civil court in this respect.
On 26 December 2010 the web-magazine Gazeta.ru published information to the effect that in the morning of 25 December 2010 plain-clothes security officers had escorted Judge Danilkin from his home to the Moscow City Court. He had allegedly been warned not to leave his house.
On 14 February 2011 Ms Vassilyeva, assistant to Judge Danilkin and later press officer of the Khamovnicheskiy District Court, gave an interview to Novaya Gazeta, an opposition newspaper. In the interview she stated that the judgment in the second applicants’ case had not been drafted by Judge Danilkin himself, but by judges of the Moscow City Court. She confirmed that on 25 December 2010 Judge Danilkin had been taken to the Moscow City Court and later arrived at the Khamovnicheskiy District Court, where he had been seen by other employees. She also said:
 “... [The] entire judicial community understands very well that there has been an ‘order’ for this case, for this trial ... I know for a fact that the [text of the] judgment was brought [to the Khamovnicheskiy District Court] from the Moscow City Court, of this I am sure...”
She stated that throughout the trial Judge Danilkin was constantly receiving instructions from the Moscow City Court. According to her, the delay in the announcement of the verdict was in part due to Mr Putin’s comments of 16 December 2010. She implied that Judge Danilkin had first prepared his own judgment, but had later been forced to read out another text, which had been prepared elsewhere, and that some parts of that other judgment had been delivered to the Khamovnicheskiy District Court while he was reading out the beginning of his judgment.
In April 2011 Mr Kravchenko, another former employee of the Khamovnicheskiy District Court, confirmed Ms Vassilyeva’s words in his interview to Novaya Gazeta. In particular, he said that Judge Danilkin, referring to the judges from the upper court, said:
“Whatever they say, that’s how it will be. It isn’t really my decision.”
Mr Kravchenko stated that Judge Danilkin had consulted with the Moscow City Court whenever he faced difficulties in handling the trial.
According to the applicants, a visitor to the court, Ms S.D., overheard a telephone conversation involving one of the prosecutors, who had allegedly stated:
“Now the lawyers will rattle on [to justify] their fees, Khodorkovskiy will blabber [his part], but the judgment is not yet ready, it has not been brought from the Moscow City Court yet”.
The applicants’ lawyers raised the allegations concerning Judge Danilkin’s lack of impartiality on appeal (see paragraph 353 below).
In May 2011 the applicants’ lawyers also lodged a formal request for a criminal investigation into the allegations by Ms Vassilyeva, Mr Kravchenko and others. In the opinion of the defence lawyers, if the facts disclosed by the two former employees of the District Court were true, the situation amounted to a crime. They supported their request with a detailed analysis of the relevant parts of the judgment which were mutually exclusive, used different terminology, were incoherent with Judge Danilkin’s other procedural decisions, etc. In their opinion, all of these factors suggested that Judge Danilkin was not the author of the judgment or at least that he was not the only author thereof.
On 20 June 2011 the Investigative Committee refused to institute criminal proceedings into the applicants’ allegations. It first noted that, in so far as the applicants’ complaint concerned their disagreement with the first-instance judgment, these issues could only be examined by the court of appeal and not by the investigating authorities. It further questioned a number of witnesses with a view to establish whether there were grounds for instituting criminal proceedings.
Judge Danilkin submitted that he had prepared the judgment independently and that there had been no procedural beaches. He also stated that during the applicants’ trial he had had to visit the Moscow City Court on a number of occasions related to a meeting of the Qualification Board and other matters, but he had never discussed the applicants’ case with anybody and had not received any instructions in this regard. At the same time, he did not even visit the Moscow City Court between 2 November and 27 December 2010. Judge Danilkin’s statement was confirmed by Ms M., who was a court secretary during the trial.
Ms Vassilyeva submitted that Judge Danilkin had not discussed the applicants’ trial with her; she had not accompanied him during his visits to the Moscow City Court; she did not know with whom Judge Danilkin had talked on the phone; she did not know any details concerning the drafting of the judgment in the applicants’ case and had not seen anybody bring the judgment from the Moscow City Court. The Investigative Committee examined an audio recording of the interview that Ms Vassilyeva had given to the media and concluded that the information provided therein was based on suppositions and was not substantiated by any evidence. At the same time, Ms Vassilyeva produced several fragments of text on A4 paper, alleging that they had been handed over to her by Judge Danilkin in January 2011 and contained the operative part of the judgment in the applicants’ case. Judge Danilkin submitted that he had never seen these fragments. The Investigative Committee concluded that the text fragments contained no handwriting that belonged to Judge Danilkin or anybody else, and that therefore it was impossible to establish their origin. It did not rule out the possibility that they had been prepared as part of a set-up.
Mr Kravchenko submitted that his statement had been misrepresented by the journalist who interviewed him. According to Mr Kravchenko, he had stated that Judge Danilkin was in the habit of discussing the issues of the court’s everyday activities with the Moscow City Court. However, he knew nothing about the way in which the procedural decisions had been taken in the applicants’ case. The Investigative Committee examined the audio recording of the interview that he had given to the media and found it to corroborate those submissions.
Ms S.D. submitted that she had been at the Khamovnicheskiy District Court on a certain day between 15 October and early November 2010 and happened to have overheard a telephone conversation by a woman in a prosecutor’s uniform. The woman allegedly said to her interlocutor: “Now Khodorkovskiy will blabber [his part], the lawyers will rattle on [to justify] their fees...But the judgment has not been brought from the Moscow City Court yet”. The Investigative Committee dismissed Ms S.D.’s submission as unreliable, since it was inconsistent with the other evidence.
The Investigative Committee concluded that there were no constituent elements of a criminal offence and refused to institute criminal proceedings.
The applicants did not appeal against that decision.
On 31 December 2010 the applicants’ lawyers appealed against the judgment. They first submitted a short appeal statement which was supplemented by a detailed appeal statement over the following months.
According to the defence, by the end of the trial the case materials were contained in 275 volumes, of which 188 volumes were materials from the pre-trial investigation and the remainder was the materials that had been added during the trial (trial record, motions, procedural rulings, etc.).
The complete final version of the trial record was made available to the parties several months after the pronouncement of the judgment, on 16 March 2011. The defence also introduced a 1,060-page memo which contained corrections to the trial record. Judge Danilkin dismissed most of the objections by the defence as unsubstantiated.
Together with his statement of appeal, the second applicant tried to introduce new evidence before the court of appeal, namely an affidavit from an American lawyer who, at request of the applicants, had investigated the question of PwC’s withdrawal of the audit report. However, the court of appeal refused to consider this evidence.
The judicial bench of the Moscow City Court was composed of three judges: Mr Usov (the President), Ms Arychkina and Mr Monekin (judges). Both applicants, as well as their defence lawyers, appeared before the court of appeal. The appeal hearing lasted one day.
On 24 May 2011 the Moscow City Court upheld the judgment of 27 December 2010, while reducing the sentence to 13 years’ imprisonment.
The decision of the court of appeal ran to 70 pages and contained a brief description of the factual findings of the trial court. The court of appeal confirmed the account of the events given by the lower court and addressed the main arguments of the defence. In the light of the amendments introduced to the Criminal Code by Federal Law of 7 March 2011, the Moscow City Court requalified the applicants’ conviction from Article 160 § 3 (a) and (b) (large-scale misappropriation or embezzlement with abuse of position committed by a group acting in concert) to Article 160 § 4 (large-scale misappropriation or embezzlement with abuse of position committed by an organised group) and applied amended Article 174.1 § 3 (large-scale laundering of money or of other assets acquired as a result of commission of a crime with abuse of position and committed by a group acting in concert).
According to the Moscow City Court, although the production entities had been receiving payments for their oil, those payments were much lower that the prices which they would otherwise have received had they sold the oil independently. Although on the face of it the general agreements and the auctions appeared valid, and although the trading companies shipped the oil to the end-customers, their will was distorted by unlawful and deceitful acts of the applicants, who coerced them into concluding those agreements and accepting the results of the auctions. The fact that the production entities, who were the civil plaintiffs in those proceedings, only sought compensation for their lost profits and not for all of the oil which was channelled through the trading companies was not mutually incompatible with the fact that all of the oil was misappropriated by the applicants.
The court of appeal dismissed the applicants’ argument that the oil had never left the production companies’ possession against the latter’s will. It found that the will of the production companies had been distorted since, under the management agreements, their management bodies had been effectively appointed by the applicants and had acted in the latter’s interests.
It further dismissed the applicants’ argument that the transactions in question could not be considered uncompensated since not only had the production companies suffered no damage, but they had received compensation for the cost of oil and had made a profit. The court of appeal stated that the oil had been sold by the production entities at prices that were four to five times lower than market prices. Thus, compensation for the oil’s cost at an amount that was below its market price entailed damage to the oil’s owner.
At the same time, the court of appeal found that it had been impossible to establish a domestic market price for oil in the respective Russian regions because at the relevant period almost all of the oil had been extracted by entities which were part of vertically integrated companies. Such companies applied transfer pricing and thus fixed the price of oil at their discretion. Such a practice ran counter to the interests of the State and the minority shareholders.
The Moscow City Court acknowledged that the validity of the general agreements had been confirmed by final judgments of the commercial courts. It dismissed them, however, stating that the commercial courts had acted on the assumption that the parties to those agreements had been acting freely and independently, which had not been the case. In addition, in those proceedings the production entities’ interests had been represented by lawyers from Yukos-Moskva, who misinformed the commercial courts about the real nature of the relationships between Yukos and its production entities.
The court of appeal held that earlier judgments by the commercial courts in the tax proceedings involving Yukos did not contradict the findings of the Meshchanskiy District Court in the first set of criminal proceedings against the applicants. The commercial courts imputed taxes to Yukos on the assumption that Yukos was a de facto owner of the oil, derived profits from selling that oil and was therefore obliged to pay taxes. However, the commercial courts never stated that Yukos was the de jure owner of the oil. The oil was the property of the production entities and was misappropriated by the applicants.
The court of appeal disagreed with the applicants that they had been convicted twice for the same act. It stated that within the first case the applicants had been convicted of tax evasion, whereas in the second case they stood trial for misappropriation.
It further upheld the findings of the trial court as to the applicants’ role in the “organised group” which participated in the misappropriation of oil.
The Moscow City Court dismissed the applicants’ allegations that the charges of stealing the oil and money laundering had already been examined by the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow within the first set of criminal proceedings which had ended with the applicants’ conviction on 16 May 2005. The court stated that while the applicants had been convicted in the first trial of tax evasion for the years 1999-2000 in the low-tax zone in Lesnoy ZATO by using the companies Business Oil, Mitra, Vald Oil and Forest Oil, the present criminal proceedings concerned stealing, by means of appropriation, oil belonging to Yukos production entities such as Samaraneftegaz plc Yuganskneftegaz plc and Tomskneft plc in 1998-2003. Thus the objects of the offences were different and, therefore, the applicants could not be considered to have been tried twice for the same offence.
The court of appeal also dismissed the applicants’ allegations of political motivation behind the prosecution. It found that the trial in the applicants’ case had been open and based on the principles of adversarial proceedings and equality of arms. The defence had enjoyed procedural rights and had been able to file motions and examine witnesses. The statements by the applicants’ lawyers alleging a political underpinning to the prosecution were unfounded. The charges against the applicants were related to their business activities and did not concern any political party. In any event, an individual’s political status did not grant him or her immunity from criminal charges.
The Moscow City Court also examined procedural objections raised by the defence. It held that in bringing the second criminal case against the applicants the GPO had respected all necessary procedural requirements, and that that issue had been sufficiently addressed by the trial court. The applicants had been sufficiently informed about the accusations against them and, as followed from their own submissions, they were well aware of all the necessary details of the case. The bill of indictment contained the information necessary to understand the factual grounds of the accusations. The trial court had examined the case within the scope outlined in the bill of indictment.
The territorial jurisdiction of the Khamovnicheskiy District Court had been defined in accordance with Articles 31-33 of the CCrP. In particular, the District Court had accepted jurisdiction to try the applicants’ case with reference to the “most serious crime” imputed to the applicants, namely that provided by Article 174-1 p. 4 of the Criminal Code. The bill of indictment referred to acts which were imputed to the applicants and had been committed on the territory under the jurisdiction of the Khamovnicheskiy District Court.
When the second case was severed from the first criminal investigation, the investigator attached to the new case file certain documents from the first case, either original documents or duly certified photocopies. With regard to the expert examinations conducted at the request of the GPO, the defence had had access to the relevant decisions of the investigator and to the reports themselves, and had been able to file motions.
The defence had full access to the materials of the case; the case file contained their written statements to that end. As to the applicants’ allegations that they had not received access to some of the materials on which the prosecution and the court had relied, the court of appeal found that allegation unfounded.
The court of appeal rejected the applicants’ allegation that the trial court’s approach to taking and examining evidence had been one-sided. The trial court had provided sufficient grounds in explaining why it considered some evidence reliable and some not. The essence of the evidence examined at the trial was reflected accurately in the judgment. The first-instance court had properly examined the applicants’ arguments concerning the inadmissibility of certain prosecution evidence, namely the documents obtained from searches in the premises of ALM Feldmans and PwC, translations of documents, and reports on the examination and extraction of information from the electronic disks. Evidence relied on by the GPO was properly obtained, recorded and produced to the court. Expert reports were commissioned in accordance with the procedural rules, the qualification of the experts was beyond any doubt, and their objectivity was not questioned.
The Moscow City Court found that the trial court had read out written testimony by several witnesses (Mr R-y, Ms Kol., Mr Yu., Mr P-n and Mr Valdez-Garcia) but that this had been in accordance with the law. In particular, the written testimony of Mr P-n, who lived abroad, was read out at his own request under Article 281 part 4 (2) of the CCrP (see paragraph 294 above). Occasionally the judgments referred to “oral submissions” by some of those witnesses, whereas the court relied only on their written testimony, but that was a minor mistake. The essential fact was that the testimony of those persons had been examined at the trial, in one form or another.
The Moscow City Court found that the trial court had examined and assessed the evidence produced by the defence. The court of appeal dismissed the arguments that the trial court had misinterpreted the testimony of Mr Kasyanov, Mr Gref and Mr Khristenko.
The court of appeal held that in the proceedings before the trial court the defence had enjoyed equality of arms with the prosecution and that the judge was impartial and had ensured that the defence was able to fully realise their procedural rights. The trial court had accepted reasonable and lawful requests by the defence and dismissed, after careful examination, all those which were unjustified or not based in law. The court of appeal further dismissed, in a summary manner, all the complaints by the defence concerning the defence motions rejected by Judge Danilkin during the trial, finding that Judge Danilkin’s decisions in this respect were “convincing and supported by the materials of the case”, and that the applicants’ defence rights had not been hindered in any way (page 65 of the decision of the court of appeal). The defence had been given sufficient time to study the trial record and to formulate their objections. The parties had been given an opportunity to make their final pleadings, and the judgment had been rendered in accordance with the procedure provided by law. The law did not prevent the trial court from starting to prepare the judgment before the trial record was finalised. The trial court’s reliance on the previous judgments in connected cases was legitimate; as to the existence of several parallel investigations, the court of appeal noted that severing cases was within the competence of the prosecution bodies and not the court.
It further held that there had been no procedural breaches in the drafting of the judgment by the trial court, and that the applicants’ allegations in this part were based on suppositions.
Finally, the Moscow City Court examined matters related to the detention of the applicants on remand and the legal classification of the acts imputed to them. In particular, the court of appeal noted that during the pleadings the prosecution had dropped charges related to several individual episodes of embezzlement of oil; it appeared that the prosecution had wished to exclude episodes where there had been uncertainty about the amounts of oil embezzled or where the method of calculation of the price of oil had differed from the usual method proposed for other episodes. The court of appeal also stated that the indication in the first-instance judgment that the applicants had acted “through their lawyers” was to be excluded, since the judgment was supposed to deal only with the applicants’ crimes and not those of anyone else. The court of appeal also applied the new law amending sentencing principles to the benefit of the accused, changed the legal classification of the crimes imputed to the applicants and reduced the overall sentence to 13 years of imprisonment in respect of each applicant.
In June 2011 the applicants were transferred from the remand prison in Moscow to serve their sentence in penal colonies.
On 20 December 2012 the Presidium of the Moscow City Court reviewed the first-instance and appeal judgments in the applicants’ case following their application for supervisory review. The Presidium stated, inter alia, that the applicants’ allegations that they had been tried twice for the same offences were unfounded. In particular, not only were the offences of tax evasion (for which the applicants were convicted as a result of the first trial) and the offences of misappropriation and money laundering (for which they were convicted in the second trial) substantially different, but the factual basis for their conviction in each set of proceedings was also different. In the first trial the courts examined the fact that the applicants had submitted tax declarations containing false information indicating that the companies Business Oil, Mitra, Vald Oil and Forest Oil were entitled to preferential taxation. In the second trial the applicants were convicted of misappropriating oil from Yukos production entities and the subsequent laundering of the profits thus gained. Whereas the applicants had used the companies Business Oil, Mitra, Vald Oil and Forest Oil for the purposes of money laundering, the source of their income was not under examination in the first criminal proceedings, as it had no bearing on the charge of tax evasion. Thus, the charges against the applicants in the first and second sets of criminal proceedings were based on different acts. The Presidium consequently dismissed the applicants’ allegations of double jeopardy.
At the same time, the Presidium of the Moscow City Court reviewed the applicants’ sentences in respect of both the first and the second conviction so as to bring them into conformity with the recent legislative changes. It reduced the sentence in respect of the second conviction to 11 years of imprisonment.
On 6 August 2013 the Supreme Court examined another application for supervisory review lodged by the applicants. Having upheld their conviction, the Presidium recalculated the sentence and reduced it to 10 years and 10 months’ imprisonment.
On 23 January 2014 the Presidium of the Supreme Court again reviewed the judgments in the applicants’ two cases under supervisory review. Having regard to the Court’s finding of a violation of Article 5 § 3 of the Convention in the Khodorkovskiy and Lebedev judgment, cited above, the Presidium quashed the decisions concerning the applicants’ pre-trial detention in the first set of criminal proceedings against them. However, it did not alter the applicants’ conviction, despite the Court’s finding of a violation of Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (c) and (d).
The Presidium upheld the applicants’ second conviction. It also dismissed their allegations of having been tried twice for the same offence, stating that the applicants had been convicted in the two sets of criminal proceedings of different offences and on the basis of different acts.
The Presidium of the Supreme Court reduced the applicants’ sentence to 10 years and 7 months in respect of the first applicant and 10 years, 6 months and 22 days in respect of the second applicant. The Presidium also ordered that the second applicant be released as he had served his sentence. It further ordered that the remainder of the first applicant’s outstanding prison sentence was not to be executed, having regard to the Presidential Decree of 20 December 2013 pardoning him.
According to the applicants, a large number of foreign political leaders and high-placed State officials expressed their concern about the fairness of the second trial and improper motivation behind the applicants’ prosecution. Those included Ms Clinton, the US Secretary of State; Mr Hague, the UK Foreign Secretary; a French Foreign Ministry official; Ms Merkel, the German Chancellor; Mr Westerwelle, the German Foreign Minister; the EU High Representative Catherine Ashton, and others. On 24 May 2011 Amnesty International, an international human-rights NGO, declared the applicants “prisoners of conscience”.
The applicants produced a large number of documents, official statements, press publications, declarations by foreign governments, intergovernmental bodies and NGOs in which their case was labelled as an instance of “political prosecution”.
In 2011 the Presidential Council of the Russian Federation for Civil Society and Human Rights, consisting of a number of legal experts, produced a Report on Results of the Public Scholarly Analysis of the Court Materials of the Criminal Case against M.B. Khodorkovskiy and P.L. Lebedev. The report concluded that there had been numerous breaches of the applicants’ rights in the course of the second criminal case against them.
Article 19 of the Russian Constitution provides as follows:
“1. All people shall be equal before the law and courts.
The State shall guarantee the equality of rights and freedoms of man and citizen, regardless of sex, race, nationality, language, origin, property and official status, place of residence, religion, convictions, membership of public associations, and also of other circumstances. All forms of limitations of human rights on social, racial, national, linguistic or religious grounds shall be banned.”
Article 45 § 2 provides that “[e]veryone shall be free to protect his rights and freedoms by all means not prohibited by law”.
Under Article 46 § 1 “[e]veryone shall be guaranteed judicial protection of his rights and freedoms”.
Article 50 § 3 prohibits using evidence obtained in breach of federal law when administering justice.
Article 123 established the principle of adversarial judicial proceedings based on equality of the parties.
For a general overview of criminal proceedings in Russia at the time of the events see Khodorkovskiy and Lebedev, cited above, §§ 377-85.
Under Article 32 § 3 of the CCrP, if offences were committed in different geographical locations, the criminal case is to be tried by a court which has territorial jurisdiction either over the place where most of the offences under the criminal investigation were committed, or where the most serious offence was committed.
Article 74 § 2 of the CCrP contains an exhaustive list of the sources of information which can be used as evidence in criminal trial:
“(1)  statements of the suspect [and] of the accused;
(2)  statements of the victim [and] of the witness;
(3)  opinion and statements of the expert;
(3.1)  opinion and statements of the specialist;
(4)  material evidence;
(5)  records of investigative and judicial actions;
(6)  other documents.”
Article 84 § 1 of the CCrP provides that “other documents” can be admitted as evidence if they contain information which may be important for establishing the necessary facts within the given criminal proceedings.
Article 86 lays down the rules on collecting evidence as follows:
“1  In the course of the criminal proceedings evidence shall be collected by ... the investigator, the prosecutor and the court by means of investigative measures and other procedural actions provided by the present Code.
[An accused] ... and his representatives may collect and produce written documents and objects to be added to the case file as evidence.
The defence lawyer may collect evidence by:
(1) obtaining objects, documents and other information;
(2) questioning people, with their consent;
(3)  requesting certificates, letters of reference and other documents from agencies of State authorities, agencies of local self-government [and] public associations and organisation, which are under an obligation to provide the requested documents or copies thereof.”
The CCrP (Articles 57 and 58) distinguishes between two types of expert witnesses: “experts” proprio sensu [experty] and “specialists” [spetsialisty]. Their role in the proceedings is sometimes similar, albeit not absolutely identical. Whereas the “experts” are often engaged in making complex forensic examinations prior to the trial (for example, dactyloscopic examinations, or post-mortem examinations of corpses), a “specialist” is summoned to help the prosecution or court in handling technical equipment, examining an item of material evidence, understanding the results of “expert examinations”, assessing the methods employed by the “experts”, their qualifications, etc. Both can submit their reports to the court and/or testify in person. Under Article 57 of the CCrP, with further references, the right to commission an expert examination belongs to the investigator or to the trial court. The court may commission an expert examination on its own initiative or at the request of the parties. Under Article 47 § 4 (11) of the CCrP the accused has the right to study the order commissioning an expert examination, to put questions to the expert and to study the expert’s report.
Article 58 § 1 of the CCrP defines the functions of a “specialist” (in so far as relevant to the present case) as follows:
“A specialist is a person possessing special knowledge who is brought in to take part in the procedural actions ..., to assist in the discovery, securing and seizure of objects and documents ..., in the use of technical equipment ..., to put questions to the expert and also to explain to the parties and to the court matters which come within his or her professional competence”.
Article 58 § 2 of the CCrP sets out the rights enjoyed by the specialist in the proceedings, as well as his or her obligations. It refers to Articles 168 and 270 of the CCrP, which deal with summoning the specialist and the procedure for his or her participation in the criminal proceedings. Article 168, which refers to Article 164 § 5, deals with the specialist’s participation in investigative actions at the pre-trial investigation stage at the investigator’s request. Article 270 provides that the presiding judge at the trial should explain to the specialist his or her rights and responsibilities before questioning.
On 17 April 2017 Article 58 of the CCrP was supplemented by paragraph 2.1, which provides that the defence’s request to call a specialist for clarifications of issues that fall within his or her professional competence may not be refused, except for instances provided for in Article 71.
Article 71 of the CCrP states that a specialist, like an expert, may not take part in the proceedings if it is established that he or she is either incompetent or not impartial.
Article 47 § 4 (4) of the CCrP provides that the accused has the right to present evidence.
The CCrP recognises the defence’s right to collect evidence, albeit with certain limitations. Thus, Article 53 § 1 (2) of the Code provides that the defence lawyer has a right “to collect and submit evidence necessary for providing legal assistance, in accordance with Article 86 § 3 of the Code”. Amongst other powers of the defence lawyer, Article 53 § 1 (3) mentions “engaging a specialist in accordance with Article 58 of the Code”. However, it does not allow the defence to commission and produce “expert reports”.
The defence lawyer’s right to obtain expert evidence is defined in section 6 § 3 (4) of Federal Law no. 63-FZ On Advocacy (2002):
“... 3. The advocate can ... (4) engage specialists on a freelance basis in order to obtain explanations on issues that are relevant for legal assistance”.
Article 271 § 4 of the CCrP stipulates that the court cannot refuse to hear a witness or a “specialist” who arrives at the court at the request of the parties.
Article 286 of the CCrP provides that the court may attach documents produced by the parties to the materials of the case-file.
Under Article 75 of the CCrP, evidence obtained in breach of the provisions of the Code is inadmissible.
Under Article 90 of the CCrP, as in force at the material time, facts established in a final judgment in a criminal case or in a final judgment in a civil, commercial or administrative case, should be accepted by a court without further verification. However, such a judgment may not predetermine the guilt of persons who were not defendants in the previous criminal proceedings.
Article 8 of the Criminal Code provides that the commission of a deed containing all the elements of a crime provided for by the Code constitutes a ground for criminal responsibility.
Article 158 of the Criminal Code provides that theft is the secret stealing of another’s property. Footnote 1 to Article 158, as in force at the material time, provided that stealing meant the unlawful and uncompensated taking and/or appropriation of another’s property to the benefit of the culprit or of other parties, thereby causing damage to the owner or to any other possessor of the property.
Article 160 § 4 of the Criminal Code, amended by Federal Law of 7 March 2011, as in force of the material time, provided that “misappropriation or embezzlement, that is, the stealing of other people’s property entrusted to the culprit”, committed by an organised group and on a particularly large scale, was punishable by deprivation of liberty for a term of up to ten years with a fine of up to one million roubles or amounting to the culprit’s wages or other income for a period of up to three years, or without such, and with restriction of liberty for a term of up to two years, or without such.
Article 174.1 § 3 of the Criminal Code, amended by Federal Law of 7 March 2011, as in force of the material time, provided that money laundering or laundering of other assets acquired by the culprit as a result of having committed an offence with a view to creating an appearance of lawful possession, usage and disposal of the said money or other assets, committed: (a) by a group acting in collusion; or (b) with abuse of office, was punishable by compulsory labour for a term of up to three years with restriction of liberty for a term of up to two years, or without such, and with a prohibition on holding particular posts or exercising a particular activity for a term of up to three years, or without such; or by deprivation of liberty for a term of up to five years with a fine of up to five hundred thousand roubles or amount to the culprit’s wages or other income for a period of up to three years, or without such, and with a prohibition on holding particular posts or exercising a particular activity for a term of up to three years, or without such.
Articles 87-94 of the Civil Code constitute lex generalis and Federal Law no. 208-FZ on Joint-Stock Societies of 26 December 1995 constitutes lex specialis with regard to joint-stock companies.
Articles 96-104 of the Civil Code constitute lex generalis and Federal Law no. 14-FZ on Limited Liability Societies of 8 February 1998 constitutes lex specialis with regard to limited liability companies.
Article 103 of the Civil Code, as in force at the material time, governed the management of a joint-stock company. It provided, in particular, that the general meeting of shareholders was the highest management body of a joint-stock company, and its powers included the election of the members of the board of directors and the establishment of the company’s executive bodies.
Under Article 153 of the Civil Code, transactions are defined as activities of natural and legal persons creating, altering and terminating their civil rights and obligations.
Under Article 166 § 1 a transaction may either be invalidated by a court (voidable transaction) or be null ab initio irrespective of a court decision (void transaction). Article 166 § 2, as in force at the material time, provided that the persons specified in the Civil Code could apply to a court in order to invalidate a voidable transaction. At the same time, any interested person could petition a court requesting that the consequences of declaring a transaction void be applied. The court could also apply such consequences on its own initiative.
Under Article 167 of the Civil Code, void transactions entail no legal consequences, apart from those relating to their invalidity, and are invalid from the moment they are conducted.
Article 179 § 1 of the Civil Code, as in force at the material time, provided that a transaction entered into under the effect of deceit, violence, threat or malicious concord of the representative of one party with the other party, as well as a transaction which the person has been forced to make on extremely unfavourable terms due to particular circumstances of which the other party has taken advantage, may be invalided by a court upon a claim by the victim.
Under Article 209 § 1 of the Civil Code the owner has the rights of possession, use and disposal of his property. Under Article 209 § 2 the owner has the right to perform at his discretion with respect to his property any actions that do not contradict the law and do not violate the rights and lawful interests of other persons. This includes the transfer of his property into the ownership of other persons; transfer to them of the rights of possession, use and disposal of the property while remaining its owner; pledge of the property and imposing other encumbrances upon it, as well as disposal of the property in a different manner.
In Ruling no. 2-P of 14 February 2000 and Ruling no. 18-P of 8 December 2003 the Constitutional Court stated that each party must have an opportunity to present to the court its arguments in the case.
Ruling no. 135-O of the Constitutional Court of 24 March 2005 held as follows:
“The law on criminal procedure excludes the possibility of an arbitrary refusal by the official or the authority which conducts the preliminary investigation either to receive evidence requested by the defence or to adduce to the case file evidence presented by the defence. Within the meaning of the provisions of the law on criminal procedure, read in conjunction with Articles 45, 46 § 1, 50 § 2 and 123 § 3 of the Constitution, such a refusal is only possible when the item of evidence is not relevant to the criminal case under investigation and is not capable of corroborating whether the crime took place, the guilt or innocence of the accused, [or] other circumstances which must be established within the criminal proceedings; or when the item of evidence is inadmissible as not being in conformity with the law; or when the circumstances which, according to the parties’ motion, are to be corroborated by the evidence in question have already been established on the basis of a sufficient body of evidence, due to which examination of one further item of evidence would be excessive having regard to the principle of reasonableness. The decision taken in this regard must be reasoned by reference to particular arguments which corroborate the inadmissibility of the item of evidence that the defence has requested be obtained and examined.”
In Ruling no. 525-O-O of 21 October 2008 the Constitutional Court stated that a party which filed a motion to a State authority or a State official has the right to receive an adequate response to the motion. Should the motion be refused, such a decision must be lawful, well-founded and reasoned, in order to avoid arbitrariness... [This] applies equally to the court’s obligation to examine a request to summon for examination an expert who had provided a report at the preliminary examination stage.
In Ruling no. 576-O-P of 19 May 2009 the Constitutional Court held that, in accordance with Article 19 §§ 1 and 2 and Article 123 § 3 of the Constitution, court proceedings in the Russian Federation are adversarial in nature and are based on the principle of equality of the parties. This implies that parties to the proceedings are provided with equal procedural opportunities to defend their rights and lawful interests, including the possibility to file motions and appeal against the court’s actions and decisions without any limitations or discrimination.
In Ruling no. 1037-O-O of 2 July 2009 the Constitutional Court pronounced on the complaint brought by the first applicant, who argued that Article 160 of the Criminal Code and footnote 1 to Article 158 of the Criminal Code enable the law-enforcement agencies to interpret “uncompensated” in a way that allows criminal charges to be brought in respect of the disposal of property by virtue of reciprocal civil-law transactions, in breach of constitutional rights, including the right to dispose of one’s property as guaranteed by Article 35.  The Constitutional Court stated that the contested provisions of the Criminal Code only provided for criminal responsibility in respect of a deed committed with intent and aimed at the theft of property. At the same time, the possibility of bringing criminal charges in respect of lawful civil-law transactions was excluded. It further noted that, insofar as the complainant sought to challenge the classification of the charges brought against him, this was to be examined within the criminal proceedings against him and fell outside the Constitutional Court’s competence.
In his separate opinion to the above Ruling of 2 July 2009, Judge Kononov stated that the broad interpretation of “uncompensated” given by the Plenum of the Supreme Court in § 20 of Resolution no. 51 of 27 December 2007 (see paragraph 408 below), which extends to “partial compensation”, corresponds neither to the meaning of the word “uncompensated”, nor to the general principles of law prohibiting extensive interpretation of the provisions of criminal law. He further stated that freedom of contract does not presuppose any particular requirements with respect to the prices set by participants in civil-law transactions. Unequal exchange does not affect the validity of a transaction. Furthermore, “market price” is a relative concept, as corroborated by the fact that section 3 of the Federal Law on Valuation Activity provides for at least eight probabilistic and variable factors for assessing the market value of an object. Judge Kononov concluded that there was a real danger that the provisions of the Criminal Code contested by the first applicant would be applied in an arbitrary manner, due to their imprecise wording.
In Ruling no. 851-O-O of 21 June 2011 the Constitutional Court found that the provisions of Articles 160 and 174 § 1 of the Criminal Code were not unforeseeable in such a way as to deprive a person of the possibility to realise that his actions were wrongful and to foresee potential liability for the commission thereof. The Constitutional Court noted, also, that the assessment as to whether the offences with which the complainant had been charged had been correctly qualified did not fall within its competence.
In Ruling no. 30-P of 21 December 2011 the Constitutional Court noted that the aim of a judicial decision having res judicata effect is to ensure its stability and to rule out possible conflicts between judicial decisions; it means that the facts established by a court in a particular case should be accepted by a different court in a different case, unless they are rebutted. It pointed out that, at the same time, the res judicata effect of an earlier decision does not predetermine the outcome in a given criminal case. Under Article 90 of the CCrP, the facts established by an earlier judicial decision are only binding on the court in respect of the individual against whom criminal charges were substantiated in the earlier decision.
In Resolution no. 23 of 18 November 2004 on Judicial Practice in Cases on Unlawful Entrepreneurship and Legalisation (Laundering) of Monetary Assets or Other Property Acquired through Criminal Means, the Plenum of the Supreme Court stated, in particular:
“21.  When delivering a guilty verdict under Article 174... or Article 174 § 1 of the Criminal Code... the court must establish that the person knowingly acquired the monetary assets or other property by criminal means or as a result of committing a crime.”
In Resolution no. 51 of 27 December 2007 on Judicial Practice in Cases on Swindling, Misappropriation and Embezzlement, the Plenum of the Supreme Court stated, in particular:
“18.  Unlawful uncompensated appropriation of property, entrusted to a person, for his benefit or for the benefit of other persons, which caused damage to the owner or to another lawful possessor of the property, should be qualified by the courts as misappropriation or embezzlement, provided that the stolen property was in the lawful possession or under the lawful disposal of this person who, by virtue of his official position or office, agreement or special commission exercised functions related to the disposal, management, delivery, use or storage of another’s property.
In order to distinguish the offences of misappropriation or embezzlement from that of theft the courts must establish that the person actually held the above-mentioned powers...
When examining cases involving the offences set out in Article 160 of the Criminal Code the courts should take into account that misappropriation consists of uncompensated unlawful appropriation by a person of property entrusted to him, against the will of the owner and for the purpose of pecuniary gain.
Misappropriation is deemed to have been committed from the moment when the lawful possession of the property by that person became wrongful and the person began carrying out actions aimed at appropriation of the said property to his benefit (for example, from the moment when a person, by way of deceit, conceals that he has the property entrusted to him, or from the moment of failure to perform his duty to deposit the owner’s monetary assets entrusted to him into a bank account).
[The courts should] qualify as embezzlement wrongful actions of a person who, for pecuniary gain, spent the assets entrusted to him by way of depletion thereof, expenditure or transfer to other parties against the owner’s will.
Embezzlement is deemed to have been committed from the moment of wrongful spending of the entrusted property...
When examining the question whether the impugned act has the elements of the offence of misappropriation or embezzlement, the court should establish the circumstances which would corroborate that the person’s intent included wrongful and uncompensated nature of the actions performed with the aim of appropriating the property to the person’s benefit or to the benefit of other parties...
At the same time, the courts must take into account that partial compensation of the damage caused to the victim does not in itself constitute proof of the a of intent to misappropriate or embezzle the entrusted property.
...
The perpetrator of misappropriation or embezzlement can only be a person to whom the property was entrusted by a legal entity or a natural person on a lawful basis for a particular purpose or for a particular activity...
The evaluation of the property stolen as a result of swindling, misappropriation or embezzlement should be based on its actual value at the moment when the offence was committed. In the absence of information on the price of the stolen property its value may be established on the basis of expert reports.
When evaluating [the property stolen as a result of] swindling, misappropriation or embezzlement the courts should take into account that stealing with simultaneous replacement of the property by property of a lesser value should be qualified as stealing in the amount equal to the value of the [stolen] property.
...
...When deciding on the person’s guilt in committing swindling, misappropriation or embezzlement, the courts should take into account that the essential element of stealing is the person’s pecuniary aim, that is, the will to take away and appropriate another’s property to his own benefit or to dispose of it as if it were his own, including transfer thereof into the possession of third parties.”
Under Article 89 § 1 of the Code of Execution of Sentences of 8 January 1997, as amended on 8 December 2003, convicted prisoners are entitled to short-term visits lasting for up to four hours and to long-term visits of up to three days, in the prison premises. A long-term visit takes place in a room in which privacy can be respected. In certain limited circumstances convicted prisoners may be authorised to have a long-term visit of up to five days outside the prison premises. Long-term visits are provided for meeting a spouse, parents, children, parents- and children-in-law, siblings, grandparents, grandchildren and, with the authorisation of the prison governor, other persons.
Article 121 § 1(b) of the Code of Execution of Sentences, as amended on 8 December 2003, provides that prisoners who serve their sentence in correctional facilities operating under the general regime can have up to six short and four long visits per year.
Article 77.1 of the Code of Execution of Sentences, as amended on 8 December 2003, regulates the manner in which convicted prisoners may be involved in further investigative actions. Paragraph 1 establishes that they may be transferred to a remand prison for that purpose. Paragraph 3 specifies that they exercise their right to family visits in accordance with the provisions of the Pre-trial Detention Act.  Section 18 of the Pre-trial Detention Act (Federal Law no. 103-FZ of 15 July 1995) provides as follows:
“Subject to written authorisation from the official or authority in charge of the criminal case, suspects and defendants may have no more than two visits per month from their family members and other persons, each visit lasting for up to three hours.
Visits from family members and other persons shall be supervised by an officer of the custodial facility; should there be an attempt to pass prohibited objects, substances or food, or to communicate information capable of preventing the truth from being established in the criminal proceedings or contributing to the commission of an offence, the visit will be cut short.”