Relying on Article 9 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention respectively, the applicants complained that the domestic authorities had unlawfully interfered with their right to freedom of religion and arbitrarily deported them from the territory of the respondent State.
The applicants were born in 1971 and 1970 respectively and live in Georgia. They were represented by Mr R. Cook, Mr A. Carbonneau and Mr J. Wise, lawyers practising in the United Kingdom, Canada and Georgia respectively.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç.Əsgərov.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicants are members of the religious community of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
On 18 December 2010, while participating in a religious meeting of Jehovah’s Witnesses in a private apartment in Ganja, the applicants were arrested during a police raid on the meeting. They were taken to Nizami District Police Department, where two separate reports (inzibati xəta haqqında protokol) on the administrative offence of violating the legislation on freedom of religion as a foreigner under Article 300.0.4 of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”) were drawn up against them.
On the same date, by separate decisions, the Nizami District Court found the applicants guilty under Article 300.0.4 of the CAO and ordered their deportation. In particular, the court found that the applicants had willingly attended the religious meeting which had been held unlawfully by local fellow members of the unregistered Jehovah’s Witnesses congregation at private premises. Moreover, the applicants had admitted that they had engaged in religious discussion. Therefore, the purpose of their participation in the meeting in question had been to conduct religious propaganda.
The applicants were deported from Azerbaijan on 20 December 2010, and on an unspecified date they lodged appeals against the first-instance court’s decisions. In their submissions, the applicants admitted that they had participated in a religious meeting, but argued that the meeting had not involved any unlawful activity. They also complained that their arbitrary deportation had been contrary to Article 1 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention.
On 8 April 2011, by separate decisions, the Ganja Court of Appeal dismissed the applicants’ appeals. Endorsing the findings of the firstinstance court, the appellate court further found that since the Jehovah’s Witnesses’ Ganja congregation had not been registered and the applicants were not members of the Jehovah’s Witnesses’ registered branch in Baku, both the religious gathering held on 18 December 2010 and the applicants’ participation in that gathering had been unlawful. Accordingly, the authorities had acted within the limitations prescribed by the domestic law and Article 9 § 2 of the Convention, and their actions had been necessary in a democratic society in the interests of public safety, for the protection of public order and the rights and freedoms of others. The decision was not amenable to further appeal.
In the meantime, on 18 January 2011 the applicants had lodged a civil claim against the Migration Service, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Nizami District Police Department with the Binagadi District Court, asking the court to annul the decision concerning their deportation and declare it unlawful.
On 26 January 2011 the Binagadi District Court decided that the examination of the applicants’ claim fell outside its jurisdiction, and it transferred the case to Baku Administrative Economic Court No. 1.
On 20 July 2012 Baku Administrative Economic Court No. 1 rejected the claim. It found that the authorities had acted in compliance with the relevant domestic legislation, particularly the Law on Freedom of Religious Belief, which clearly prohibited the conduct of any kind of religious propaganda by foreigners. Relying on the copies of their passports which were available in the case file, the court also found that the applicants had entered the territory of the respondent State on 20 November 2010 and had been deported on 20 December 2010.
On 21 November 2012 and on 4 April 2013 respectively the Baku Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court upheld the firstinstance court’s judgment.
At the material time the relevant provisions of the Constitution provided as follows:
Article 48.  Freedom of conscience
“I.  Everyone enjoys freedom of conscience.
Everyone has the right to independently determine his or her attitude to religion, to profess, individually or together with others, any religion or refrain from following one, to express and disseminate his or her religious beliefs ...
[People] shall be free to hold religious ceremonies, provided that [those ceremonies] do not violate public order or public morals.
Freedom of conscience and religion shall not serve as a basis for exemption from responsibility for violation of the law ...”
Article 1 of the Law on Freedom of Belief, as in force at the material time, prohibited the conduct of religious propaganda by foreigners and stateless persons. Article 21 provided that, subject to the requirements of Article 1, people were free to hold services of religious worship, rites and ceremonies at places of worship and adjacent areas, shrines, cemeteries, religious organisations, and citizens’ houses and apartments.
At the material time the relevant provisions of the CAO provided as follows:
Article 300.  Violation of legislation concerning freedom of religion
“300.0.  Violation of the legislation concerning freedom of religion, namely:
...
0.4.  the conduct of religious propaganda by foreigners or stateless persons – shall be punishable by a fine in the amount of two hundred to four hundred manats and ... the seizure of the literature, items and material directly forming the subject of the administrative offence, and ... administrative expulsion from the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan.”
Article 432.  Time-limits for submitting a complaint or protest
“432.1.  A complaint against a decision in an administrative case may be submitted within ten days [of the decision] being presented or delivered.
...”
Article 439.  Enforceability of a decision delivered in an
administrative case, or a decision delivered following
a complaint or objection
“439.0.  A decision delivered in an administrative case, as well as a decision delivered following a complaint or protest, shall become enforceable in the following [way]:
0.1.  after the expiration of the time-limit for submitting a complaint against such a decision, provided that no complaint or protest has been lodged against it.
...”