The case originated in an application (no. 36545/06) against the Republic of Moldova and the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by fifty-seven Moldovan nationals on 25 August 2006 (see Appendix 1).
The applicants were represented by Mr A. Postică and Mr I. Manole, lawyers practising in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr O. Rotari, and the Russian Government were represented by their Agent, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that they had been denied access to their land, in breach of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention, and that they had had no effective remedies available to them.
On 27 August 2018 the respondent Governments were given notice of the application.
The Russian Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. Having considered the objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicants live in Molovata-Nouă (Dubăsari district), a village under Moldovan control on the left bank of the Dniester River.
At the time of lodging their application, the applicants all had titles to nearby plots of land, between 0.3 and 4 hectares in size, which they had obtained from the Moldovan authorities. Their land was on territory controlled by the Moldovan authorities but situated across a road which links the northern and southern parts of the self-proclaimed “Moldovan Transdniestrian Republic” (the “MRT”). The road, which cuts through two zones controlled by the Moldovan Government on the left bank of the Dniester River, is controlled by the authorities of the “MRT”. The applicants derived most of their income from working the land owned by them.
Title to some of the land was subsequently transferred to others by sale, gift or inheritance. The details of each applicant are set out in Appendixes 1 and 2.
Between 1992 and 1998 the applicants used the land they owned without interference. In 1998 the “MRT” authorities set up checkpoints in order to monitor the movement of agricultural products across the “border” road. According to the applicants, the checkpoints enabled the “MRT” authorities to subject them to various forms of harassment, such as impeding them from transporting the tools, agricultural machinery, equipment and fuel necessary for the exploitation of their land. Harvesting and transporting the agricultural products became extremely difficult, as the applicants and their family members were often humiliated when stopped at the checkpoints. From then on the applicants also had to pay various taxes and fees to “MRT” authorities, which they agreed to do since their livelihood depended on them working the land located across the road.
On 28 January 2000 the so-called “MRT” government issued a decision “on the regulation of land relations in the Dubăsari district”, compelling owners of plots of land situated across the Rîbnița to Dubăsari road to each enter into a lease agreement with the Dubăsari administration.
In October 2004 the “MRT” authorities declared that the land owned by the applicants was the property of the “MRT”. The applicants could continue working it on the condition that they rented it from the “MRT” local authorities.
In February 2005 the applicants were prevented by the “MRT” authorities from exploiting and farming their land. As a consequence, they sustained losses owing to their inability to use the land at the beginning of the agricultural season. Moreover, the land was not worked in the years that followed, which made it difficult to bring it back to its former state.
According to the applicants, they were threatened with fines, sanctions or being arrested by the “MRT” authorities, unless they could provide proof that they had entered into a lease agreement with the Dubăsari administration. The applicants described instances where the agricultural machinery of those trying to work their land had been seized. The landowners’ plots of land were monitored by the “MRT” military, border guards and militia, who would sanction any attempt to work the land.
The applicants made numerous complaints to the local “MRT” authorities, asking for a right of way to their land and permission to farm it. Their requests were refused since the land in question was considered to be the property of the “MRT”.
The applicants also complained to the Moldovan authorities, who replied that they had no means of compelling the “MRT” authorities to allow them unimpeded access. They asked the Moldovan Prosecutor General’s Office to start a criminal investigation against the individuals responsible for blocking the applicants’ access to their land.
The applicants complained to the Russian embassy in Moldova and to the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (“the OSCE”), but to no avail. On 26 April 2005 a group of landowners, including some of the applicants, protested in front of the Russian embassy in Moldova, asking the authorities to intervene as a guarantor of peace and stability in the region. A similar protest took place on 11 May 2005.
According to the Moldovan Government, the Moldovan Parliament passed a number of laws aimed at compensating the inhabitants of villages under Moldovan control on the left bank of the Dniester River (in the area concerned by the present cases) for losses caused by various actions of the “MRT”. The compensation included differences in natural gas and electricity prices, increasing pensions, giving tax breaks and preferential credits to agricultural companies in the region, and allocating diesel fuel for agricultural activities. Moreover, a number of laws and decisions were implemented between 2004 and 2007 providing for the payment of compensation to villagers who had sustained losses owing to their inability to farm their land in the relevant area, with the total amount of aid reaching almost 39 million Moldovan lei (MDL) (approximately 2.3 million euros (EUR)). In 2006 the Moldovan authorities managed to negotiate with the “MRT” authorities a temporary “MRT” registration system for owners of land in the relevant area, which allowed them to farm the land and be exempt from making payments to the “MRT”. The temporary registration system is renewed each year in negotiations between Moldova and the “MRT” authorities.
Reports by inter-governmental and non-governmental organisations, the relevant domestic law and practice of the Republic of Moldova and other pertinent documents were summarised in Mozer v. the Republic of Moldova and Russia ([GC], no. 11138/10, §§ 61-77, 23 February 2016).