The case originated in an application (no. 23199/17) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by ten Turkish nationals, Mr Mehmet Murat Sabuncu, born in 1969, Mr Akın Atalay, born in 1963, Mr Önder Çelik, born in 1956, Mr Turhan Günay, born in 1946, Mr Mustafa Kemal Güngör, born in 1959, Mr Ahmet Kadri Gürsel, born in 1961, Mr Hakan Karasinir, born in 1963, Mr Hacı Musa Kart, born in 1954, Mr Güray Tekin Öz, born in 1949, and Mr Bülent Utku, born in 1955 (“the applicants”), on 2 March 2017.
The applicants were represented by Mr F. İlkiz, a lawyer practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 8 June 2017 the Government were given notice of the application.
The applicants and the Government each filed written observations on the admissibility and merits of the case.
The Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights (“the Commissioner for Human Rights”) exercised his right to intervene in the proceedings and submitted written comments (Article 36 § 3 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 2 of the Rules of Court).
In addition, written comments were submitted to the Court by the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression (“the Special Rapporteur”), and also by the following non-governmental organisations acting jointly: ARTICLE 19, the Association of European Journalists, the Committee to Protect Journalists, the European Centre for Press and Media Freedom, the European Federation of Journalists, Human Rights Watch, Index on Censorship, the International Federation of Journalists, the International Press Institute, the International Senior Lawyers Project, Media Defence, PEN International and Reporters Without Borders (“the intervening non-governmental organisations”). The Section President had granted leave to the Special Rapporteur and the organisations in question to intervene under Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3.
The Government replied to the intervening parties’ comments.
In correspondence of 11 July 2019 the Government informed the Court that the Constitutional Court had delivered its judgment on the applicants’ individual applications. The applicants submitted comments on that judgment.
The applicants are journalists with the national daily newspaper Cumhuriyet (“The Republic”) or managers of the Cumhuriyet Foundation, the principal shareholder of the company that publishes the newspaper.
Cumhuriyet was established in 1924 and is one of the oldest newspapers in Turkey. It is known for its critical stance towards the current government and for its particular attachment to the principle of secularism. It is regarded as a serious newspaper of the centre-left.
On 31 October 2016 the applicants, with the exception of Akın Atalay, who was abroad at the time, were taken into police custody by the Istanbul police. They were suspected of committing offences on behalf of organisations considered by the Government to be terrorist organisations, including, in particular, the PKK/KCK (the Kurdistan Workers’ Party / Kurdistan Communities Union) and an organisation referred to by the Turkish authorities as “FETÖ/PDY” (“Fethullahist Terror Organisation / Parallel State Structure”), and of disseminating propaganda on their behalf.
The same day, on the instructions of the Istanbul public prosecutor’s office, the Istanbul police carried out searches at the applicants’ homes and seized computers and other IT equipment belonging to them.
Still on 31 October 2016, the applicants in police custody lodged an objection challenging their detention and seeking their release. In a decision of 2 November 2016 the Istanbul 4th Magistrate’s Court dismissed the objection.
The applicants concerned were questioned at the police station about their alleged acts. They denied belonging to or assisting any illegal organisation.
On 4 November 2016 the nine applicants in police custody appeared before the Istanbul public prosecutor (“the public prosecutor”) and were again questioned about their alleged acts. The public prosecutor asked them questions relating mainly to articles published in Cumhuriyet and to the newspaper’s editorial stance. He asked the applicants whether they had been instructed by the leaders of illegal organisations, and in particular FETÖ/PDY, to align the newspaper’s editorial stance with criticisms directed by alleged members of the latter organisation against the political authorities. He also questioned them about the newspaper’s funding and its advertising revenue.
During questioning the applicants concerned rejected the allegations that they had acted in concert with outside sources in publishing articles in the newspaper, and denied belonging to any illegal organisation. They contended that the criminal investigation – which, in their view, called into question the assessment of political events and the defence of public freedoms carried out by the journalists of Cumhuriyet – amounted to a breach of freedom of expression and freedom of the press.
Following this questioning the public prosecutor requested the competent judge to place the applicants, with the exception of Akın Atalay, in pre-trial detention, on the grounds that they were suspected of assisting criminal organisations without being members of them and of disseminating propaganda in favour of those organisations (offences under Article 220 §§ 7 and 8 of the Criminal Code (“the CC”)), while acting in full association with them from a moral and factual point of view.
On 11 November 2016 the applicant Akın Atalay returned to Turkey. On his arrival in the country he was taken into police custody. On the following day, 12 November 2016, he was brought before the Istanbul magistrate.
Placement in pre-trial detention
On the night of 4 November 2016 the applicants, with the exception of Akın Atalay, appeared before the Istanbul 9th Magistrate’s Court and were questioned about their alleged acts and the suspicions against them. At the end of the hearing, on 5 November 2016, the magistrate, echoing the approach taken in the public prosecutor’s observations and on the basis of the latter’s allegations, and taking into consideration the content of several articles that had appeared in Cumhuriyet and some comments made on social media, ordered the pre-trial detention of the applicants concerned.
The applicant Akın Atalay was placed in pre-trial detention at the close of the hearing on 12 November 2016, on the same grounds.
The magistrate considered, in relation to all the applicants, that articles containing implicit propaganda in favour of the armed terrorist organisations FETÖ and the PKK had been published in the daily newspaper Cumhuriyet, and that there were strong suspicions that the suspects had been responsible for the newspaper’s ongoing activities consisting in promoting and disseminating propaganda on behalf of those terrorist organisations. The magistrate considered in that connection that the applicants were under investigation for offences including assisting illegal organisations (Article 220 § 7 of the CC) and disseminating propaganda in favour of them (Article 220 § 8 of the CC) and for acts potentially coming within the scope of the offence of carrying out activities on behalf of terrorist organisations without being members of them, an offence under Article 220 § 6 of the CC. The magistrate referred to the fact that this offence was among those listed in Article 100 § 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”) – the so-called “catalogue offences” – for which a suspect’s pre-trial detention was deemed justified in the event of strong suspicion.
The magistrate also considered that if the applicants were released pending trial they were liable to abscond. He observed in that connection that in the previous investigations concerning Cumhuriyet journalists the suspects had fled, by lawful or unlawful means, as soon as an opportunity had arisen. The magistrate also referred to the risk of deterioration of the evidence if the applicants were released pending trial, and the risk that alternative measures to detention might be insufficient to ensure the suspects’ participation in the criminal proceedings.
Regarding these eight applicants the Istanbul magistrate considered, like the public prosecutor, that their placement in pre-trial detention was justified by the existence of strong suspicions that they had committed the alleged offences.
The magistrate noted at the outset that the applicants Güray Tekin Öz, Hakan Karasinir, Hacı Musa Kart and Mustafa Kemal Güngör were members of the board of management of the Cumhuriyet Foundation; Bülent Utku was a member of the board of management and a level 2 authorised signatory of the media company Yenigün; Önder Çelik was a member of the board of management of the Cumhuriyet Foundation and of the board of Yenigün; Ahmet Kadri Gürsel was an editorial adviser to the newspaper Cumhuriyet; and Turhan Günay was a member of the board of Yenigün. The magistrate observed that according to the statements of the applicant Önder Çelik, the media company Yenigün was the company responsible for publishing Cumhuriyet, and that the Cumhuriyet Foundation ranked above Yenigün and the newspaper Cumhuriyet in the institutional hierarchy. In other words, the foundation was the institution which held the trademark and publishing rights in relation to the newspaper, and leased the right to use the name Cumhuriyet to the media company Yenigün. In the light of these observations the magistrate considered that the articles and news items published in the daily newspaper Cumhuriyet indeed came under the responsibility of the members of the board of management of the Cumhuriyet Foundation and the board of the media company Yenigün, and hence of the applicants in question.
The magistrate further noted that, when the eight suspects had joined the board of the foundation and that of the media company following the elections in 2013 and early 2014, Cumhuriyet’s editorial stance had changed noticeably. The newspaper, contrary to the foundation’s aims, had then engaged in manipulation against the State; had attempted to influence public opinion in a manner at odds with the world view of its usual readership; had published false information resulting from the machinations of destructive separatist movements and from the statements of the leaders of terrorist organisations containing calls to violence; had attempted to portray the terrorist organisations as legitimate; and had alleged that the State had links to terrorist organisations.
Without accusing any of the applicants of writing a specific article, the magistrate, like the public prosecutor, referred to certain articles written by other journalists allegedly under the influence of the applicants and published during the period when the latter had occupied managerial positions in the Cumhuriyet Foundation. The articles referred to were the following.
(i)  An article dated 14 March 2015 containing an interview with one of the leaders of the PKK and allegedly amounting to propaganda in favour of that organisation, describing its militants as “guerrilla fighters” and reporting on the comments made by the PKK leaders concerning certain topical issues (and in particular the PKK’s conditions for laying down its weapons).
(ii)  Articles published on 1 April 2015 entitled “Remarkable account given by activists half an hour before being killed (by police officers)” and “This action [the kidnapping] is a method we were forced to use”. The articles had consisted solely of an interview with one of a group of left-wing extremists who had taken a public prosecutor hostage in his office in a bid to expose the law-enforcement officers who had killed a demonstrator. After hearing the demands of the militants for the identity of the police officers who had allegedly killed the demonstrator B. to be disclosed in a live television broadcast and for the police officers concerned to face trial and not benefit from impunity, the reporter, A.S., had challenged the interviewee by questioning whether violence by the militants would solve the problem. Shortly afterwards, the militants concerned and the public prosecutor whom they had taken hostage died during a rescue operation by the security forces. It was alleged that the articles in question had conveyed the terrorists’ message to the public by printing a large photograph of them (taken while they were holding a gun to the head of their hostage) and by using the adjectives “young and determined” to describe one of the terrorists after interviewing one of the militants who had been involved in the kidnapping.
(iii)  An article published on 2 June 2015 concerning Selahattin Demirtaş, which stated that the PKK was mindful of environmental and gender equality issues.
(iv)  An article published on 25 July 2015 entitled “War at home, war in the world”, in which the security forces’ actions to combat terrorist organisations were described as “war”.
(v)  An article published on the day of the attempted military coup of 15 July 2016, entitled: “He went missing for a week ... we’ve discovered where Erdoğan was”, which gave details of the place where the President had been on holiday.
(vi)  An interview with one of the PKK’s leaders, M. Karayilan, published on 21 December 2015 under the heading “If they don’t agree to autonomy, we’ll consider separation”, which reported that Mr Karayilan described the PKK’s terrorist acts as “resistance” and the State’s antiterrorist action as a “civil war that the State can’t win”.
(vii)  An article of 18 July 2016 entitled “Danger on the streets”, referring to the presence of radical groups among the persons protesting against the coup attempt and reporting that, during the demonstrations against the attempted coup, some demonstrators had damaged monuments commemorating the victims of violence against minorities or had attacked members of the Alevi minority. It was alleged that the article had attempted to divide society by provoking distrust towards the demonstrators.
(viii)  An article of 19 July 2016 entitled “The witch hunt has begun”, reporting on the criticisms and proposals of the main opposition political party, the CHP (Cumhuriyet Halk Partisi – People’s Republican Party). The latter had stated that any action against possible supporters of the coup should be carried out in compliance with the rule of law, that all the political parties should take a critical look at their own conduct in order to ascertain how a religious sect could have infiltrated the State apparatus to such an extent, and that political leaders should refrain from stirring up hostility in society. The article had also criticised the dismissal of large numbers of civil servants suspected of belonging to the Gülenist movement. It was alleged that the article had questioned the extent and legitimacy of the action against the instigators of the attempted coup.
(ix)  An article of 19 July 2016 entitled “No one at the rallies is talking about democracy”, reporting on the demonstrators’ anti-democratic demands. The article was alleged to have denigrated citizens voicing their reactions to the attempted coup.
(x)  An article of 8 July 2015 entitled “What we’re doing is journalism; what you’re doing is treason”, reporting on remarks made by the public prosecutor Ö.Ş. alleging that the organisation MİT (the national intelligence agency) had concealed the Reyhanli attack from the judicial authorities, in the following terms: “MİT had information on the Reyhanli massacre but did not share that information with the police”. The prosecutor Ö.Ş. had subsequently been arrested in connection with a criminal investigation concerning some judges and members of the security forces who were alleged to be militants of the organisation FETÖ, and relating to the affair known as “The MİT lorries”.
(xi) An article dated 13 February 2015 entitled “The secret in the lorries revealed” which stated, citing recordings of telephone calls between the leaders of the Turkmen forces in Syria, that the consignment of weapons and ammunition transported from Turkey to Syria in lorries belonging to MİT had not been intended for Turkmen militia but for the jihadist organisation Ansar AlIslam.
In the case of the applicant Mehmet Murat Sabuncu, the magistrate noted that he was the editor-in-chief of the daily newspaper Cumhuriyet. The magistrate considered, like the public prosecutor’s office, that his placement in pre-trial detention was justified on the basis of strong suspicions that he had committed the alleged offences.
The magistrate referred, in particular, to his findings concerning the change in the editorial stance of the newspaper Cumhuriyet following the election of the other applicants to the board of management of the Cumhuriyet Foundation and the board of the media company Yenigün in 2013 and early 2014. In the magistrate’s view the applicant Mehmet Murat Sabuncu should be held responsible for the articles and headings published in Cumhuriyet, in his capacity as the newspaper’s publication director. (The publication director was appointed by the board of management of the Cumhuriyet Foundation.) By way of example the magistrate cited the same materials relied on in relation to the other applicants (see paragraph 23 above). According to the magistrate, this material had been aimed at persistently undermining the State’s efforts to combat the PKK and FETÖ/PDY; had gone beyond the aim of criticism and reporting; had conveyed false information resulting from the machinations of destructive separatist movements and from the statements of the leaders of terrorist organisations containing calls to violence; had attempted to portray the terrorist organisations as legitimate, innocent and victims of the authorities’ actions; and had alleged that the State had links to terrorist organisations.
On 12 November 2016, the day after his return to Turkey, the applicant Akın Atalay was brought before the Istanbul 9th Magistrate’s Court. The magistrate ordered his pre-trial detention on the same grounds as those cited in the case of the other applicants. Like the public prosecutor, the magistrate considered that Akın Atalay’s placement in pre-trial detention was justified by the existence of strong suspicions that he had committed the offences alleged by the public prosecutor. Reiterating the considerations outlined in the order he had issued for the detention of the applicants Önder Çelik, Mustafa Kemal Güngör, Hakan Karasinir, Hacı Musa Kart, Güray Tekin Öz, Bülent Utku, Ahmet Kadri Gürsel, Turhan Günay and Mehmet Murat Sabuncu (see paragraphs 21 and 25 above), the magistrate found that, following the changes to the composition of the board of management of the Cumhuriyet Foundation, including Akın Atalay’s appointment as chairman of the executive committee, the newspaper Cumhuriyet had begun targeting State institutions and had published a large number of articles that could be regarded as propaganda in favour of terrorist organisations and were liable to give the public a favourable impression of those organisations. In the magistrate’s view, even if the investigation did not relate to any articles written by Akın Atalay himself, there was a strong suspicion of guilt on the part of the senior members of the foundation’s board of management, including the applicant, on account of their influence over the impugned material. The magistrate referred in that connection to the articles published in Cumhuriyet which had likewise been mentioned in his order for the detention of the applicants Önder Çelik, Mustafa Kemal Güngör, Hakan Karasinir, Hacı Musa Kart, Güray Tekin Öz, Bülent Utku, Ahmet Kadri Gürsel and Turhan Günay (see paragraph 23 above).
On 14 November 2016 the applicants collectively lodged an objection against the orders for their pre-trial detention.
In a decision of 18 November 2016 the Istanbul 10th Magistrate’s Court dismissed the objection. The magistrate considered that the suspects could be held responsible for the propaganda activities in favour of terrorist organisations because they had allegedly assisted the latter in achieving their aims.
On 2 December 2016 the applicants, with the exception of Akın Atalay, lodged an application for release pending trial. In a decision of the same day the Istanbul 7th Magistrate’s Court refused the application. On 12 December 2016 the applicants concerned lodged an objection against that decision which was dismissed by the Istanbul 8th Magistrate’s Court on 16 December 2016.
In the meantime, on 12 December 2016, the applicant Akın Atalay had lodged an application for release pending trial. The Istanbul 6th Magistrate’s Court refused the application on the same day. On 19 December 2016 the applicant lodged an objection against that decision which was dismissed on 21 December 2016 by the Istanbul 7th Magistrate’s Court.
On 30 December 2016 and 30 January 2017 the Istanbul 12th Magistrate’s Court, on the basis of the examination of the file (a procedure permitted during the state of emergency), ordered the continued pre-trial detention of all the applicants. The magistrate considered that the case file contained specific evidence demonstrating the existence of strong suspicions that the applicants had committed the alleged offences. He noted that the evidence had not yet all been gathered and that the offences of which the applicants were accused were among those listed in Article 100 § 3 of the CCP (the so-called “catalogue offences”). The magistrate further considered that, in view of the seriousness of the alleged offences, there was a risk that the applicants would abscond if they were released pending trial. He also took into consideration the risk of deterioration of the evidence, noting that the claimants and victims of the incidents in issue had not yet all been identified and/or that statements had not yet been taken from them.
On 11 January and 1 February 2017 the applicants lodged appeals against the orders of 30 December 2016 and 30 January 2017 for their continued pre-trial detention. The appeals were dismissed on 17 January and 3 February 2017 respectively by the Istanbul 13th Magistrate’s Court. The magistrate found that the impugned orders had complied with the procedure and the law, that the reasons for the orders continued to apply and that no new evidence had been added to the file capable of leading to reconsideration of the applicants’ continued detention.
On 6 April 2017, after the public prosecutor’s office had filed the bill of indictment with the Istanbul 27th Assize Court on 3 April 2017, the applicants applied to that court for release pending trial. On 19 April 2017 the Assize Court rejected their application and ordered their continued pretrial detention. The court considered that the case file contained specific evidence demonstrating the existence of strong suspicions that the applicants had committed the alleged offences, and that it was even likely that those suspicions would be reinforced by further evidence. The Assize Court considered that the applicants were liable to abscond if they were released, that their continued pre-trial detention complied with the criteria laid down by the Court with regard to Article 5 of the Convention, that their detention was proportionate, and that no new evidence had been added to the file capable of leading to reconsideration of their continued pre-trial detention.
On 25 April 2017 the applicants lodged an objection against that order and applied for release pending trial. On 28 April 2017 the Istanbul 27th Assize Court rejected the applications for release on the grounds that the order of 19 April 2017 had not contained any irregularities and had complied with the procedure and the law. It transferred the objection to the Istanbul 1st Assize Court. In a decision of 4 May 2017 that court dismissed the applicants’ objection, finding that the case file contained specific evidence demonstrating the existence of strong suspicions that the applicants were guilty, that there was a risk that they would abscond, and that the current length of their pre-trial detention was not disproportionate in view of the prison sentences they were liable to incur.
On 25 April and 17 May 2017 the applicants applied to the Istanbul 27th Assize Court for release pending trial. In an order of 18 May 2017 the Assize Court, taking into consideration the nature and content of the offences of which the applicants were accused and the state of the evidence against them, ordered their continued pre-trial detention and rejected the applications of 25 April and 17 May 2017.
On 28 July 2017, at the close of the first hearing, held from 24 to 28 July 2017, the Istanbul 27th Assize Court ordered the release pending trial of the applicants Önder Çelik, Turhan Günay, Mustafa Kemal Güngör, Hakan Karasinir, Hacı Musa Kart, Güray Tekin Öz and Bülent Utku, after taking statements in their defence against the charges filed by the public prosecutor’s office on 3 April 2017. The court considered that there was sufficient information in the case file concerning their responsibility in their capacity as members of the board of management of the Cumhuriyet Foundation and the board of the media company Yenigün, and that these accused had no connection with the other accused who had been summoned but who had failed to appear for trial. The court therefore considered that all the relevant evidence in the case concerning these applicants had been gathered and that, in view of the sentences to which the applicants were liable, the risk of their absconding was no longer relevant.
Also on 28 July 2017, the Istanbul 27th Assize Court ordered the continued pre-trial detention of the applicants Mehmet Murat Sabuncu and Akın Atalay. The court held that the offence of which they were accused in the indictment, namely assisting an armed organisation, could take a variety of forms and that the evidence in the case file should be assessed as a whole, bearing in mind that the activities of these applicants, acting in collaboration with the accused who were absent (those who had been summoned but had failed to appear, including C.D., former publication director of Cumhuriyet), were at odds with the values laid down in the constitution of the Cumhuriyet Foundation. The objections lodged by the applicants Mehmet Murat Sabuncu and Akın Atalay against the order of 28 July 2017 were rejected by the Istanbul 28th Assize Court in a final decision of 23 August 2017. The court held that “the impugned order complied with the procedure and the law”.
At the close of the second hearing on 11 September 2017, the third hearing on 25 September 2017, the fourth hearing on 31 October 2017, and the fifth hearing on 25 December 2017, the Istanbul 27th Assize Court ordered the continued pre-trial detention of the applicants Mehmet Murat Sabuncu and Akın Atalay, on exactly the same grounds as those set out in its order of 28 July 2017 (see paragraph 36 above). The two applicants lodged objections against the orders of 11 September, 25 September and 31 October 2017. Their objections were rejected by the Istanbul 28th Assize Court in final decisions dated 12 October and 17 November 2017. The Assize Court referred to “the evidence demonstrating the existence of strong suspicions of guilt, the nature and content of the offences in question, the state of the evidence and the fact that there [had] been no change in the state of the evidence”.
In the meantime, at the close of the third hearing on 25 September 2017, the Istanbul 27th Assize Court ordered that the applicant Ahmet Kadri Gürsel be released pending trial. The court found that the evidence relating to him had been gathered and that there were no grounds to suspect that he would put pressure on the accused who had failed to appear or on the witnesses whose evidence had not yet been heard.
At the close of the hearing held on 9 March 2018, the Istanbul 27th Assize Court ordered the release pending trial of the applicant Mehmet Murat Sabuncu. The court found that the evidence concerning the accused had been gathered; that there was no longer a risk that he would tamper with the evidence; that there was no longer a strong suspicion that he would put pressure on the accused who were absent or on the witnesses who had not yet been heard; that his continued pre-trial detention would be a disproportionate measure for the accused; and that the same benefits would be achieved by judicial supervision in the form of an order barring the applicant from leaving the country.
On conclusion of the hearing of 24 and 25 April 2018 the Istanbul 27th Assize Court, after convicting the applicant Akın Atalay, among others, of the offence of assisting armed terrorist organisations under Article 220 § 7 of the CC, ordered his release until such time as his conviction became final, and issued an order barring him from leaving the country. The court considered that the reasons for his continued detention referred to in the previous orders no longer applied and that, in view of the sentence imposed on the applicant, the risk of his absconding was no longer relevant.
On 3 April 2017 the Istanbul public prosecutor’s office filed a bill of indictment with the Istanbul 27th Assize Court against nineteen individuals including the applicants. They were accused mainly of lending assistance to terrorist organisations without being members of them (offence under Article 220 § 7 of the CC). With regard to the applicants it was primarily alleged that, over a period of three years leading up to the attempted coup of 15 July 2016, the editorial stance of Cumhuriyet had changed as a result of their influence, running counter to the editorial principles to which the newspaper had adhered for ninety years.
The public prosecutor considered that, by publishing articles which were glaringly at odds with the world view of its readers, the newspaper had conveyed manipulative and destructive information about the State. He maintained that the newspaper had published statements by leaders and prominent figures of terrorist organisations and had attempted to undermine Turkey’s credibility internationally, in particular by alleging that the government had ties to international terrorist organisations and that the National Intelligence Organisation (MİT) had supplied arms to extremist groups in Syria. In the view of the prosecutor’s office, since 2013 and under the leadership of C.D., former editor-in-chief of Cumhuriyet, the newspaper had become the champion of terrorist organisations such as FETÖ/PDY, the PKK and the DHKP/C (People’s Revolutionary Liberation Party/ Front). According to the public prosecutor, the newspaper had not acted within the bounds of freedom of expression since its managers had attempted, deploying the tactics of “asymmetric warfare”, to manipulate public opinion in order to slander the government and the President of the Republic. The prosecutor maintained that the newspaper, by manipulating and disguising the truth, had acted in accordance with the aims of the terrorist organisations and had thus attempted to create domestic upheaval in order to render the country ungovernable.
In order to demonstrate that the publication of the articles and headings in question had resulted from a process whereby teams with close links to the above-mentioned illegal organisations had taken control of the newspaper’s editorial policy, the public prosecutor’s office referred to the witness evidence which it had gathered against the applicants. That evidence, given either by former Cumhuriyet journalists who had left the newspaper following the change of management after the events referred to in the bill of indictment, or by journalists who still worked for the newspaper but currently occupied non-managerial positions, indicated in general that following the death in 2010 of the publication director I.S. (who had socialist leanings), the newspaper’s management had gradually been changed by the foundation, with Kemalist and nationalist journalists being replaced by journalists who shared the vision of the Gülenist movement and the United States, that the new management had had no hesitation in publishing articles containing points of view similar to those defended by organisations such as FETÖ and the PKK, and that the management had had the final say over the titles of articles, sometimes changing the titles proposed by the authors. The great majority of these witnesses took over the management of the newspaper Cumhuriyet following the applicants’ placement in detention.
The relevant parts of the main witness statements against the applicants can be summarised as follows.
(i)  A.K. (news coordinator of the newspaper Cumhuriyet): This witness had worked as the newspaper Cumhuriyet’s news coordinator since 1994. In a statement to the public prosecutor he said that the board of management of the Cumhuriyet Foundation appointed the publication director, who in turn appointed the editor-in-chief. A body known as the executive committee, which did not feature in the foundation’s constitutive instrument, had been created by the new board of management. [The applicant] Akın Atalay had been appointed as chairman of the committee. The publication director was the only person authorised to intervene in an article due to be published in the newspaper and was responsible for choosing the article headings. As a rule, the journalists were not responsible for the headings. The heading “Incomplete democracy” had been added by the then publication director. A.K. explained that the publication of the statements of leaders of the PKK’s armed terrorist organisations had reflected the preferences of the publication director. A.K. himself had not been in favour. He considered it possible that the articles on the “MİT lorries” and the “former prosecutor C.K.”, published under the name of the previous publication director, C.D., may have demonstrated that the “cemaat” (the Gülenist community) regarded Cumhuriyet under its publication director, C.D., as the most appropriate newspaper in which to air their views following the closure, or loss of credibility, of their own media outlets.
(ii)  The witness A.A. (a journalist with the newspaper Cumhuriyet): This witness stated that he had joined the newspaper in 2006 and had been working as a journalist in its social and political affairs department for about ten years. He explained that even if the text of an article had been written by a journalist, the heading could be changed by the editors. In his article published by the newspaper under the heading “Incomplete democracy” he had emphasised the fact that the main political forces had been present at the pro-democracy gathering held in Yenikapı, and that during the gathering there had been a call to join forces against the military coup. The editorial team had given the article the heading “Incomplete democracy” because the Peoples’ Democratic Party (“the HDP”, a pro-Kurdish party) had not been invited to take part. He had thought that the heading might offend people and might give rise to legal liability, and had said this to the publication director. A.A. added that he had occasionally received criticism from readers regarding, for instance, the increase in the number of news items relating to the political party the HDP, which upset some readers. As a Kemalist, he too had felt uncomfortable with the news items published by the newspaper concerning the PKK. He explained that the publishing policy was determined by the board of management of the foundation and the newspaper’s editorial board. In particular, the foundation’s board of management had the authority to determine the “oppositional” nature of the newspaper’s editorial stance.
(iii)  M.İ. (a journalist with the newspaper Cumhuriyet): This witness said that he had worked as a journalist with Cumhuriyet since 1993. He stated that the executive committee of the Cumhuriyet Foundation’s board of management did not intervene directly in journalists’ work but could do so through the publication director. When I.T. had begun working for the newspaper, the witness had gathered from his articles that he had close links to the “cemaat”. He would have preferred not to work with I.T., but that had been the choice of the management at that time. Sensitive articles written by the journalists were published in the newspaper after being assessed by the editors. The articles on the “MİT lorries” and the “former prosecutor C.K.” had been published in Cumhuriyet because FETÖ/PDY’s own newspapers had no longer enjoyed a good reputation.
(iv)  R.Z. (journalist and editor): This witness stated that after the death of İ.S. in 2010 the newspaper Cumhuriyet had changed direction as a result of the changes in the composition of the foundation’s board of management. Kemalist and nationalist journalists had been dismissed and journalists with ties to the Gülenists and susceptible to American influence had been recruited.
(v)  M.F. (journalist and editor): This witness stated that the turning-point in the change of the newspaper’s editorial policy had been the death of İ.S in 2010. The recent coverage concerning Fethullah Gülen and Kandil was the result of that change.
(vi)  İ.Y. (former editor-in-chief and former publication director of Cumhuriyet): This witness explained that he had been the newspaper’s editor-in-chief from 1992 to 2000. He had resigned in 2000 and had been publication director until 2014. In his view, the articles published after C.D.’s appointment as publication director had been at odds with the publishing principles set out in the foundation’s constitution. He said that it was Akın Atalay who had recommended C.D. as publication director. The foundation was responsible for appointing the journalists, after consultation with the editors-in-chief.
(vii) A.C. (former member of the foundation’s board of management): This witness stated that one of the newspaper’s principles had been violated when the remarks made by the head of the terrorist organisation FETÖ, Fethullah Gülen (“[They] called my humble home a mansion”), had been published together with his photograph on the newspaper’s front page, above the Cumhuriyet logo.
(viii)  T.A. (journalist and editor): This witness stated that a comparison of the headings used by the newspapers associated with FETÖ/PDY and those printed in Cumhuriyet could create the impression that they had been written in coordination with each other.
(ix)  L.E. (journalist and editor): This witness stated that the interview by H.Ç. (a journalist with Cumhuriyet) published by the newspaper Zaman under the heading “I would not describe the Gülenist community as a terrorist organisation” was one of the most tangible pieces of evidence that the newspaper Cumhuriyet had been taken over by that organisation. The fact that the newspapers Zaman and Cumhuriyet had printed the headings “The knotty problem of Azaz” and “Bomb at the heart of the State” within a day of each other had been arranged entirely by Fethullah Gülen. Persons who had not been approved by Fethullah Gülen were not invited to the Abant meetings. The name “Peace [at Home] Council” had been determined by Fethullah Gülen himself and supplied to Cumhuriyet.
Specific individual charges
The prosecutor’s office accused the applicant Mehmet Murat Sabuncu of having been in contact with certain individuals, including a former judge who had since been arrested and twenty-three other suspects, thirteen of whom had used the encrypted messaging application ByLock and had subsequently been placed under investigation on suspicion of membership of the organisation FETÖ/PDY.
The prosecutor’s office further maintained that during the period when the applicant had been the publication director of Cumhuriyet, starting on 1 September 2016, he had been responsible for articles in the newspaper which the prosecutor described as “manipulative”, both in terms of the choice of articles and the exaggerated tone used in them in order to indoctrinate the public. The prosecutor’s office based its accusations in this regard on the allegedly provocative content of an article published on 22 October 2016 according to which members of the ruling party, the AKP, had asked for restrictions on the carrying of weapons by State officials or party sympathisers to be eased in order to quell a possible coup attempt, with the attendant risk that the persons carrying the weapons might also intervene during peaceful political demonstrations.
The prosecutor’s office also referred to the following items published during the two-month period when the applicant Mehmet Murat Sabuncu had not had sole responsibility for publication but had worked in tandem with Cumhuriyet’s editors-in-chief.
(i)  The article written by the journalist Aydin Engin and published on 13 July 2016, two days before the attempted coup, under the heading “Peace in the world, but what about at home?”. The article had criticised President Erdoğan’s alleged policy of tension and hostility directed, at domestic level, against citizens of Kurdish origin and former leaders of the ruling party in particular, and, at international level, against the leaders of neighbouring countries or of politically allied States, and had referred to a committee formed by the instigators of the attempted coup known as the “Peace at Home Council”. According to some informants, the article had thus announced the date of the planned coup.
(ii)  The article published on 15 July 2016, the day of the attempted coup, entitled “He went missing for a week ... we’ve discovered where Erdoğan was”, which allegedly gave details of the President’s whereabouts on the day before the attempted coup.
(iii)  The article published on 18 July 2016 entitled “Danger on the streets”, which referred to the presence of certain radical groups among the persons protesting against the attempted coup and which had allegedly attempted to sow divisions among the demonstrators.
(iv)  The article of 19 July 2016 entitled “The witch hunt has begun”, which had allegedly raised doubts as to the legitimacy of the actions taken against suspected members of FETÖ/PDY and other terrorist organisations which had infiltrated the State apparatus.
(v)  Another article published on 19 July 2016 under the heading “No one at the rallies is talking about democracy”. The article reported that, at the demonstrations organised by the ruling party, the AKP, the anti-coup demonstrators had shouted several religious or pro-Ottoman slogans or had engaged in the practice of dhikr (zikr, the rhythmic repetition of the name given to God in Islam) rather than calling for democracy. It was alleged that the article had sought to humiliate citizens who had voiced their reaction to the attempted coup, and had undermined the sense of unity and solidarity expressed at the Yenikapi rally (a rally organised by President Erdoğan and attended by the leaders of the other political parties with the exception of the pro-Kurdish party the HDP, which had not been invited) by using the expression “incomplete democracy”.
(vi)  The publication of a series of news items and interviews on the alleged disappearance while in police custody of Hurşit Külter, leader of the local branch of the pro-Kurdish party the DBP (Demokratik Bölgeler Partisi – Democratic Regions Party). The publication of these items had allegedly enabled the PKK to use this as a subject for propaganda, although Hurşit Külter had subsequently turned up in Syria.
The prosecutor’s office also accused the applicant Mehmet Murat Sabuncu of posting tweets expressing support for the journalists who had been dismissed or prosecuted for working for the pro-Kurdish newspaper Özgür Gündem or the pro-Gülenist newspaper Zaman and containing extracts from an interview with Gülen’s family claiming that the latter had been slandered by the political authorities following the coup attempt. The applicant was also accused of posting tweets containing extracts from an interview given by Gülen himself to the BBC in which he had stated that he was not opposed to a process of dialogue and negotiation with Öcalan and the PKK in order to resolve the Kurdish problem. The prosecutor’s office considered that these tweets had served to denigrate the security forces’ operations against FETÖ/PDY and the PKK.
The tweets posted on the Twitter account @muratsabuncum, and taken into consideration by the Constitutional Court in its assessment of the present case, read as follows.
(i)  “We stand side-by-side with our colleagues from Özgür Gündem” (20 June 2016).
(ii)  “We have an honourable duty to oppose all pressure on journalism, past and present. The people knocking on the door of Radikal in the past are now knocking on Zaman’s door. Unacceptable” (14 December 2014).
(iii)  “We refuse ... Cumhuriyet will not comply with the publishing ban concerning the events of 17 December” (a ban on publishing allegations of corruption made by certain public prosecutors, alleged to be members of FETÖ, against four government ministers) (26 November 2014).
(iv)  “A police raid on the premises of the opposition newspaper is unacceptable” (30 October 2014).
(v)  “For the first time I’ve witnessed a statesman calling on an independent authority (the BDDK) to sink a bank. Only in the new Turkey.” (The BDDK is the banking regulation and supervisory authority.) (15 October 2014).
(vi)  “A disgrace ...@evrenselgzt: M.B. and the editor-in-chief of the newspaper Taraf, M.Ş.Ç., charged and a prison sentence of 28-52 years sought” (22 May 2014).
(vii)  “M.A. [M.H.A.], H.Ş.T. ... They lost their jobs with the Star newspaper after a telephone call from the Prime Minister. Democracy is still a long, long way off here” (18 March 2014).
(viii)  “According to Gülen’s family, those who don’t know what it’s like to live with very little have slandered him” (9 March 2014).
(ix)  “One of the key points to emerge from the BBC interview with Gülen is that he is not against dialogue and negotiation with Öcalan and Kandil to find a solution to the Kurdish question” (27 January 2014).
In support of the charges against the applicant Akın Atalay the prosecutor’s office referred, among other material, to the following published items (the charges that were not subsequently taken into account by the Constitutional Court are not mentioned here).
(i)  The article of 14 March 2015 containing an interview with one of the leaders of the PKK and allegedly amounting to propaganda in favour of that organisation, describing its militants as “guerrilla fighters”, and reporting on the comments made by the PKK leaders concerning certain topical issues.
(ii)  The articles of 1 April 2015 concerning the incident in which a public prosecutor had been held hostage in his office by left-wing extremists. The articles in question had allegedly conveyed the terrorists’ message to the public by printing a large photograph of them (taken while they were holding a gun to the head of their hostage) and by using the adjectives “young and determined” to describe one of the militants.
(iii)  The article of 2 June 2015 concerning Selahattin Demirtaş, which stated that the PKK was mindful of environmental and gender equality issues.
(iv)  The article published on 25 July 2015 under the heading “War at home, war in the world”, in which the security forces’ actions to combat terrorist organisations were described as “war”.
(v)  An article published on 12 July 2016, three days before the attempted coup, written by the applicant Ahmet Kadri Gürsel and entitled “Erdoğan wants to be our father”. The article criticised the President’s habit of forcing people whom he met to stop smoking, and alleged that this habit was part of his tendency to impose his totalitarian views on society. It proposed that people should refuse to comply by not putting out their cigarettes. The article was alleged to have conveyed a message designed to cause disorder in Turkey and to have predicted the coup attempt.
(vi)  The other article published on 15 July 2016, the date of the attempted coup, entitled “He went missing for a week ... we’ve discovered where Erdoğan was”, which gave details of the place where the President had been on holiday.
(vii)  The article published on 18 July 2016 entitled “Danger on the streets”, which referred to the presence of certain radical groups among the persons protesting against the attempted coup and which allegedly attempted to divide society by arousing distrust towards the demonstrators.
(viii)  The interview with one of the PKK leaders, M. Karayılan, published on 21 December 2015 under the heading “If they don’t agree to autonomy, we’ll consider separation”, which reported on the views expressed by Mr Karayilan, who described the PKK’s terrorist acts as “resistance” and the State’s anti-terrorist actions as a “civil war” that the State could not win.
(ix)  The article of 19 July 2016 entitled “The witch hunt has begun”, which raised doubts as to the legitimacy of the action taken against the instigators of the coup attempt.
(x)  The article entitled “No one at the rallies is talking about democracy”, which allegedly sought to humiliate citizens expressing their reactions to the attempted coup.
(xi)  The article about the MİT lorries and the article concerning the explosives attack on the town of Reyhanlı. It was alleged that the articles, by stating that public officials may have committed criminal offences and provided assistance to certain terrorist groups, had tarnished Turkey’s image abroad.
The tweets posted by the applicant Akın Atalay on the Twitter account @av_akinatalay and taken into consideration by the Constitutional Court in its assessment of the present case, in so far as they related to the closingdown of the television stations and newspapers allegedly belonging to the organisation FETÖ/PDY, read as follows.
14 December 2014:
(i)  “If we remain silent now, we’ll no longer have the right or the opportunity to speak out. We condemn the raid of the publishing groups Zaman and Samanyolu and the detentions.”
(ii)  “Some people refer to the past of the Cemaat (“Community”) media outlets and say ‘What right have you got now to talk about solidarity?’”.
(iii)  “It’s not for us to assess whether individuals are worthy of their rights and freedoms by examining their actions, past and present.”
(iv)  “We defend freedom of the press, not of individuals. We protect freedom itself, not a particular person or group. Yes, we’re being tested again.”
(v)  “It’s only when you take care not just of those who think like you and are close to you, but also those who think differently, or even those who have hurt you, that you have the right to say [I am a champion of freedom and a democrat].”
(vi)  “Even if we knew that today’s victims would not question their own actions in defending illegal acts in the past, our position would not change ...”.
(vii) “When Hrant was killed, we were ‘the Armenian’; yesterday we were the ‘supporter of Ergenekon’. Today we’re the ‘supporter of the Cemaat’ and tomorrow, if necessary, we’ll be ‘the supporter of the AKP’. The fact is, we’re just democrats ...”
27 October 2015:
(i)  “They question or criticise us, saying ‘These members of the Cemaat have done you the greatest harm and injustice. Why are you defending them now?’”.
(ii)  “Yes, this newspaper [Cumhuriyet] was treated very unjustly and suffered great harm. The media close to the Cemaat, in cooperation with the present government, were also involved in this illegal activity. We believe that this fact makes the upholding of rights, the law and freedoms more precious and more meaningful.”
(iii)  “We’re not expecting any thanks for doing this. Nowadays, our attitude is not determined by the identity or (criminal) record of the victim of the illegal act.”
(iv)  “Moreover, human rights, the law, rights and freedoms are for everyone, not just for the innocent.”
(v)  “We should recall Mary Magdalene’s words: ‘Let he who is without sin cast the first stone’.”
28 October 2015:
(i)  “Let us take note: Bugün TV was closed down by the police at 4.33 p.m. today.”
(ii)  “Be in no doubt: the police closed down Kanaltürk and Today TV, not on the orders of the prosecutor or of a court, but on the orders of the administrator.”
(iii)  “Work instructions given by the person appointed to run the company should be carried out by the company’s employees, not by the police.”
(iv)  “Since the police also intervene in the internal affairs of company bosses concerning workers’ rights, and carry out their orders, where does this method lead?”
(v)  “@cumhuriyetgzt friends, be warned ! If you don’t follow our management instructions we’ll call the police straight away!”
28 October 2015:
(i)  “The first action of the administrators of the İpek Medya group was to end the broadcasts of two television channels and the distribution of two newspapers.”
(ii)  “Are there no regulations governing the powers and responsibilities of administrators appointed under Article 133 of the CCP? Can they just manage in arbitrary fashion?”
(iii)  “Article 133 of the CCP regulates the appointment of an administrator in the context of criminal proceedings.”
(iv)  “The powers and responsibilities of administrators and the way in which they must fulfil their duties are set out in the Turkish Civil Code.
If you go through the Articles one by one you’ll understand the situation without the need for any comment.”
(v)  “Article 403 of the Civil Code: ‘The administrator shall be appointed to carry out certain tasks or to manage a person’s property. Unless otherwise indicated the provisions of the present law on trustees shall apply to administrators’. Article 458: ‘The appointment of an administrator shall not exclude a person’s capacity to act’.”
(vi)  “Article 460: ‘If an administrator is placed in charge of managing and supervising property, he or she may only perform the tasks required for that purpose.”
(vii)  “The ability of administrators to perform other tasks depends on the special powers conferred on them by the persons whom they represent.”
(viii)  “Article 467: ‘The administrator shall be liable for any damage he or she causes to the person represented as a result of a failure to properly perform his or her duties’”.
(ix)  “@Medetdersim, either we didn’t explain ourselves properly or you insist on not understanding: we are not defending the Cemaat, we’re defending freedom of the press, of the law, our own freedom ...”.
5 March 2016:
(i)  “It is illegal to hand over management of the newspaper Zaman to an administrator. We oppose the move in a determined, implacable, absolute manner ...”.
(ii)  “We were politically at odds with the Cemaat. They committed a great many injustices against numerous opponents by manipulating the law to suit their own political views.”
(iii)  “The political authorities take illegal control of a religious community’s newspaper and wind it up. We’re asked for our reaction.”
(iv)  “If you expect us to say ‘Oh, they’re reaping what they sowed’ or ‘Let them destroy one another’, you don’t know us.”
(v)  “We realise that to protect our own rights we have to protect rights and the law as regards our competitors and even our enemies. End of story.”
(vi)  “Even if we strongly suspect that if they [the Gülenists] were to regain their positions of strength in the future they would again act illegally, that is no excuse for us to remain silent now.”
(viii)  “There’s no excuse for not speaking out about illegal acts. The victim’s history, criminal record and lack of self-criticism are secondary.”
According to the bill of indictment filed by the prosecutor’s office, these eight applicants, on account of their positions within Cumhuriyet, were to be considered criminally responsible for the following acts, in addition to those referred to in the detention orders.
(i)  The publication of an interview with Fethullah Gülen on 23 May 2015 under the heading “The son-in-law called my humble home (fakirhane) a mansion (malikhane)”. This was alleged to constitute propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation.
(ii)  The use by the newspaper Cumhuriyet, on two occasions, of the same heading as the daily newspaper Zaman (regarded as having close ties to the organisation FETÖ). The first article, published on 16 February 2016 under the title “The knotty problem of Azaz”, reported on a missile attack on civilian targets in the Syrian city of Azaz, allegedly led by Russian forces; the second article, published in February 2016 under the heading “Bomb at the heart of the State”, reported on a car-bomb attack in the centre of Ankara close to buildings belonging to the senior command of the armed forces.
(iii)  The participation of certain journalists working for the newspaper Cumhuriyet in the “Abant meetings”, together with testimony to the effect that only individuals approved by Fethullah Gülen were invited to those seminars.
(iv)  The publication of the article by the journalist Aydin Engin on 13 July 2016, two days before the attempted coup, entitled: “Peace in the world, but what about at home?”, which referred to a committee formed by the instigators of the attempted coup known as the “Peace at Home Council”. According to some informants, the article had announced the date of the planned coup attempt.
(v)  The statement made by a Cumhuriyet journalist, H.Ç., in an interview published in the daily newspaper Zaman, in which he said that he “would not describe the Gülenist community as a terrorist organisation”.
(vi)  The publication of the article of 12 July 2016, three days before the attempted coup, written by the applicant Ahmet Kadri Gürsel and entitled “Erdoğan wants to be our father”, which allegedly conveyed a message designed to cause disorder in Turkey and predicted the coup attempt.
(vii)  The fact that the United States correspondent of the website haberdar.com had also been Cumhuriyet’s US correspondent for two years, and had allegedly published articles setting out some of the views of the organisation FETÖ/PDY.
(viii)  The fact that allegedly false and manipulative information posted on the Twitter accounts @fuatavni and @jeansbiri (Twitter feeds of whistleblowers critical of the government to which members of FETÖ allegedly contributed) had been reproduced in a special section of the newspaper Cumhuriyet, thus enabling the information to be circulated widely among the public.
The applicants submitted defence pleadings to the Istanbul Assize Court in response to the prosecution’s charges. The court also took witness evidence against the applicants, primarily from journalists or former journalists of Cumhuriyet, who confirmed the inferences drawn by the prosecutor’s office with regard to the alignment of the newspaper’s editorial stance with the views of members of the organisation FETÖ/PDY.
In a judgment of 25 April 2018 the Istanbul Assize Court found the acts of which the applicants were accused in the indictment to be established, and found them guilty of assisting a terrorist organisation without being members of it, under Article 220 § 7 of the CC. Accordingly, it sentenced the applicant Mehmet Murat Sabuncu to seven years and six months’ imprisonment, the applicant Akın Atalay to eight years, one month and fifteen days’ imprisonment, the applicant Bülent Utku to four years and six months’ imprisonment, the applicant Ahmet Kadri Gürsel to two years and six months’ imprisonment, and the applicants Güray Tekin Öz, Önder Çelik, Hacı Musa Kart, Hakan Karasinir and Mustafa Kemal Güngör to three years and nine months’ imprisonment each.
The Assize Court acquitted the applicant Turhan Günay of the above-mentioned charges.
The Assize Court also acquitted the applicants Turhan Günay, Akın Atalay, Bülent Utku, Güray Tekin Öz, Önder Çelik, Hacı Musa Kart, Hakan Karasinir and Mustafa Kemal Güngör of the charges of misappropriation under Article 155 § 2 of the CC.
The applicants and the prosecutor’s office each appealed against the judgment of 25 April 2018.
In a judgment of 18 February 2019 the Istanbul Court of Appeal (Third Criminal Division) dismissed the appeals after examination on the merits. It found as follows:
“... the impugned judgment did not contain any substantive or procedural irregularities. There were no deficiencies in the evidence taken or the other investigative steps carried out by the first-instance court. The impugned acts were correctly characterised in accordance with the types of offences provided for by law. The sentences were fixed in accordance with the convictions and the law. Accordingly, the grounds of appeal advanced by the prosecutor’s office and by the convicted persons are unfounded. ...”
The parties appealed on points of law.
On 16 July 2019 the chief public prosecutor attached to the Court of Cassation, in his submissions, sought the quashing of the judgment convicting the applicants. He relied on a series of grounds of appeal.
The chief public prosecutor pointed out in particular that the crime of assisting criminal organisations or armed terrorist organisations required direct intent. In that regard he observed that the finding that a criminal offence had been committed could not be grounded purely on a hypothetical aim pursued by the accused in expressing their political opinions, merely on the basis that their assessment of the situation was at variance with that of the public authorities and the majority of the public. A finding that the alleged offence had been committed had to be based first and foremost on concrete facts. The evidence adduced in support of the allegations should make it possible to establish the facts so as to demonstrate that the accused had acted with the aim of helping to achieve the illegal objectives of the terrorist organisations. In other words, articles published in newspapers or items shared on social media could not constitute the offence of assisting terrorist organisations purely because they contained remarks criticising the actions of the public authorities.
As to the charges against the three accused who had occupied managerial positions within Cumhuriyet, including the applicants Mehmet Murat Sabuncu and Akın Atalay, the chief public prosecutor considered that the individuals concerned could not be held responsible for the impugned articles as there was no evidence or information indicating that they had been involved in the writing of the articles. The chief public prosecutor noted, moreover, that the prosecution and the defence had agreed on this point. He stated that the individual responsibility of the authors of the articles, who had been known and identified, could be engaged, but that the criminal responsibility of the management of Cumhuriyet could not.
With regard to the charges relating to the applicants’ alleged assistance to terrorist organisations, the chief public prosecutor made the following points.
(i)  The telephone conversations between the accused and persons who had subsequently been the subject of a criminal investigation for membership of FETÖ could not constitute evidence of the offence of assisting an armed terrorist organisation.
(ii)  The accusation that the changes to the board of management of the Cumhuriyet Foundation following discussions and elections between 2013 and 2016 had altered the editorial stance of the newspaper Cumhuriyet in order to provide assistance to terrorist organisations was not based on any factual evidence.
(iii)  Participation in the “Abant meetings” could not by itself amount to evidence that the accused had committed the offence of assisting a terrorist organisation, since the memoranda submitted by the accused at those meetings had not contained any of the constituent elements of a crime.
(iv)  Participation in a breakfast organised by the Journalists’ and Writers’ Foundation, a body against which no suspicion or accusation of assisting terrorist organisations existed, and the fact of being photographed on that occasion with suspected members of FETÖ, could not by themselves constitute evidence of the offence of assisting a terrorist organisation.
(v)  Exchanges between third parties (suspected in other criminal proceedings of belonging to the organisation FETÖ) via the messaging application ByLock on the question of who would be invited to the Abant meetings could not be regarded as evidence of the offence of assisting a terrorist organisation, provided that they did not refer to facts concerning assistance to such an organisation.
(vi)  The alleged facts concerning the activities routinely organised by the members of the PKK and of FETÖ were in no way connected to the accused in the present case.
(vii)  Material shared on social media that did not contain any criminal element but simply constituted comments or criticism of a political nature could not be regarded as evidence of the offence of assisting armed terrorist organisations.
By way of conclusion, the chief public prosecutor requested the Court of Cassation to quash the judgment convicting the accused. He took the view that the applicants should be acquitted of the charges against them, given that, in view of the principles, standards and restrictions laid down by the Constitution, and the case-law of the Strasbourg Court and the Constitutional Court, the articles and other written material complained of had simply conveyed information, criticism or comments and did not warrant the application of any restriction necessary in a democratic society for the purpose of preventing disorder or crime.
In a judgment of 12 September 2019 the Court of Cassation quashed the appeal judgment convicting the applicants, basing its decision on the grounds advanced by the chief public prosecutor. In its reasoned judgment delivered on 27 September 2019 it observed at the outset that the press and investigative journalism, by subjecting political decisions and actions, and possible negligence on the government’s part, to close scrutiny and facilitating participation by citizens in the decision-making process, ensured the proper functioning of democracy. The court stressed the fact that the press constituted one of the most appropriate means by which citizens could form a view on the opinions and attitudes of political leaders.
The Court of Cassation pointed out that activities relating to the exercise of public rights and freedoms should be presumed to be in accordance with the law and that press freedom, when exercised within the limits laid down by law, was no exception to that principle. It stressed that, according to the Press Act, the press was free and that this freedom encompassed the right to receive and disseminate information, the right to criticise, the right to interpret facts and opinions and the creation of works of all kinds.
The Court of Cassation also referred to the case-law of the Strasbourg Court, describing the role of the press as a “public watchdog” as vital to the functioning of a democratic society.
The Court of Cassation went on to point out the particular features of the offence of assisting a terrorist organisation, emphasising that persons committing that offence, in addition to a general intentional fault, namely intent to carry out acts punishable under criminal law, had to have committed a specific intentional fault consisting in pursuing a particular objective. The Court of Cassation held that, for the offence of assisting a terrorist organisation to be established, the perpetrator had to have deliberately assisted such an organisation while being aware that the latter pursued the aim of committing criminal offences. The court specified that the expression “while being aware” also required direct intent on the part of the perpetrator. Hence, in the court’s view, it was also necessary to ascertain whether the person concerned had acted with the intention of helping to achieve the illegal aims of the organisation in question.
The Court of Cassation added that if the assistance had been provided not directly to the illegal organisation itself, but to the individuals who were members of it, the person providing the assistance could not be held responsible for that criminal offence unless it was established that he or she had been aware that the individuals concerned were acting as members of an organisation created for the purpose of committing the said offences or crimes.
As to the issue of the establishment of the facts on the basis of the evidence for and against the accused, the Court of Cassation referred to the general criminal-law principle whereby the accused should have the benefit of the doubt. The court pointed out that, for any person to be convicted, the commission of an offence had to be proved beyond doubt. A decision to convict could not be arrived at by interpreting to the detriment of the accused facts or allegations that were doubtful or not wholly clarified.
The Court of Cassation therefore concluded that the lower courts had erroneously characterised the offences in issue as “assisting a terrorist organisation”. The case was sent back to the Istanbul Assize Court.
In a judgment of 21 November 2019 the Istanbul 27th Assize Court acquitted the applicant Ahmet Kadri Gürsel, finding that he had not been a member of any board of management within Cumhuriyet and that his own written pieces could be characterised as criticism coming within the exercise of freedom of expression. With regard to the other applicants, the Assize Court departed from the Court of Cassation judgment of 18 September 2019 and confirmed its own judgment of 18 February 2019 convicting the applicants. It sentenced the applicant Mehmet Murat Sabuncu to seven years and six months’ imprisonment, the applicant Akın Atalay to eight years, one month and fifteen days’ imprisonment, the applicant Bülent Utku to four years and six months’ imprisonment, the applicant Önder Çelik to three years and nine months’ imprisonment, the applicant Haci Musa Kart to three years and nine months’ imprisonment, the applicant Hakan Karasinir to three years and nine months’ imprisonment, the applicant Mustafa Kemal Güngör to three years and nine months’ imprisonment, and the applicant Güray Tekin Öz to three years and nine months’ imprisonment.
The case is still pending before the plenary criminal divisions of the Court of Cassation.
On 26 December 2016 the applicants each lodged an individual application with the Constitutional Court. They alleged a breach of their right to liberty and security and their right to freedom of expression and freedom of the press. They also maintained that they had been arrested and detained on grounds other than those provided for by the Turkish Constitution and the Convention.
The Constitutional Court delivered its judgments on the applicants’ applications on 11 January 2018 (with regard to Turhan Günay) and on 2 and 3 May 2019 (with regard to the remaining applicants). In the case of the applicants Mehmet Murat Sabuncu, Akın Atalay, Önder Çelik, Mustafa Kemal Güngör, Hakan Karasinir, Hacı Musa Kart, Güray Tekin Öz and Bülent Utku, it found, by a majority, that there had been no violation of the provisions of the Constitution relied on by the applicants, namely Article 19 (right to liberty and security of person) and Articles 26 and 28 (freedom of expression and freedom of the press respectively).
In the case of the applicants Turhan Günay and Ahmet Kadri Gürsel the Constitutional Court held, unanimously in the first case and by a majority in the second, that there had been a breach of the aforementioned provisions.
In a judgment of 2 May 2019 the Constitutional Court observed that in issuing the detention orders in respect of these six applicants, the authorities had found that, following their appointment to the board of management of the Cumhuriyet Foundation, the daily newspaper Cumhuriyet had criticised the actions of various State bodies and had published several articles that could be regarded as propaganda in favour of terrorist organisations, in that they had been liable to create a favourable perception of those organisations among members of the public. It also noted that the authorities that had ordered the applicants’ detention had found that the individuals concerned, in view of the senior positions which they occupied and their length of service, had influenced the newspaper’s editorial policy and should be held criminally responsible for the articles published in the newspaper. On this point the Constitutional Court observed as follows:
“It is beyond doubt that the board of management of the Cumhuriyet Foundation appoints the publication director of the daily newspaper and that the latter chooses the editor-in-chief and other persons. In this context, some of the applicants and [the applicant] Akın Atalay stated that the board of management could replace the publication director at any time if his performance was unsatisfactory. Likewise, the vice-president of the foundation’s board of management, Akın Atalay, stated that a review meeting concerning the newspaper was held every two months. In particular, in reply to a question, he stated that prior to the publication of the articles concerning the ‘MİT lorries’, the newspaper’s lawyers, including himself, had met and assessed the articles and had then published them. Some witnesses, including journalists and former editors of the newspaper, stated that the newspaper’s publishing policy was determined by the board of management of the Cumhuriyet Foundation, that Akın Atalay, who was the vice-president of the management board and the chairman of the executive committee, was the most senior authority in that regard, and that he had proposed to the foundation’s board of management that it appoint C.D. as publication director. The court notes that the investigating authorities, taking into account all these facts and the applicants’ positions within the foundation and the media company, and their long-standing positions within the newspaper, concluded that the applicants could indeed be held responsible for the publication of the news items and articles published in the newspaper and for the direction taken by the newspaper’s publishing policy.”
The Constitutional Court considered that it had been neither arbitrary nor unfounded for the investigating authorities to consider that there was a strong indication of the applicants’ guilt, in view of the language used in the articles and in the social media posts and of the impact that these documents had had on public opinion at the time of their publication.
The Constitutional Court referred in particular to the alleged acts as set out in the orders for the applicants’ detention (see the summary of these facts at paragraph 23 above) and in the bill of indictment concerning them (see the summary of these facts at paragraph 49 above).
On the basis of those accusations the Constitutional Court considered that all the applicants had posed a flight risk, given the severity of the statutory penalties for their alleged offences. Like the criminal courts, it rejected the applicants’ claim that they had been investigated and placed in pre-trial detention solely on account of acts coming within the scope of their freedom of expression and freedom of the press.
A minority of six judges of the Constitutional Court (six out of fifteen, including the President) expressed separate dissenting opinions. They considered that there had been no reasonable or strong suspicion capable of justifying the applicants’ arrest and detention. In their view, the suspicions advanced by the public prosecutor’s office and cited by the competent authorities as grounds for the applicants’ initial and continued detention, to the effect that the applicants, in their capacity as members of the board of management of the Cumhuriyet Foundation, had influenced the content of the articles referred to in the judgment, had not been supported by any specific evidence. The dissenting judges considered that there was likewise no indication that the applicants had acted with the intention of assisting the criminal organisations referred to in the judgment. In the judges’ view, the prosecution of the members of the board of management on account of articles written by other journalists and published under the responsibility of the newspaper’s publication director had been contrary to the principle of the individual nature of criminal responsibility. Furthermore, no evidence had been adduced casting doubt on the applicants’ defence in reply to those accusations, as it had been consistent with the normal course of life. Noting that the suspicions against the applicants had been based on newspaper articles that were covered by freedom of expression and freedom of the press, the dissenting judges considered that the authorities in question should have taken particular care in applying measures entailing a deprivation of liberty. The change in the newspaper’s editorial stance could not by itself constitute the subject of a criminal offence. The judges pointed out that the senior management of the newspaper could not be prosecuted unless the newspaper’s editorial stance systematically promoted the use of violence and terrorist methods and sought to legitimise terrorist organisations. As a general rule, accusations could not be made against journalists in a sweeping manner by listing the headings, articles and opinions published by the newspaper over a particular period. A blanket approach of this kind, omitting to specify how each article had infringed the Criminal Code, would narrow the sphere of journalistic activity and have a chilling effect on freedom of the press. The dissenting judges considered that even if some articles apt to support the activities of a terrorist organisation were published from time to time in a newspaper, they could merely engage the criminal responsibility of their authors but did not suffice to demonstrate a shift in the editorial stance of the newspaper as a whole.
The dissenting judges pointed out that the Constitutional Court had set aside the provisions of the Prevention of Terrorism Act providing for the proprietors of newspapers to be held responsible for articles published in their newspapers, basing its ruling on the individual nature of criminal responsibility. In their view, the criminal investigation authorities had in no way demonstrated in the present case how the responsibility of the applicants, whose situation could be likened to that of the proprietors of a newspaper, could have been engaged.
The judges also pointed to the case-law of the Constitutional Court according to which the requirement of strong suspicion, which under Article 19 of the Constitution was a prerequisite for detention, continued to apply even during the state of emergency.
Moreover, a newspaper’s editorial stance was protected by freedom of expression and freedom of the press. These freedoms, which enabled the public to be informed of different versions of events and to read critical opinions on current affairs and governance issues, had a vital role to play in the functioning of a democratic, pluralist regime. The freedoms in question also applied to minority views within society. According to the dissenting judges, while some published items or editorial stances might present certain similarities with the supposed objectives of terrorist organisations, such similarities could not in themselves be regarded as assistance to a terrorist organisation.
In its judgment of 2 May 2019 the Constitutional Court observed that the applicant Mehmet Murat Sabuncu had been appointed as editorinchief of the newspaper Cumhuriyet on 1 September 2016, in other words, after the attempted coup; that he had subsequently been accused of being responsible for the articles published in the newspaper; and that he had also been accused of opposing the operations conducted by the security forces against the media outlets controlled by the organisation FETÖ/PDY, of having given the impression, via material posted on social media, that the members of that organisation were victims, of allowing the newspaper Cumhuriyet to disseminate propaganda in favour of the PKK by conveying the messages of that organisation, and of thereby aiding these two terrorist organisations.
In that connection the Constitutional Court found as follows:
“53.  It was noted in the detention order that the media company (Yenigün) was the company responsible for publishing the daily newspaper and that the (Cumhuriyet) Foundation, which held the trademark and publishing rights in relation to the newspaper, ranked above the newspaper and the media company in the institutional hierarchy, with the result that an organic link existed between the foundation, the media company and the newspaper; that following the election ... to the foundation’s board of management of individuals with links to FETÖ/PDY, the newspaper had altered its statist, secular and nationalist stance and begun targeting the State; that a large number of headings, news items and articles liable to create a favourable impression of the organisations FETÖ/PDY and the PKK had been published in the newspaper; and that the newspaper had obscured (manipulated) the facts to the benefit of the terrorist organisations, thus attempting to render the country ungovernable. It was found that the applicant was also responsible for these materials in his capacity as publication director and that there was a strong suspicion that he was guilty. In the above-mentioned order, items published by the newspaper after 2013 were referred to in support of the charges. The indictment mentioned the changes to the foundation’s board of management in 2013 and subsequently, and the news items and articles published in the newspaper during the same period and to which the charges related.
Accordingly, the applicant was not charged for having written a news item or an article published in the newspaper. It was found that the charge against the applicant in account of the news items and articles published in the newspaper was based on the fact that he had been responsible for the headings, news items and articles published in the newspaper because he was its publication director. It was also alleged that the applicant had opposed the operations carried out by the judicial authorities against FETÖ/PDY’s media outlets and had attempted, through his social media posts, to portray the members of FETÖ/PDY as victims and had also, through his social media posts, supported the publication of PKK propaganda, thereby assisting the above-mentioned terrorist organisations.
It was further alleged in the indictment that the applicant had been in telephone contact with persons who were under investigation for offences linked to FETÖ/PDY or who were users of ByLock. The above-mentioned aspects were not the subject of a separate charge but were mentioned in connection with the main charge against the applicant, referred to above.”
The Constitutional Court referred to the newspaper articles mentioned by the judicial authorities in ordering the detention of Mehmet Murat Sabuncu (see paragraph 25 with reference to paragraph 23 above) and, in particular (citing them specifically), those mentioned in the bill of indictment of 3 April 2017 (see paragraphs 45-47 above). The court concluded that it could not be said that there had been no reasonable suspicion that the applicant had committed a criminal offence necessitating his placement in pre-trial detention. It considered, on the basis of those accusations, that the applicant had posed a flight risk at the time of the events, given the severity of the statutory penalty for the offences in question. Like the criminal courts, it also rejected the applicant’s argument that the investigation concerning him and his pre-trial detention had been designed to punish acts that were covered by freedom of expression and freedom of the press.
The Constitutional Court held, by a majority, that the orders for Mehmet Murat Sabuncu’s initial and continued detention had been well founded and had not been arbitrary.
A minority of the members of the Constitutional Court (six judges out of fifteen, including the President) expressed separate dissenting opinions in the case of Mehmet Murat Sabuncu. They pointed to their opinions concerning freedom of expression set out in the case of Önder Çelik and Others, to the effect that a newspaper’s editorial stance was protected by freedom of expression and freedom of the press. These freedoms, which enabled the public to be informed of different versions of events and to read critical opinions on current affairs and governance issues, had a vital role to play in the functioning of a democratic, pluralist regime and also applied to minority views within society. According to the dissenting judges, while some published items or editorial stances might present certain similarities with the supposed objectives of terrorist organisations, such similarities could not in themselves be regarded as assistance to a terrorist organisation.
As to the existence of suspicions that the offence of assisting terrorist organisations had been committed, the dissenting judges stressed that none of the articles referred to by the prosecution had actually been written by the applicant Mehmet Murat Sabuncu himself. The prosecution had not even attempted to demonstrate how the individual articles referred to had infringed the Criminal Code, but had simply listed the articles one by one before alleging that the newspaper’s editorial stance had changed, becoming aligned with the stated aims of the terrorist organisations in question. In the judges’ view, freedom of expression, and especially freedom of the press, protected the dissemination to the public of all dissenting views and the public’s right to be informed of them.
Some of the dissenting judges also observed that the impugned articles referred to in the detention orders had not been published during the period when Mehmet Murat Sabuncu was the publication director, but had in fact been published prior to September 2016, when he had been appointed to that position. In the view of other judges, the remarks shared by Mehmet Murat Sabuncu on social media, criticising the proceedings brought against the media outlets accused of having close ties to the organisation FETÖ and expressing concern at the likelihood of civilians close to the government being armed, were protected by freedom of expression.
With regard to the responsibility of the applicant Akın Atalay on account of news items and articles published in the newspaper Cumhuriyet and referred to by the magistrate and the prosecuting authorities in the present case, the Constitutional Court made findings similar to those made in relation to the other applicants. It held as follows:
“... 52.  It was noted in the detention order that the media company (Yenigün) was the company responsible for publishing the daily newspaper, that the (Cumhuriyet) Foundation, which held the trademark and publishing rights in relation to the newspaper, ranked above the newspaper and the media company in the institutional hierarchy, with the result that an organic link existed between the foundation, the media company and the newspaper; that following the election ... to the board of management of the foundation of individuals with links to FETÖ/PDY, the newspaper had altered its statist, secular and nationalist stance and begun targeting the State; that a large number of headings, news items and articles liable to create a favourable impression of the organisations FETÖ/PDY and the PKK had been published in the newspaper; and that the newspaper had obscured (manipulated) the facts to the benefit of the terrorist organisations, thus attempting to render the country ungovernable. It was found that the members of the foundation’s board of management, including the applicant, were responsible for these materials and that there was a strong suspicion that they were guilty. In the above-mentioned order, items published by the newspaper after 2013 were referred to in support of the charges. The indictment mentioned the changes to the foundation’s board of management in 2013 and subsequently, and news items and articles published in the newspaper during the same period and to which the charges related.
Accordingly, the applicant was not charged for having written a news item or an article published in the newspaper. It was found that the charge against the applicant on account of the news items and articles published in the newspaper was based on the fact that he had been a member of the board of management of the foundation and the board of the media company, that he had been chairman of the executive committee (of the foundation’s board of management) and that he had thus had an active role in the newspaper. It was also alleged that the applicant had opposed the operations carried out by the judicial authorities against FETÖ/PDY’s media outlets and had attempted, through his social media posts, to portray the members of FETÖ/PDY as victims, thereby assisting that terrorist organisation.
It was further alleged in the indictment that financial transactions had taken place between, on the one hand, persons and companies with links to FETÖ/PDY and, on the other hand, the newspaper and the media company, connected to the foundation on whose board of management the applicant sat as vice-president, and that the applicant had been in telephone contact with persons under investigation for offences linked to FETÖ/PDY or who were users of ByLock. The above-mentioned aspects were not the subject of a separate charge but were mentioned in connection with the main charge against the applicant, referred to above.”
The Constitutional Court, after reiterating the allegations made by the authorities against Akın Atalay in the orders for his initial and continued pre-trial detention (see paragraph 26 with reference to paragraph 23 above), and by the prosecutor’s office in the indictment of 3 April 2017 (see paragraph 48 above), went on to find that it could not be said that there had been no reasonable suspicion that the applicant had assisted the terrorist organisation in question by opposing the operations conducted against the media outlets controlled by the organisation FETÖ/PDY and by attempting to cast doubt on the legitimacy of those operations via the items he had posted on social media, which had given the impression that the members of that terrorist organisation were in fact victims.
Lastly, the Constitutional Court found that it had been neither arbitrary nor unfounded for the criminal investigation authorities to consider that there was a strong indication of the applicant’s guilt, in view of the language used in the articles published in Cumhuriyet and in the items posted on social media, and of the impact that these had had on public opinion at the time of their publication.
In the light of these considerations regarding the complaints concerning the right to liberty and security, the Constitutional Court dismissed Akın Atalay’s remaining complaints, including those relating to freedom of expression and freedom of the press.
A minority of the judges of the Constitutional Court (six judges out of fifteen) expressed separate dissenting opinions in Akın Atalay’s case. In their view, the observations they had made in the case of Önder Çelik and Others concerning the prosecution and detention of the senior managers of the Cumhuriyet Foundation for their alleged influence over the editorial stance of the newspaper Cumhuriyet applied equally to the case of Akın Atalay. According to the dissenting judges, Akın Atalay had also been prosecuted not because of any articles that he himself had written, but first and foremost because he had allegedly influenced articles written by other Cumhuriyet journalists, on account of his managerial positions within the Cumhuriyet Foundation and the publishing company Yenigün. In the judges’ view, it was not possible to arrive at the conclusion that suspicions had existed simply by listing the allegations against the applicant; each of the items of evidence should have been examined in turn on the basis of the facts and the documents in the case file. Neither the prosecuting authorities nor the majority of the Constitutional Court had conducted such an examination.
The dissenting judges also observed that in the few items he had shared on social media, the applicant had not just expressed the view that the measures taken against the organisations deemed to be close to FETÖ/PDY had been in breach of the law; he had also referred to that organisation’s past illegal activities and had criticised the government, and even the Constitutional Court, for not preventing those activities. The judges concluded that the investigating authorities had failed to give any reasons for their finding that the sharing of these items on social media was not protected by freedom of expression.
In its judgment of 11 January 2018 concerning the applicant Turhan Günay, the Constitutional Court found a violation of the applicant’s right to liberty, taking the view that there had been no strong suspicions that he had committed the alleged criminal offences capable of justifying his pre-trial detention. It noted in that connection that the applicant had not been charged on account of an article that he himself had written, but that the allegations had been based on his membership of the board of management of the foundation, which allegedly rendered him responsible, together with his fellow board members, for the change in editorial stance and the manipulative articles published in the newspaper championing the cause of terrorist organisations. However, the court noted that the applicant had ceased to be a member of the newspaper’s senior management in 2013 and that his name did not feature among the members of the board of management, and that the alleged acts had taken place after 2013. It therefore considered it unnecessary to examine the complaints of a breach of freedom of expression, since no facts had been disclosed concerning possible influence by the applicant over the material published in the newspaper. The Constitutional Court also made an award to the applicant for costs and expenses. Since the applicant had not claimed any compensation, submitting that the finding of a violation would constitute redress for the alleged damage, and since he had already been released pending trial, the Constitutional Court ruled that there was no need to take any additional action in his case.
In its judgment of 2 May 2019 concerning the applicant Ahmet Kadri Gürsel, the Constitutional Court considered that there had been no strong suspicions that the applicant had committed the alleged criminal offences. It noted in that regard that although the investigating authorities had argued that the applicant, in his capacity as editorial adviser, had been responsible for the news items and articles published in the newspaper Cumhuriyet, those authorities had not specified how his role – which had been confined to giving editorial advice – had had an impact on the newspaper’s editorial policy. The court found that, while the style of the article written by the applicant had been harshly critical, his remarks had not expressly incited others to commit violence or terrorist acts. The Constitutional Court further considered that the fact that the applicant had met with persons who had been investigated in connection with an offence linked to a terrorist organisation could not in itself constitute a ground for bringing charges. In that connection it pointed out that it would have had to be proven that the meetings had taken place in the context of an organisational activity. In the instant case it noted that the investigating authorities had not indicated for what purpose the applicant had met with the persons concerned. The Constitutional Court concluded by finding a violation of the right to liberty and the right to freedom of expression. It also made an award to the applicant for costs and expenses. Since the applicant had not claimed any compensation, submitting that the finding of a violation would constitute redress for the alleged damage, and since he had already been released pending trial, the Constitutional Court ruled that there was no need to take any additional action in his case.
The relevant parts of Article 19 of the Constitution read as follows:
“Everyone has the right to personal liberty and security.
...
Individuals against whom there are strong presumptions of guilt may be detained only by order of a judge and for the purposes of preventing their absconding or the destruction or alteration of evidence, or in any other circumstances provided for by law that also necessitate their detention. No one shall be arrested without an order by a judge except when caught in flagrante delicto or where a delay would have a harmful effect; the conditions for such action shall be determined by law.
...
A person who has been arrested or detained shall be brought before a judge within forty-eight hours at the latest or, in the case of offences committed jointly with others, within four days, not including the time required to convey the person to the court nearest to the place of detention. No one shall be deprived of his or her liberty after the expiry of the aforementioned periods except by order of a judge. These periods may be extended during a state of emergency or a state of siege or in time of war.
...
Anyone who has been detained shall be entitled to request a trial within a reasonable time and to apply for release during the course of the investigation or criminal proceedings. Release may be conditioned by a guarantee to ensure the person’s appearance throughout the trial, or the execution of the court sentence.
Everyone who is deprived of his or her liberty for any reason whatsoever shall be entitled to apply to a competent judicial authority for a speedy decision on his or her case and for his or her immediate release if the detention is not lawful.
...”
The relevant parts of Article 220 of the Criminal Code (“the CC”), which concerns the offence of forming an organisation with the aim of committing a criminal offence, provide as follows:
 “...
(6)  Anyone who commits an offence on behalf of an [illegal] organisation shall also be sentenced for belonging to that organisation, even if he or she is not a member of it. The sentence to be imposed for membership may be reduced by up to half. This paragraph shall apply only to armed organisations.
(7)  Anyone who assists an [illegal] organisation knowingly and intentionally (bilerek ve isteyerek), even if he or she does not belong to the hierarchical structure of the organisation, shall be sentenced for membership of that organisation. The sentence to be imposed for membership may be reduced by up to two-thirds, depending on the nature of the assistance.
(8)  Anyone who disseminates propaganda in favour of the organisation [formed with the aim of committing offences] by legitimising or condoning methods such as force, violence or threats shall be liable to a term of imprisonment of one to three years.”
Article 314 of the CC, which concerns the crime of belonging to an armed organisation, provides as follows:
“1.  Anyone who forms or leads an organisation with the aim of committing the offences listed in the fourth and fifth parts of this chapter [crimes against the State and the constitutional order] shall be sentenced to ten to fifteen years’ imprisonment.
Any member of an organisation referred to in the first paragraph above shall be sentenced to five to ten years’ imprisonment.
The provisions relating to the offence of forming an organisation with the aim of committing criminal offences shall apply in their entirety to this offence.”
Pre-trial detention is governed by Articles 100 et seq. of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”). In accordance with Article 100, a person may be placed in pre-trial detention where there is factual evidence giving rise to strong suspicion that the person has committed an offence and where the detention is justified on one of the grounds laid down in the Article in question, namely: if the suspect has absconded or there is a risk that he or she will do so, and if there is a risk that the suspect will conceal or tamper with evidence or influence witnesses. For certain offences, in particular offences against State security and the constitutional order, the existence of strong suspicion is sufficient to justify pre-trial detention.
Article 101 of the CCP provides that pre-trial detention is ordered at the investigation stage by a magistrate at the request of the public prosecutor and at the trial stage by the competent court, whether of its own motion or at the prosecutor’s request. An objection may be lodged with another magistrate or another court against decisions ordering or extending pre-trial detention. Such decisions must include legal and factual reasons.
Pursuant to Article 108 of the CCP, during the investigation stage, a magistrate must review a suspect’s pre-trial detention at regular intervals not exceeding thirty days. Within the same period, the detainee may also lodge an application for release. During the trial stage, the question of the accused’s detention is reviewed by the competent court at the end of each hearing, and in any event at intervals of no more than thirty days.
Article 141 § 1 (a) and (d) of the CCP provides:
“Compensation for damage ... may be claimed from the State by anyone ...:
(a)  who has been arrested or taken into or kept in detention under conditions or in circumstances not complying with the law;
...
(d)  who, even if he or she was detained lawfully during the investigation or trial, has not been brought before a judicial authority within a reasonable time and has not obtained a judgment on the merits within a reasonable time;
...”
Article 142 § 1 of the same Code reads as follows:
“The claim for compensation may be lodged within three months after the person concerned has been informed that the decision or judgment has become final, and in any event within one year after the decision or judgment has become final.”
According to the case-law of the Court of Cassation, it is not necessary to wait for a final decision on the merits of the case before ruling on a compensation claim lodged under Article 141 of the CCP on account of the excessive length of pre-trial detention (decisions of 16 June 2015, E. 2014/21585 – K. 2015/10868 and E. 2014/6167 – K. 2015/10867).
In its decision of 4 August 2016 (no. 2016/12) concerning the dismissal of two members of the Constitutional Court and its decision of 20 June 2017 (Aydın Yavuz and Others, no. 2016/22169) concerning a person’s pre-trial detention, the Constitutional Court provided information and assessments on the attempted military coup and its consequences. It carried out a detailed examination, from a constitutional perspective, of the facts leading to the declaration of the state of emergency. As a result of this examination, it found that the attempted military coup of 15 July 2016 had been a clear and serious attack both on the constitutional principles that sovereignty was unconditionally and unreservedly vested in the people, who exercised it through authorised organs, and that no individual or body could exercise any State authority not emanating from the Constitution, and also on the principles of democracy, the rule of law and human rights. According to the Constitutional Court, the attempted military coup had been a practical illustration of the severity of the threats posed to the democratic constitutional order and human rights. After summarising the attacks carried out during the night of 15 to 16 July 2016, it emphasised that in order to assess the severity of the threat posed by a military coup, it was also necessary to consider the risks that might have arisen had the coup attempt not been thwarted. It found that the fact that the attempted coup had taken place at a time when Turkey had been under violent attack from numerous terrorist organisations had made the country even more vulnerable and considerably increased the severity of the threat to the life and existence of the nation. The Constitutional Court noted that in some cases, it might not be possible for a State to eliminate threats to its democratic constitutional order, fundamental rights and national security through ordinary administrative procedures. It might therefore be necessary to impose extraordinary administrative procedures, such as a state of emergency, until such threats were eliminated. Bearing in mind the threats resulting from the attempted military coup of 15 July 2016, the Constitutional Court accepted the power of the Council of Ministers, chaired by the President, to issue legislative decrees on matters necessitating the state of emergency. In that context, it also emphasised that the state of emergency was a temporary legal regime, in which any interference with fundamental rights had to be foreseeable and the aim of which was to restore the normal regime in order to safeguard fundamental rights.
On 15 February 2017 the Commissioner for Human Rights published a memorandum on freedom of expression and media freedom in Turkey. The parts of this memorandum directly related to the present case are found at paragraphs 7989 under the heading “Detentions on remand causing a chilling effect”.
Furthermore, the relevant Council of Europe and international texts on the protection and role of human-rights defenders, including journalists, are set out in the Aliyev v. Azerbaijan judgment (nos. 68762/14 and 71200/14, §§ 8892, 20 September 2018) and in the Kavala v. Turkey judgment (no. 28749/18, §§ 74-75, 10 December 2019).
On 21 July 2016 the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the Council of Europe sent the Secretary General of the Council of Europe the following notice of derogation:
“I communicate the following notice of the Government of the Republic of Turkey.
On 15 July 2016, a large-scale coup attempt was staged in the Republic of Turkey to overthrow the democratically-elected government and the constitutional order. This despicable attempt was foiled by the Turkish state and people acting in unity and solidarity. The coup attempt and its aftermath together with other terrorist acts have posed severe dangers to public security and order, amounting to a threat to the life of the nation in the meaning of Article 15 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
The Republic of Turkey is taking the required measures as prescribed by law, in line with the national legislation and its international obligations. In this context, on 20 July 2016, the Government of the Republic of Turkey declared a State of Emergency for a duration of three months, in accordance with the Constitution (Article 120) and the Law No. 2935 on State of Emergency (Article 3/1b). ...
The decision was published in the Official Gazette and approved by the Turkish Grand National Assembly on 21 July 2016. Thus, the State of Emergency takes effect as from this date. In this process, measures taken may involve derogation from the obligations under the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, permissible in Article 15 of the Convention.
I would therefore underline that this letter constitutes information for the purposes of Article 15 of the Convention. The Government of the Republic of Turkey shall keep you, Secretary General, fully informed of the measures taken to this effect. The Government shall inform you when the measures have ceased to operate.
...”