The case originated in an application (no. 22289/08) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Ukrainian nationals, Mr Vitaliy Vasilyevich Berezovskiy and Mr Aleksandr Vitalyevich Berezovskiy (“the applicants”), on 26 April 2008.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants complained under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention of a violation of their right of access to a court.
On 8 November 2016 notice of the complaint was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The first applicant, Mr Vitaliy Vasilyevich Berezovskiy, was born in 1964. He died on 10 February 2014 (see also paragraphs 17-20 below).
The second applicant, Mr Aleksandr Vitalyevich Berezovskiy, is the son of the first applicant. He was born in November 1988 and lives in Odessa.
In June 2002 the first applicant lodged a claim with the national courts seeking payment, under the Status and Social Protection of Chernobyl Victims Act, of his annual health-improvement lump sum (five minimum wages). He also claimed the compensation allegedly due to his son, who was then underage (monthly payments of one and a half times the minimum wage payable to a child who suffered from the Chernobyl nuclear disaster) and compensation for non-pecuniary damage to be awarded to both himself and his son in equal amounts.
On 12 December 2003 the Suvorovskyy District Court of Odessa rejected the claim.
On 3 June 2004 the Court of Appeal of the Odessa Region upheld the decision of the first-instance court.
On 2 July 2004 the first applicant sent an appeal in cassation by registered mail to the Suvorovskyy District Court of Odessa, in accordance with the legal procedure provided for by Article 323 of the Code of Civil Procedure, pursuant to which a cassation appeal was to be lodged with the court of first instance that had considered the case.
On 5 July 2004 a letter containing the notice of cassation appeal was delivered to the Suvorovskyy District Court of Odessa. A certain E. signed the acknowledgement of receipt. The first-instance court’s stamp on the cassation appeal indicates 6 July 2004 as the date of receipt.
On 10 November 2006 the Supreme Court, acting in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Administrative Procedure, referred the case for examination to the Higher Administrative Court.
On 1 November 2007 the Higher Administrative Court rendered a ruling refusing to examine the cassation appeal on the basis that it had been lodged on 6 July 2004 and thus outside the statutory time-limit.
The first applicant appealed to the Supreme Court, asking it to quash the decision of the Higher Administrative Court. He explained that he had sent the registered letter with acknowledgement of receipt on 2 July 2004 and attached the pre-paid return slip on which the date of 2 July 2004 was indicated. He also attached the acknowledgement of receipt form indicating 2 July 2004 as the date of posting and 5 July 2004 as the date of delivery.
On 26 December 2007 the Supreme Court of Ukraine refused to reopen the proceedings.
The relevant extracts from the Code of Civil Procedure of 1963, as worded at the material time, read as follows:
Article 87. Expiry of the procedural time-limit
“... The time-limit shall not be considered to have been missed if, before its expiry, the claim or documents required by the court or monetary sums have been submitted to a post office.”
Article 321. Time-limit for lodging an appeal in cassation
“1. An appeal in cassation ... shall be lodged within one month of the date of pronouncement of the ruling or judgment of the appellate court ...”
Article 323. Procedure for lodging an appeal in cassation ...
“An appeal in cassation ... shall be lodged via the court of first instance where the case file is stored [which considered the case] ...”