The case originated in an application (no. 27122/10) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Ivan Vasilyevich Vinogradov (“the applicant”), on 26 April 2010.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the conditions of his detention were inhuman and unsuitable for a partially paralysed detainee such as himself.
On 16 May 2011 the above complaints were communicated to the Government.
The Government objected to the examination of the applications by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1960 and until his conviction lived in the town of Slantsy in the Leningrad Region.
.  In 1991 the applicant sustained a penetrating head injury, which involved the crushing of brain tissue. This trauma caused paralysis of the entire right side of his body, light speech impairment and post-traumatic epilepsy. To reduce the frequency of epileptic seizures the applicant was obliged to take Benzonal.
The following year the applicant was examined by a social security medical assessment board (бюро медико-социальной экспертизы) and certified as having the highest-degree disability on the grounds that he had lost the ability to work, to walk without assistance or to look after himself. Those findings were confirmed by the board during routine re-examinations in 1994, 1996, 1998 and 2000, when the applicant was granted life-long disability status.
.  In 2005 the applicant committed a homicide. On 16 April 2007 the Slantsy Town Court found him guilty of murder and sentenced him to seven years’ imprisonment in a highly secure correctional colony. On 15 August 2007 the Leningrad Region Court upheld the sentence on appeal.
.  On 16 April 2007 the applicant was taken to a police ward in the town of Slantsy.
.  Two days later he was transferred to remand prison no. IZ-47/6 in St Petersburg. On admission to that facility the resident prison doctor conducted a general medical check-up of the applicant and noted his disability. The applicant was allowed to take Benzonal supplied by his wife in order to minimise his suffering from epileptic seizures.
.  In the remand prison the applicant was detained in a normal cell block where he allegedly faced great difficulties in his daily routine owing to the lack of special arrangements, in particular when using the squat toilet and shared dormitory shower, which lacked handrails and non-slip flooring.
On 26 September 2007, when the sentence became final, he was transferred to correctional colony no. 7 in the Leningrad Region, where he was also placed in a cell designed for healthy inmates and, allegedly, continued to experience the inconveniences arising from his disability.
.  Having no licence to treat inmates with as strong a medication as Benzonal, the colony’s medical authorities offered the applicant two substitute drugs with similar anticonvulsive effect, but the latter refused, alleging their low efficiency and possible side effects.
On 3 March 2008, at his own request, the applicant was sent to Gaaza prison hospital in St Petersburg (“the prison hospital”) for an indepth medical examination and treatment. In the hospital he was subjected to various medical tests which showed that his health was stable. On 1 April 2008 the applicant was discharged from the hospital. In the discharge summary the supervising doctor mentioned that the patient was able to look after himself and to walk without assistance.
.  On 10 October 2008 the deputy head of the correctional colony ordered the applicant’s transfer to a special unit for disabled prisoners. According to the Government’s description, this unit had “enhanced housing conditions” and “less strict security regime”. It accommodated only disabled inmates, who were detained in a prison wing located close to the medical unit.
.  The applicant submitted that even after his transfer to the special unit he had not been provided with nursing assistance. Being unable to dress himself or perform hygiene procedures without assistance, he had asked his inmates for help in exchanging valuable prison products such as tea, coffee, sweets and cigarettes.
On 1 July 2009 the special medical board, at the request of the penal authorities, issued an advisory report confirming the gravity of the applicant’s disability.
On 4 August 2009 the applicant was examined by a medical board composed of the prison hospital management and a neurosurgeon. The doctors noted that the applicant’s health had remained stable, that he was able to look after himself, and that nursing assistance was not required for him. However, due to the gravity of the applicant’s brain condition it was decided to check whether his illness fell within the established list of illnesses warranting early release.
.  Three days later a special medical board confirmed that the applicant’s condition justified his early release.
It appears that the applicant remained in the prison hospital until 8 September 2009.
.  In the meantime the detention authorities applied for his early release on medical grounds.
.  On 28 August 2009 the Smolninskiy District Court of St Petersburg dismissed their application, citing the gravity of the applicant’s offence, the fact that he had developed paralysis and epilepsy prior to his arrest and that in detention his condition had remained stable. The decision was upheld on appeal by the St Petersburg City Court on 17 November 2009.
Between 1 February and 18 March 2010, at his own request, the applicant was admitted to the prison hospital for treatment, and on 16 March 2010 he was re-examined by a medical board, which confirmed his right to early release on medical grounds.
.  On 10 April 2010 the applicant was transferred to correctional colony no. 4 in the Leningrad Region. He was accommodated in a special unit for disabled prisoners. It appears that the conditions of his detention were similar to those in correctional colony no. 7. The applicant continued to receive Benzonal from his wife and refused to take any substitutes.
On 10 June 2010 the Tosnenskiy Town Court dismissed the application for early release on medical grounds, referring to the gravity of the applicant’s offence, the fact that his health status had already been taken into account by the court which sentenced him, and, lastly, to the fact that the applicant’s medical condition had not worsened in detention.
The relevant provisions of domestic and international law on the detention of disabled inmates are cited in Topekhin v. Russia (no. 78774/13, §§ 52-45 and §§ 54-58, 10 May 2016).
The rules on certification of a disability are set out in the Federal Law “On social protection of disabled persons in the Russian Federation”, no. 181-FZ of 24 November 1995. According to Articles 7 and 8 of the Law, a social security medical assessment board carries out an assessment for the purpose of determining the needs of the person under examination and the degree of his or her disability. The examination has to be based on a complex assessment of the clinical, functional, social, professional, psychological and other characteristics of the person concerned. The social security medical assessment board’s decision is binding for State authorities, local authorities, and private and public entities.