The applications concern allegedly insufficient compensation awarded by the domestic courts for excessive length of criminal proceedings against the applicants.
The applicants were born in 1973, 1977 and 1970 respectively. The first and second applicants live in Varna. The third applicant lives in Burgas. The first and second applicants were represented by Ms R.P. Mineva, a lawyer practising in Varna. The third applicant was represented by Mr S.K. Karov, a lawyer practising in Burgas.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Dimitrova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
Criminal proceedings were instituted against all three applicants on different dates.
In respect of the first and the second applicants, the proceedings lasted from 2001 until 2011 and ended with their acquittal following two levels of jurisdiction. The indictments against the first two applicants were submitted to court in 2008, the proceedings having remained at the pre-trial investigative stage until that time.
As regards the third applicant, the proceedings against him lasted from 1995 until 2008 and ended with his conviction following three levels of jurisdiction. The indictment against him was submitted to court in 2005, the proceedings having remained at the pre-trial investigative stage until that time.
All three levels of courts which dealt with the third applicant’s case at the trial stage noted explicitly the excessive length of the criminal proceedings against him and accounted for that in the sanction they imposed on him.
In particular, the Yambol Regional Court, sitting at first instance, held that the excessive procedural length had been a mitigating circumstance which justified fixing the punishment below the applicable statutory minimum which was three years’ imprisonment in his case. It accordingly sentenced the third applicant to two years’ imprisonment and suspended that prison term for a period of four years. Upon the applicant’s appeal, the Burgas Court of Appeal upheld the first-instance court’s judgment. Thereafter, the Supreme Court of Cassation (SCC) further lowered the sentence imposed on the third applicant to one year’s imprisonment, suspended for a three-year period. The SCC explicitly linked this decision to the fact that the criminal proceedings had been unreasonably long, in breach of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, and the applicant had not contributed to the delay.
All three applicants brought civil proceedings, seeking compensation for the excessive length of the criminal proceedings against them.
In respect of the first applicant, in a final judgment of 8 January 2014 the courts awarded him 1,000 euros (EUR) in damages for the excessive duration of the proceedings against him. The courts applied Article 6 § 1 of the Convention directly as relied upon by the first applicant. They found in particular that, although the applicant had not been kept in detention in connection with these proceedings, the mere fact that they had lasted so long had inevitably caused him fear and anxiety, which justified the amount awarded.
In the same proceedings, the first applicant also sought damages in connection with his unlawful prosecution, a claim he brought under section 2 (1)(2) of the State and Municipalities Responsibility for Damage Act 1988 (“the SMRDA”). The courts awarded him EUR 650 in connection with that complaint, finding that the State bore strict liability in cases where indicted individuals had ultimately been acquitted. In estimating the amount of damages due to him, the courts took into account the excessive length of the proceedings against the applicant, the limitations on his social contacts during that period and the family and other problems he had experienced in that connection.
In respect of the second applicant, in a final judgment of 14 January 2014 the courts awarded him EUR 500 for the excessive length of the proceedings against him (under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention as relied upon by him) and EUR 500 in respect of his unlawful prosecution (under section 2 (1)(2) of the SMRDA). In determining the amount of damages due to him as a result of his unlawful prosecution, the civil courts took into account the excessive length of the criminal proceedings against him, the limitations on his social contacts during that period and the family and other problems he had experienced in that connection.
In respect of the third applicant, the proceedings ended with a final judgment dated 26 March 2015. Having established that the criminal proceedings against him had been excessively lengthy, the civil courts awarded him EUR 1,350 in that connection. In doing so, the courts relied on Article 6 § 1 of the Convention in conjunction with section 49 of the Contracts and Obligations Act which provided for vicarious tort liability.
Under Article 239a of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1974, in force as of June 2003, individuals accused of committing a crime were entitled to have their case examined by a court or terminated, if the investigation had not been completed within one year, or within two years in serious cases. This provision was reproduced almost verbatim in Articles 368 and 369 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 2005 before it was repealed by Parliament with effect from 28 May 2010.