The case originated in an application (no. 66355/11) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Ivan Aleksandrovich Sevastyanov (“the applicant”), on 7 October 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Semkin, a lawyer practising in Tyumen. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 2 February 2018 notice of the complaints concerning the applicant’s alleged lack of access to legal assistance, inability to confront witnesses and obtain the attendance of witnesses in court, and absence from the appeal hearing was given to the Government, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1989 and lives in Tyumen.
On 6 April 2011 traffic police officers drew up an administrativeoffence record in which they indicated that the applicant had refused to undergo a breathalyser test.
On 28 April 2011 the justice of the peace of judicial circuit no. 2 of the Tyumen District of the Tyumen Region found the applicant guilty as charged and withdrew his driving licence for one and a half years. The justice of the peace relied on (i) the administrative-arrest record and other police documentation, (ii) a report indicating that the applicant had refused to undergo a breathalyser test, and (iii) written statements by S. and Ya. (who had been attesting witnesses of the events in question and had signed both the record prepared by the police and the medical report compiled in their presence). The justice of the peace also took note of the applicant’s decision to agree to the case being heard in the absence of his lawyer, who had been unable to attend the hearing.
The applicant maintained his innocence. He claimed he had not been under the influence of alcohol on 6 April 2011; that he had been a passenger in the car and not the driver; and that he had complied with the police’s demand and undergone a breathalyser test, which had confirmed that he had been sober.
On 9 May 2011 the applicant appealed. He argued that the justice of the peace should have (1) questioned S., Ya. and the traffic police officers in person and (2) ensured on his behalf the attendance of two witnesses to the events in question, P. and Sem. Lastly, he submitted that, contrary to the findings of the justice of the peace, he had not agreed to the case being heard in his lawyer’s absence.
On 27 May 2011 the Tyumen District Court of the Tyumen Region upheld the judgment of 28 April 2011. The applicant did not attend the hearing. Having noted that the applicant had been notified of the date and time of the hearing, the court opened the hearing of the case. It reviewed the material in the case file and questioned the police officer, St., who had instituted administrative proceedings against the applicant.