The case originated in three applications (nos. 81518/12, 81545/12 and 81547/12) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Ukrainian nationals, Mr Sergey Nikitovich Bibin (“the first applicant”), Mr Genadiy Nikitovich Bibin (“the second applicant”), and one Belarusian national, Anatoliy Frantsevich Vaytkevich (“the third applicant”) (“the applicants”), on 12 December 2012.
The applicants were represented by Ms V. Leonidchenko, a lawyer based in Russia. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the criminal proceedings against them had breached Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (a) and (c) of the Convention.
On 13 October 2014 notice of the applications was given to the Government. On the same date the Ukrainian Government were informed of their right to intervene in the proceedings, in accordance with Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 (b) of the Rules of Court. They did not avail themselves of that right.
The first and second applicants were born in 1962 and 1960 respectively and are currently serving a prison sentence in Azerbaijan. The third applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Belarus.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 3 July 2010 the applicants arrived in Baku by plane with a view to driving onwards to Tehran. During a search carried out at the airport on the same date, at approximately 9 a.m., by officers of the Ministry of National Security (“the MNS”), with the participation of two attesting witnesses and an interpreter, some electronic equipment was found in their baggage and their written statements (izahat) were taken down in Russian, a language they understood.
According to the arrest records (tutma haqqında protokol) drawn up by the officer of the MNS, the applicants were arrested on 3 July 2010 at approximately 2 p.m. and apprised in a language they understood of their rights, including the rights to have a lawyer of their own choosing or provided by the State, to remain silent and to refrain from making self-incriminatory statements. The applicants signed the arrest records and were questioned as suspects, with the participation of individually assigned legal-aid lawyers and interpreters.
On 4 July 2010 the applicants were charged with the criminal offence of large-scale fraud under Article 178.3.2 of the Criminal Code. On the same day the Nasimi District Court ordered the applicants’ detention for a period of three months.
On 16 September 2010 the second applicant lodged a complaint with the prosecuting authorities that he did not have effective legal and interpreter assistance.
On 25 September 2010 the investigator in charge of the case decided to provide the second applicant with the legal assistance of an additional lawyer and the assistance of an additional interpreter.
Following the submission of expert reports dated 31 August and 5 October 2010 stating that the items found in the applicants’ baggage were suitable for military purposes, on 8 October 2010 the investigator in charge of the case reclassified the criminal case under Article 206.4 (smuggling, committed by an organised group) of the Criminal Code and decided to continue the criminal proceedings against the applicants. The charges against them were based on the fact that the applicants, acting jointly, had smuggled electric relay and contactor systems, which could be used for military purposes, without making a customs declaration.
It appears from the forensic report of 5 October 2010 that the expert refused to reply to the question whether public circulation of the items in question was forbidden and required a special licence, stating that this question fell outside his competence and was a matter of legal interpretation.
On 11 October 2010 the applicants were charged with the criminal offence under Article 206.4 of the Criminal Code. They were served with copies of the indictments and signed the respective reports, drawn up by the investigator, in the presence of their lawyers and interpreters.
On 13 October 2010 the second applicant lodged a request with the investigator for a new forensic examination.
By a decision of 18 October 2010 the investigator dismissed the second applicant’s request, finding it unsubstantiated and holding that there was no need to conduct a new forensic examination.
The records of admission to consult the criminal case file drawn up by the investigating officer on 15 October 2010 show that the first applicant had completed reading the case file on the premises of the MNS, with the participation of his lawyers and interpreter.
The records of admission to consult the criminal case file drawn up by the investigating officer on 20 October 2010 show that the second applicant and his lawyer were provided with facilities to read the case file on the premises of the MNS between 3.35 p.m. on 12 October 2010 and 2.55 p.m. on 20 October 2010. The second applicant noted in handwriting that he had been able to examine six files relating to the criminal case, with the participation of his lawyer and interpreter.
The records of admission to consult the criminal case file drawn up by the investigating officer on 15 October 2010 show that the third applicant had completed reading the case file on the premises of the MNS, with the participation of his lawyers and interpreter.
No statement concerning translation of the documents in the case file or its incompleteness was entered by the applicants in their respective records of admission to consult the criminal case file.
On an unspecified date the second applicant lodged a complaint with the Nasimi District Court in court supervisory proceedings, alleging a violation of his right to defence. He complained in particular that he had not been provided with all the documents relating to the criminal proceedings in a language which he understood.
On 26 October 2010 the Nasimi District Court dismissed the second applicant’s complaint as unsubstantiated following his submission at the hearing stating that all the discrepancies he had been complaining of had been removed and that he had been provided with a translation of the entire case file. The second applicant did not lodge an appeal against the decision of the Nasimi District Court concerning his complaint.
On 26 November 2010 the Assize Court held a preliminary hearing. According to the transcript of the hearing, the prosecutor had submitted a written motion arguing that the court would have to examine evidence containing State secrets and seeking to have the trial conducted in camera. Having heard the other parties to the proceedings who had objected to the prosecutor’s request, the court considered it well-reasoned and decided to hold the trial in camera. No further explanation was given in the respective court order. The trial court also ordered to leave unchanged the preventive measure of remand in custody in respect of the applicants.
On 2 May 2011 the Assize Court found the applicants guilty of smuggling, committed by an organised group, and sentenced the first applicant to nine years’ imprisonment and the second and third applicants to eight years’ imprisonment each. The court held that the applicants, together with their one Iranian and two Azerbaijani accomplices, had planned to smuggle through the Azerbaijani border to Iran items which could be used for military purposes.
In the course of the proceedings before the trial court the applicants claimed their innocence and stated that they were retired military engineers by profession and had intended to travel to Iran in order to repair S-200 surface-to-air missile systems. It appears from the judgment that their conviction was based mainly on physical evidence, such as the notes and the equipment found in their baggage during the search carried out on 3 July 2010, and various expert reports.
On various dates the applicants lodged appeals against the decision of the trial court, complaining that they had been unlawfully convicted for smuggling equipment which was not in fact subject to any restriction on use and carriage.
On 27 July 2011 the Baku Court of Appeal held a preliminary hearing at which it decided, inter alia, to hold the proceedings in camera and to examine only questions of law.
On 26 October 2011 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the Assize Court’s judgment in respect of the applicants.
On 3 March 2012 the first applicant lodged a cassation appeal against the decision of the Baku Court of Appeal, complaining that the trial court and the appellate court had unlawfully deprived him of the right to a public hearing. He also complained that the case materials had not been served on him in a language he understood.
On 10 January 2012 the second applicant lodged a cassation appeal against the decision of the Baku Court of Appeal, complaining that he had been deprived of the right to a public hearing.
On 28 February 2012 the third applicant lodged a cassation appeal against the decision of the appellate court, complaining that the lower courts had incorrectly assessed the facts and misapplied the law. He also complained of the severity of the penalty applied.
On 6 July 2012 the Supreme Court upheld the Baku Court of Appeal’s judgment of 26 October 2011 in respect of the applicants without giving assessment to the first and the second applicants’ complaints concerning the proceedings in camera in the lower courts. The court found that the applicants had been provided with lawyers and interpreters from the very outset of the investigation on 3 July 2010 and that they had not made complaints about their lawyers or interpreters.
According to the transcripts of the hearings, the proceedings at all three instances were conducted with the participation of interpreters.
On 26 May 2014 the third applicant was pardoned.
Chapter LII of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCrP”) lays down the court supervisory procedure by which parties to criminal proceedings can challenge actions or decisions of the investigation authorities before a court. Article 449.3.3 provides that the accused (suspect) or his counsel can challenge actions or decisions of the investigation authorities on grounds of a violation of the defence rights of the arrested or detained person. The judge examining the lawfulness of the investigation authorities’ actions or decisions can quash them if he or she finds them to be unlawful (Article 451). The decision of the judge on the lawfulness of the prosecuting authorities’ actions or decisions can be challenged before an appellate court in accordance with the procedure established in Articles 452453 of the CCrP.
Article 299.3.2 of the CCrP provides that at its preliminary hearing the first-instance court shall in any event consider whether the requirements of this Code have been secured by the investigation authorities, including the accused’s right to defend himself or herself through legal assistance and to have adequate time and facilities for the preparation of his or her defence (Article 19) and the right to have the free assistance of an interpreter and access to the case-file materials in a language he or she understands (Article 26). Furthermore, where an order to conduct the main hearing in camera is made, the decision delivered at the end of the preliminary hearing shall provide, inter alia, reasons for that order (Article 301.2.12).
Article 391.2.5 of the CCrP provides that at its preliminary hearing the appellate court shall in any event consider whether the requirements of this Code have been grossly violated during the proceedings in the first-instance court. The decision delivered at the end of the preliminary hearing shall stipulate, inter alia, whether the public should be allowed into or excluded from the main hearing (Article 392.1.6) and can be challenged before a cassation court (Article 391.12).