The case originated in an application (no. 37809/08) against Georgia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Georgian national, Ms Tina Svanidze (“the applicant”), on 1 July 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr I. Kandashvili, a lawyer practising in Tbilisi. The Georgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr B. Dzamashvili, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant complained, in particular, about the allegedly unlawful composition of the first-instance court which had examined her case, about the violation of the principle of immediacy, and the lack of reasoning in the domestic court decisions.
On 8 September 2016 notice of the above complaints under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1935 and lives in Tbilisi. At the material time, she was the head of the gynaecological department at Mtskheta Hospital.
In the early morning of 22 September 2005 a patient, G.M., who had severe abdominal pain, was brought to Mtskheta Hospital. Two doctors who were on duty diagnosed her with post-abortion acute endometriosis and pelvic peritonitis. The applicant came to the hospital at 10 a.m. She reexamined G.M., whose medical condition had deteriorated in the meantime, and decided to move her to an intensive care unit. Subsequently, G.M. had two ultrasounds, following which it was decided to perform an urgent operation.
At 3.50 p.m. on 22 September 2005, before the operation started, G.M. died. According to the post-mortem forensic examination, the cause of her death was acute anaemia, which had developed as a result of a ruptured fallopian tube caused by an ectopic pregnancy.
On the same day a preliminary investigation into G.M.’s death was initiated to assess whether her death had been caused by medical negligence under Article 130 § 2 of the Criminal Code of Georgia (abandoning a patient in danger for no good reason and thereby causing death).
On 22 December 2005 experts from the National Forensic Bureau confirmed the results of the post-mortem forensic examination. The experts further concluded that, owing to a diagnostic error, G.M. had not been provided with an urgently required surgical intervention, and had died as a result.
According to the bill of indictment drawn up on 16 February 2006, the applicant and her two colleagues had been complicit in failing to provide a patient with a life-threatening condition with urgent medical treatment for no good reason, which had caused her death (Article 130 § 2 of the Criminal Code).
The trial at Mtskheta District Court started on 6 March 2006. Judge G.K., the first-instance judge, acting as a single judge, examined seventeen witnesses, including the experts behind the forensic reports, as well as the applicant and her two co-defendants. On 7 August 2006, after the examination of the evidence had finished, Judge G.K., acting at the request of the prosecution, decided to separate the applicant’s case from that of her colleagues. Her poor state of health and her inability to participate in the trial formed the basis for that decision.
On the next day Judge G.K. wrote a letter to the Chair of the Mtskheta District Court, informing him that the final decision in the case of the applicant’s colleagues would be delivered on 9 August 2006. In that connection, he asked for a substitute judge to be assigned to the case against the applicant, in order to replace him on the basis of Article 436 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”). On an unspecified date in September 2006 the Chair of the Mtskheta District Court was dismissed from his post and placed on a judges’ reserve list. On 16 October 2006 the President of Georgia appointed Judge P.S. as the Chair of the Mtskheta District Court, in accordance with section 17 of the Courts Act.
On 8 November 2006 the trial against the applicant resumed, with the new Chair of the Mtskheta District Court, Judge P.S., acting as a substitute judge. During the hearing of 21 November 2006 the applicant’s lawyer requested that Judge P.S. restart the examination of the case, in accordance with the procedure envisaged in Article 435 of the CCP (see paragraph 21 below). The prosecutor disagreed with the application. While noting that the examination of the evidence had already been concluded, he claimed that a rehearing would only delay the proceedings. Having heard the prosecution and the defence, Judge P.S. dismissed the application by the defence. He concluded that he had been assigned to the applicant’s case as a substitute judge, and thus in accordance with Article 436 of the CCP he did not have to restart the trial. He further noted that the case material was sufficient for him to continue with the examination of the case. The defence also filed an application with the court requesting the examination of two more witnesses on the applicant’s behalf. The defence claimed that those witnesses, as employees of Mtskheta Hospital, could provide more precise information concerning the circumstances in which the second ultrasound examination of G.M. had taken place. Judge P.S. rejected that application, finding it vexatious.
On 1 March 2007 the applicant was convicted as charged. She was sentenced to three years’ imprisonment, to be served after she had recovered her health, and was given a fine in the amount of 15,000 Georgian laris (GEL). The trial court concluded that the applicant had, without “good reason”, failed to provide G.M. with the medical treatment she had urgently required. Thus, an ultrasound examination of G.M. had not been organised promptly, and more importantly, despite noting liquid in the patient’s abdominal cavity, something which, along with other symptoms, was indicative of a critical condition, the applicant had failed to carry out an urgent medical intervention.
The applicant appealed. She complained that the judge who had convicted her had become involved in her trial only at the last stage of the proceedings, after the examination of the evidence had finished; hence, he had not participated in the examination of the witnesses or the consideration of the expert and other evidence. Moreover, according to the relevant order of the President of Georgia, Judge P.S. had only been appointed as a judge at the Mtskheta District Court on 29 August 2006. Consequently, he could not have served as a substitute judge in her trial, which had started in March 2006.
As to the substance of her conviction, among other things, the applicant appealed on the grounds that the first-instance court had overlooked her argument that there had been no anaesthesiologist available to start the operation at the moment when it had become obvious that a surgical intervention was necessary. Thus, the constituent element of the offence of medical negligence – “without good reason” – was not satisfied.
By a decision of 14 May 2007 the Tbilisi Court of Appeal upheld the applicant’s conviction. On the basis of the relevant forensic and witness evidence included in the case file, the appeal court concluded that the applicant had been late in organising a second ultrasound examination of G.M. Subsequently, when at around 1.00 p.m., G.M. had had an ultrasound examination, it had been noted that she had liquid in her abdominal cavity, which had implied that she was in need of an urgent medical intervention. However, G.M. had died at 3.50 p.m. without being provided with such an intervention. The appeal court dismissed as unsubstantiated the applicant’s argument that she could not have started a surgical intervention without an anaesthesiologist. In that connection, it relied on the evidence given by several doctors that no measures to prepare for G.M.’s operation had been undertaken between 1.00 p.m. and approximately 3.15 p.m., and that the applicant had made no request for an anaesthesiologist to be present.
As to the procedural aspects of the trial, the Court of Appeal concluded that Judge P.S. had been assigned to the applicant’s case as a substitute judge, and that in accordance with Article 436 § 2 of the CCP, as opposed to Article 435, he had not been required to restart the examination of the evidence. He had had court transcripts at his disposal, which had allowed him to proceed with the trial without rehearing the evidence.
According to the appeal court transcripts, the applicant requested again that two additional witnesses be questioned in connection with the circumstances of the second ultrasound examination. That request by the defence was dismissed by the Court of Appeal for procedural reasons. It concluded that the applicant’s above application had already been examined by the court of first instance.
On 3 January 2008 the Supreme Court of Georgia amended the applicant’s sentence, while confirming her guilt. In particular, she was discharged from serving her prison sentence on the basis of the Amnesty Act of 2007. At the same time the Supreme Court addressed the applicant’s argument concerning the unlawful composition of the first-instance court and dismissed it, making the following conclusion:
“It appears that, before the examination of the case was finalised at the court of first instance, a substitute judge was assigned to it. Because his judicial authority was interrupted, the case was transferred to another judge ... At the same time, in accordance with Article 436 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, it is not compulsory for a substitute judge to be present in the courtroom from the very beginning of the examination of a case in court, [thus] the fact that the first-instance court continued with the examination of the case had no impact on the lawfulness, well-foundedness and fairness of the conviction, and the requirements of Article 436 of the Code of Criminal Procedure were not breached.”
The relevant Articles of the 1998 Code of Criminal Procedure (as in force at the material time) read as follows:
“1. A court shall examine a case in one and the same composition. If one of the judges cannot take part in the proceedings, he or she shall be replaced by another judge and the examination of the case shall restart, except in cases provided for by Article 436 ...”
“1. By a decision of the chairperson of a court, a substitute judge may be assigned to a case ... [He or she] replaces a judge who withdraws from the court composition and the examination of the case shall continue.
If a substitute judge considers that there is a need for various court procedures in order to form [his or her] own personal view of the case, it is possible that certain pieces of evidence may be re-examined ...”
The relevant provision of the Criminal Code, as in force at the material time, reads as follows:
“1. A failure on the part of a medical practitioner to provide urgent medical assistance to a sick person with a life-threatening condition without good reason shall be punished ...
The same act which caused either serious damage to the patient’s health or the patient’s death shall be punished ...”