The case originated in an application (no. 13274/08) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Azerbaijani nationals, Mr Rafig Nazir oglu Tagiyev (Rafiq Nəzir oğlu Tağıyev – “the first applicant”) and Mr Samir Sadagat oglu Huseynov (Samir Sədaqət oğlu Hüseynov – “the second applicant”) (“the applicants”), on 7 March 2008.
The applicants were represented by Mr I. Ashurov, a lawyer based in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that their criminal conviction for publication of an article had amounted to a breach of their right to freedom of expression.
By a letter of 14 December 2011 the Court was informed of the first applicant’s death on 23 November 2011 and the wish of his wife, Ms Maila Bulud gizi Tagiyeva (Mailə Bulud qızı Tağıyeva), to continue the proceedings before the Court in the first applicant’s stead.
On 17 May 2017 notice of the complaints concerning Articles 7 and 10 of the Convention was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
By a letter of 9 August 2017, Ms Maila Tagiyeva and the second applicant informed the Court that they would be represented by Mr R. Hajili, a lawyer based in Strasbourg, following the death of Mr I. Ashurov and that the second applicant would also be represented by Mr K. Agaliyev, a lawyer based in Azerbaijan.
The first applicant was born in 1950 and at the time of the publication of the article lived in Baku. The second applicant was born in 1975 and resides in Lankaran.
The first applicant was a well-known writer and columnist, who collaborated with various newspapers and reviews writing under the pen name of Rafig Tagi. The second applicant worked as editor-in-chief of the Sanat Gazeti (Art Newspaper), a bi-weekly newspaper which mostly covered issues related to art, literature and theatre, and had a circulation of around 800 copies.
On 1 November 2006 an article entitled “Europe and us” (“Avropa və biz”) and signed by the first applicant was published on page 24 of the Sanat Gazeti newspaper, issue no. 16 (060). It was one of the articles written by the first applicant in a series of “East-West studies”. The full text of the article reads as follows:
“Europe has always made mankind think of it not just as a geographical space, but in terms of a moral-ethical habitat. Since European values are in fact an achievement of all mankind, it should not lead to haughtiness on the part of the Europeans. Although unfortunately this haughtiness manifests itself from time to time, even materialising itself as fascism or in the form of a militarised aggressive nation.
Of course, fascism was Europe’s unforgivable mistake.
It turns out that the ideas of freedom and humanism emerged in Europe and they are effective and real only there. It is because of the coincidence of its moral postulates with these ideas that Christianity became well set in Europe. No other religion may be spread, disseminated in Europe. Europe has always refused and refuses the deceitful humanist ideas of other religions, including Islam. Morality in Islam is a juggling act; its humanism is not convincing. The Islamic humanism criteria cannot even resist the dialectic materialist criticism that we learnt by heart, became accustomed to. Islam is a type of Eastern despotism and may be considered only as one of the modifications of despotism. Islam would never transform into a moral imperative in Europe; it is incapable of that. Although it was carried as a coffin on the shoulders of the Ottoman Empire throughout Europe, no place was found to put it down. It was again brought and placed in the East, in the direction of Mecca. A man worshipping Jesus Christ would never give any consideration to the Prophet Muhammad. In comparison with Jesus Christ, the father of war fatwas (müharibə fətvalarının atası) the Prophet Muhammad is simply a frightful creature (qorxunc bir məxluqdur). At best, Islam would advance in Europe with tiny demographic steps. And maybe there would be a country in which Islam would be represented by a few individuals or terrorists living incognito (tək-tək fiziki şəxslər, ya inkoqnito yaşayan terroristlər).
Europe is a lost opportunity of the East. The East did not perceive human freedom, or did not want to do so. Human freedom in the East crawls along as a problem of lowest priority. A man deprived of social and public freedoms is promised illusory happiness at the level of dark Islamic sects. The way to paradise decorated with calamities is portrayed as a way out of social mires. Islam has caused hypocritical working principles in structures of Eastern countries. Its taboo system has caused a full fiasco of the East, rendering worthless the few bright public ideas and thoughts available in it. Look, religious science in the Islamic world consists of only multiplication of these taboos and its further improvement.
The West is always in dialectical and the East in metaphysical conditions. Only false progressive visions are possible in the Eastern metaphysical public status. Against the background of forward leaps of the West, the East looks like it has jumped back.
All attempts of Azerbaijan at building a secular State result from European influence. In these sincere attempts the Azerbaijani people has completely proved that it is a real member of the European family. Our State relations with Islamic countries are tedious and reluctant and diplomatically insincere. Our thinking people consider Islam in Azerbaijan as a mandatory, necessary Eastern sign, the residue of violence. Historically, at least in our most recent history, the ‘sincere’ relations of Azerbaijani heads of State towards Islam mostly proceed from insincere ‘reigning’ interests. For them the Muslims had always been among significant obstacles to be cleared off and had significance merely as electoral strata.
As much as I am the Pope, Azerbaijani heads of State were Muslims.
The Azerbaijani Turk even remains European within the strict Shiite-Islamic regime of Iran. Oppressions and any kind of persecution, or nationalist assimilation attempts, bring no success to Persian chauvinism. You should pay attention, the immigration from the South [Iranian Azerbaijan] is mainly towards Europe. This psychological self-knowledge says everything with no need for proof or explanations; one should take advantage of it. Frankly speaking, the Eastern elements in the character of the Azerbaijani who is in substance European seem like a foreign substance, I would say, a defect in the Azerbaijani man.
The Eastern belonging adds nothing to the system of values of the Azerbaijani man.
Russia too did not want to isolate itself from the West; even if it was subjected to regular military aggressions from the West. Peter the Great, having not been pleased with both sides said his word confidently and resolutely. His attempts to graft Europe on Russia succeeded entirely. Russian culture and Russian literature are entirely European sourced.
All States of the world, if looked at thoroughly, are engaged in the interpretation of freedom to a certain extent. The problem of human rights is discussed there in terms of Europe, taking it as a specimen. Since only European values are inevitable factors of progress. Human rights are a social European invention and are acceptable only in the European model.
European culture succeeded in removing the barbarism from human nature. With crimes reduced to a minimum; there is no need already for this living factor. First of all, man was able to overcome himself in the European area, could move away from the Evil and get closer to the Good. Europe also passed through bloody revolutions, but having gained experience earlier than others, it says no to them again first of all.
The refusal of revolution is a superiority of the West over the East.
Only societies which do not need social and political revolutions are good.
By the way, the scientific and technical leaps in America and South-East Asia are also creations of European science. If there was no Europe, the world would probably have thought that the Sun rotates around the Earth. The East would have considered that the Earth is supported by bulls.
Europe already finalised its painful moral, ethical, historical and philosophical searches, and managed to bring them to a necessary, decent, useful condition. Today the European man reaps the fruits of centuries-old searches and thoughts. Since these searches and thoughts were always practical, realistic and logical. The real life of a man exists only with logical deeds. The lack of logic is a shortage of intellect and is uselessness. Logic is the most important attribute of wit. The thoughts of the Eastern man are as if not for living; it is unknown for what they are. The European philosopher does not act as a clown like the Eastern philosopher, is not inclined to Sufism, or madness, stupidity. Yes, the Eastern philosopher is a pure actor; all his activities are decorated with imaginations of miniature ornament for the sake of ideology. The Eastern philosopher says something for the sake of saying something. The aim, the way is unknown, or quite abstract. In any case, the intention is to direct a man towards the life hereafter. The school of Eastern philosophers is a system of limited thinking inside Islam. The Eastern philosopher is at best in the role of an Islamic missionary. It is necessary to say that the link with Islam is not at all a merit for a philosopher.
Nietzsche’s works were beautiful exactly in that they were far from religion. In the case of Fyodor Dostoyevsky, although the link with religion looks so attractive, it was not so important. Outside Christianity, Dostoyevsky would still have been more interesting, more fundamental.
... The East-West comparative analysis is mainly met with envy and intolerance, and sometimes with severe pressure and reactions. And this article, which I have suddenly completed, has been written taking into account all the pressure and reactions. Moreover, I would say it is to be continued.”
Following the publication of the article, the applicants were publicly criticised by various Azerbaijani and Iranian religious figures and groups. In particular, in November 2006 one of the prominent religious leaders of Iran, Ayatollah Muhammad Fazel Lankarani, issued a religious fatwa calling for the applicants’ death. The publication of the article also triggered protests in Iran in front of the Azerbaijani embassy and consulate.
On 11 November 2006 criminal proceedings were instituted against the applicants under Article 283 of the Criminal Code (incitement to ethnic, racial, social or religious hatred and hostility).
It appears from the documents in the case file that on 14 November 2006 the investigator in charge of the case ordered a forensic linguistic and Islamic assessment (məhkəmə-linqvistik islamşünaslıq ekspertizası) of the impugned article. In particular, he asked the expert to establish whether there were any elements capable of leading to incitement to religious hatred and hostility in the article “Europe and us”, and if so in which part of the article those elements appeared.
Report no. 11908, signed by J.M., the head of the religious expertise department at the State Committee for Work with Religious Organisations, was issued on 15 November 2006. The relevant part of the report reads as follows:
“The examined writings, submitted for assessment, consisted of Rafig Tagi’s article ‘Europe and us’ published on page 24 of the Sanat Gazeti newspaper no. 16 (060).
The author writes, in paragraph 3, that ‘Europe has always refused and refuses the deceitful humanist ideas of other religions, including Islam. Morality in Islam is a juggling act; its humanism is not convincing’. In fact, Islam is a humanist religion calling for high moral standards and good behaviour. The author tries to propagandise among the individuals hatred and hostility against Islam by using these sentences.
The author further argues that ‘in comparison with Jesus Christ, the father of war fatwas the Prophet Muhammad is simply a frightful creature’. The fact that the Prophet Muhammad had high moral standards and that he treated the people well was established in the Koran and in the works of various Western scholars. In the third verse of the Al-Qalam Surah of the Koran, Allah indicated that the Prophet Muhammad had high moral standards. The comparison between Jesus Christ and the Prophet Muhammad and the consideration that the one is preferable to the other seek to incite religious hatred and hostility.
The author also notes that ‘at best, Islam would advance in Europe with tiny demographic steps. And maybe there would be a country in which Islam would be represented by a few individuals or terrorists living incognito’. The author tries to prove by this sentence that Muslims living in the West are terrorists and Islam supports terrorism. However, terrorism is vigorously condemned in the verses of the Koran and the hadiths.
In the last paragraph the author argues that ‘the European philosopher does not act as a clown like the Eastern philosopher, is not inclined to Sufism, or madness, stupidity. Yes, the Eastern philosopher is a pure actor; all his activities are decorated with imaginations of miniature ornament for the sake of ideology. The Eastern philosopher says something for the sake of saying something. The aim, the way is unknown, or quite abstract’. By these words, he insulted the Eastern philosophers ridiculing them, claiming that they are mad and stupid. However, philosophers of worldwide renown such as Al-Farabi, Al-Ghazali and Ibn Rusd appeared in the East. This position of the author accusing all the Eastern philosophers of being clowns seeks to spread propaganda of hatred and hostility against Islam.
The above-mentioned considerations give sufficient grounds to conclude the existence of elements of actions leading to incitement to religious hatred and hostility in Rafig Tagi’s article ‘Europe and us’ published on page 24 of the Sanat Gazeti newspaper 16 (060).
Conclusion
There are elements of actions leading to incitement to religious hatred and hostility in Rafig Tagi’s article ‘Europe and us’, published on page 24 of the Sanat Gazeti newspaper 16 (060), in paragraph 3 in the sentences ‘Europe has always refused and refuses the deceitful humanist ideas of other religions, including Islam. Morality in Islam is a juggling act; its humanism is not convincing’; ‘in comparison with Jesus Christ, the father of war fatwas the Prophet Muhammad is simply a frightful creature’; ‘at best, Islam would advance in Europe with tiny demographic steps. And maybe there would be a country in which Islam would be represented by a few individuals or terrorists living incognito’; and in the last paragraph in the sentences ‘the European philosopher does not act as a clown like the Eastern philosopher, is not inclined to Sufism, or madness, stupidity. Yes, the Eastern philosopher is a pure actor; all his activities are decorated with imaginations of miniature ornament for the sake of ideology. The Eastern philosopher says something for the sake of saying something. The aim, the way is unknown, or quite abstract.”
On 15 November 2006 the Nasimi District Court ordered the applicants’ detention pending trial.
On 4 May 2007 the Sabayil District Court found the first applicant guilty under Article 283.1 of the Criminal Code (incitement to ethnic, racial, social or religious hatred and hostility, committed publicly or by use of the mass media) and sentenced him to three years’ imprisonment. The court also found the second applicant guilty under Article 283.2.2 of the Criminal Code (incitement to ethnic, racial, social or religious hatred and hostility, committed by a person using his official position) and sentenced him to four years’ imprisonment. It appears from the judgment that the applicants pleaded not guilty in the course of the court proceedings, arguing that they had not committed any criminal offence. The employees of the Sanat Gazeti newspaper and of the company which published it were questioned as witnesses before the court and stated that the impugned article had been sent by the first applicant to the newspaper and had been published following the authorisation of the second applicant. The court held that the passages of the impugned article referred to in report no. 11908 dated 15 November 2006 contained elements capable of leading to incitement to religious hatred and hostility. In that connection, the judgment relied on the conclusions of the forensic report, without making any legal assessment or giving further explanation. The relevant part of the judgment reads as follows:
“It was established by forensic linguistic and Islamic report no. 11908 dated 15 November 2006 completed in connection with that case that there are elements of actions leading to incitement to religious hatred and hostility in Rafig Tagi’s article ‘Europe and us’, published on page 24 of the Sanat Gazeti newspaper 16 (060), in paragraph 3 in the sentences ‘Europe has always refused and refuses the deceitful humanist ideas of other religions, including Islam. Morality in Islam is a juggling act; its humanism is not convincing’; ‘in comparison with Jesus Christ, the father of war fatwas the Prophet Muhammad is simply a frightful creature’; ‘at best, Islam would advance in Europe with tiny demographic steps. And maybe there would be a country in which Islam would be represented by a few individuals or terrorists living incognito’; and in the last paragraph in the sentences ‘the European philosopher does not act as clown like the Eastern philosopher, is not inclined to Sufism, or madness, stupidity. Yes, the Eastern philosopher is a pure actor; all his activities are decorated with imaginations of miniature ornament for the sake of ideology. The Eastern philosopher says something for the sake of saying something. The aim, the way is unknown, or quite abstract.’
Therefore, assessing the totality of the collected evidence, the court considers that it was fully proven by the statements from the accused persons and the witnesses, and the forensic report that Tagiyev Rafig Nazir oglu was guilty of committing the criminal offence provided for by Article 283.1 of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Azerbaijan and that Huseynov Samir Sadagat oglu was guilty of committing the criminal offence provided for by Article 283.2.2 of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Azerbaijan.”
On 18 May 2007 the applicants appealed against that judgment, claiming a breach of their right to freedom of expression as protected under Article 10 of the Convention. In particular, they argued that the first-instance court’s judgment had simply copied the conclusions of report no. 11908 dated 15 November 2006, without giving any consideration to the Court’s case-law relating to Article 10 of the Convention.
On 6 July 2007 the Court of Appeal upheld the judgment of 4 May 2007. The wording of the appellate court’s judgment was almost identical to the first instance court’s judgment and made no mention of the applicants’ particular complaint under Article 10 of the Convention.
On 31 August 2007 the applicants lodged a cassation appeal against the appellate court’s judgment, reiterating their previous complaints.
On 22 January 2008 the Supreme Court upheld the Court of Appeal’s judgment of 6 July 2007. The Supreme Court held in particular that it agreed with the lower courts’ findings, based on the forensic linguistic and Islamic report and the witness statements, that the applicants had committed the criminal offence provided for by Article 283 of the Criminal Code.
In the meantime, on 28 December 2007 the applicants were dispensed from serving the remainder of their sentence by a presidential pardon decree and were released from prison, having spent more than one year and one month in detention.
On 19 November 2011 when the first applicant returned home from work he was stabbed by an unknown person who fled from the scene of the crime. On 23 November 2011 the first applicant died in hospital. A separate application (see application no. 72611/14) concerning the circumstances of the death of the first applicant, in which various complaints under Articles 2, 10 and 13 of the Convention were raised, is pending before the Court.
At the material time, the relevant provisions of the Constitution provided as follows:
“I.  The Azerbaijani State is a democratic, secular, unitary republic governed by the rule of law. ...”
“I.  Religion is separated from the State in the Republic of Azerbaijan. All religious faiths shall be equal before the law. ...”
“I.  Everyone enjoys the freedom of thought and speech.
No one shall be forced to proclaim or to repudiate his or her thoughts and beliefs.
Agitation and propaganda inciting racial, ethnic, religious, social discord and hostility are not allowed.”
“I.  Everyone enjoys the freedom of conscience.
Everyone has the right to freely determine his or her attitude to religion, to profess, individually or together with others, any religion or to profess no religion, to express and disseminate his or her beliefs concerning his or her attitude to religion. ...”
Article 283 of the Criminal Code, in force at the relevant time, provided as follows:
“283.1.  Acts aimed at inciting ethnic, racial, social or religious hatred and hostility, humiliation of national dignity, as well as acts aimed at restricting citizens’ rights or establishing citizens’ superiority on the basis of their ethnic, racial, social or religious origin, if committed openly or by means of the mass media, are punishable by a fine in the amount of one thousand to two thousand manats, or restriction of liberty for a period of up to three years, or deprivation of liberty for a period of two to four years.
2.  The same acts, if committed:
2.1.  with the use of violence or the threat of use of violence;
2.2.  by a person using his official position;
2.3.  by an organised group;
are punishable by deprivation of liberty for a period of three to five years.
...”