The case originated in an application (no. 60042/13) against the Hellenic Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by fourteen applicants of Greek, Turkish, Nigerian and Senegalese nationality, whose names appear in the annexed list. They were represented by Mr K. Tsitselikis and Mr A. Spathis, lawyers practising in Thessaloniki.
The Greek Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent’s delegates, Mr I. Bakopoulos, member of the State Legal Council, and Mrs K. Karavasili, legal representative of the State Legal Council. The Turkish Government did not make use of their right to intervene (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention).
The applicants alleged that they had been detained in inhuman and degrading conditions, and that they had not had effective domestic remedies at their disposal.
On 4 November 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicants and the Government filed observations on the admissibility and merits of the application, in accordance with Article 54 § 2 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants were or still are detained in Chios Prison, either in pre-trial detention or serving prison sentences. The first to fifth applicants and the tenth and thirteenth applicants were placed in cell no. 9, the sixth to ninth applicants and the eleventh and twelfth applicants were placed in cell no. 5, and the fourteenth applicant was placed in cell no. 3.
The fifth applicant was transferred to Korydallos Prison on 10 September 2013, the seventh applicant was released on 29 October 2013 and the ninth applicant was released on 4 September 2013.
The applicants submitted that Chios Prison was overcrowded, resulting in a situation where each inmate was allocated approximately 2 sq. m of personal space. The prison consisted of six cells which each had fifteen beds and five mattresses on the floor, and three cells which each had ten beds. As regards the cells in which the applicants were held, their measurements were as follows: cell no. 3 measured 10 sq. m. and accommodated six detainees, cell no. 5 measured 40 sq. m. and accommodated twenty detainees, and cell no. 9 measured 20 sq. m. and accommodated ten detainees. The sixth, eighth and ninth applicants slept on the floor, which was standard practice for other inmates as well.
The applicants pointed out that the toilets in the cells were not partitioned off from the rest of the cells, and there was no hot water. Filthiness of the cells, in addition to overcrowding, exposed the inmates to contagious diseases and created various psychological problems, in respect of which no medical treatment was provided. Detainees lacked access to adequate dental care.
The applicants stressed that inmates were not sufficiently separated according to their health conditions or according to whether they were in pre-trial detention or serving prison sentences, as was required by the Penal Code.
The applicants also contended that they were confined to their cells for sixteen to seventeen hours per day, in the absence of any recreational or educational activities.
Meals, which were insufficient and of poor quality, were served in the cells and consumed on the beds.
On 29 August 2013 the applicants lodged a complaint with the Prison Board, arguing that the conditions of their detention were very poor, but did not receive any reply.
The Government submitted that Chios Prison consisted of nine cells, each furnished with a table, stools, a fridge, cooking stoves, wardrobes and a television. Cells were sufficiently ventilated and heated and had adequate natural light. Additionally, they were regularly cleaned and disinfected.
In respect of prison overcrowding, the Government argued that the prison had accommodated 142 inmates at the time the applicants had lodged their application with the Court, only slightly exceeding its capacity of 120 detainees.
All detainees had access to adequate medical care provided by the prison doctor. In case of emergency, or when a serious incident occurred, detainees were transferred to Chios General Hospital or Korydallos Prison Hospital in Athens. Those suffering from contagious diseases were held separately or transferred to hospital. The Government provided information showing that some of the applicants had had consultations with doctors in respect of various conditions.
There were fifty available places for detainees who wished to work. In addition, detainees had the opportunity to attend educational programmes or other recreational activities which were scheduled from time to time. Most of the applicants participated in some of the educational courses.
As regards prisoners’ meals, the Government submitted a menu from a week selected at random to demonstrate that meals were varied.
The relevant domestic law and practice is described in the Court’s judgment in Kanakis v. Greece (no. 2) (no. 40146/11, §§ 62-68, 12 December 2013) and the Court’s decision in Chatzivasiliadis v. Greece (dec.) (no. 51618/12, §§ 17-21, 26 November 2013).
The United Nations (UN) Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, Mr Manfred Nowak, visited Greece in October 2010. In his report dated 4 March 2011, he stated the following regarding Chios Prison:
“110. The prison consists of 6 chambers with 18 beds and 2 mattresses each and 3 chambers with 10 beds each. In addition, there is one cell for 2 people used for the elderly or sick and one cell for solitary confinement. The capacity of the prison is 120 but at the time of the visit 163 persons were being detained. Of all prisoners 52 were pre-trial detainees and 105 foreign nationals. There are 62 persons working at the prison in 4 shifts. The severe overcrowding had increased the problems with drugs and inter-prisoner violence. According to the director, the prison had been renovated and cleaned over the last weeks. A doctor came every Monday, Wednesday and Friday. The prison regime is as follows: At 7.45am the gates open and detainees can go to the inner yard; 8 am breakfast; at 11 the yard is closed but they can move freely inside the building; 11.30 lunch; 12 medicine; 12.30 head count and order to go back to the chambers; at 3 pm the chambers open again and from 3.15 to sunset they can go to the yard; 7.30 medication; and at 8 pm the gates close again.
The cells were very small and overcrowded. At the time of the visit, the cells were fairly clean although some cells had problems with cockroaches. Many prisoners complained about the diet and hygiene conditions. There were little recreational activities offered to the detainees and only 41 detainees could work at the prison which was decided by a special committee. The health care provided was inadequate and the doctor was young and inexperienced. Conjugal visits were not allowed and permission of visits was only granted for direct blood relatives but not for friends. The detainees stated that it was difficult to complain or be heard in case of arbitrary or discriminatory treatment. In comparison to other prisons, such as Kos and Komotini which were both much more overcrowded but taken well care of by their respective directors, the overall conditions of Chios Prison were fairly poor.”