The case originated in an application (no. 201/17) against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Magyar Kétfarkú Kutya Párt, a political party registered in Hungary (“the applicant political party”), on 16 December 2016.
The applicant was represented by Mr Cs. Tordai, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent at the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant political party alleged that its freedom of expression had been violated, in breach of Article 10 of the Convention, by the fact that it had been fined for having developed a mobile telephone application via which voters could post anonymous photographs of invalid ballot papers.
On 13 January 2017 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant political party has its registered seat in Budapest.
On 2 October 2016 a referendum related to the European Union’s migrant relocation plan was held in Hungary. The referendum was initiated by the Government and posed the following question: “Do you want the European Union to be entitled to order the mandatory settlement of non-Hungarian citizens in Hungary without Parliament’s consent?”
In the course of the campaign several opposition parties called on voters to boycott the referendum or to cast invalid ballots that would not count in the final tally but could still be interpreted as rejecting the idea of the referendum. On 29 September 2016 the applicant political party made available a mobile telephone application to voters (“the cast-an-invalid-vote app”) where they could upload, and share with the public, photographs taken of their ballots. It also enabled voters to comment on the reasons for how they cast their ballot. The posting and sharing of photographs were anonymous. The application was reported in major online journals.
On 29 September 2016 a private individual lodged a complaint with the National Election Commission (Nemzeti Választási Bizottság) about the application.
In a decision of 30 September 2016 the National Election Commission found that the application infringed the principles of fairness of elections, voting secrecy, and the proper exercise of rights (rendeltetésszerű joggyakorlás), and ordered the applicant organisation to refrain from further breaches of section 2(1)(a) and (e) of Act no. XXXVI of 2013 on Electoral Procedure and Article 2(1) of the Fundamental Law. Relying on a previous resolution issued in 2014, it held that voters could not treat ballot papers as their own [property], and therefore could neither take them out of the voting booths nor take a photograph of them. It held that taking photographs of ballot papers could lead to electoral fraud. Furthermore, although the principle of secrecy did not create any obligation on the voters’ side, it nevertheless did not entitle them to abuse their situation, bearing in mind that voting secrecy could only be maintained with their cooperation. The Commission concluded that the phone application was capable of discrediting the work of election bodies and tallying systems in the eyes of the public.
The applicant sought judicial review of this decision before the Kúria.
By a judgment of 10 October 2016 the Kúria upheld the Commission’s decision as to its finding regarding the infringement of the principle of the proper exercise of rights. The Kúria held that the purpose of the ballots had been to enable voters to express their opinion on the referendum question, and that taking photographs of ballots and subsequently publishing them had not been in line with this purpose. A ban on photographs and on publication had not infringed voters’ freedom of expression, since they had been free to express their opinions by casting their ballots and to share with others how they had voted. The Kúria overturned the remainder of the Commission’s decision on the infringement of the secrecy of the electoral process and on the discrediting of the work of the electoral bodies. It found that there was no regulation prohibiting voters from taking photographs of their ballot papers in the voters’ booths and that their identity could not have been revealed through the mobile telephone application.
Meanwhile, on 3 October 2016 the same private individual lodged a new complaint with the National Election Commission, in the light of the fact that the applicant political party had activated the “cast-an-invalid-vote app” on 2 October, the day of the referendum. The complainant maintained that by operating the mobile telephone application and by encouraging voters to make use of it, the applicant political party had infringed the principles governing the bona fide and proper exercise of rights, and also the principles of fairness and secrecy of elections.
In a decision of 7 October 2016 the National Election Commission reiterated its previous finding that taking photographs of ballot papers had infringed the principle of the secrecy of voters’ ballots, the fairness of elections, and the proper exercise of rights, and fined the political party 832,500 Hungarian forints (HUF – approximately 2,700 euros (EUR)). The Commission supplemented its previous reasoning by noting that the mobile telephone application calling on voters to cast an invalid ballot could have influenced voters and had thus constituted unlawful campaigning.
The applicant political party sought judicial review of this decision as well.
By a decision of 18 October 2016 the Kúria upheld the Commission’s decision as to the finding of an infringement of the principle of the proper exercise of rights. It explained that the purpose of the ballot papers had been for voters to express their opinion on the referendum question, and any other use of them had constituted a violation of the principle of the proper exercise of rights. The Kúria overturned the remainder of the Commission’s decision as to a violation of the fairness and voting secrecy and the principle of the bona fide exercise of rights. It reiterated its previous finding that the identity of the individual voters had not been revealed, and emphasised that the conduct of the applicant political party had had no impact on the fairness of the referendum. It reduced the fine to HUF 100,000 (approximately EUR 330).
The Constitutional Court declared the complaints inadmissible on 24 October 2016, with identical reasoning, on the grounds that the cases did not concern the applicant organisation’s right to freedom of expression. It reiterated the Kúria’s finding that although the case related to the freedom of expression of voters, this had not been infringed by the decision of the Election Commission, which had only found that the method used – that is to say uploading photographs to a mobile application – had not been in compliance with the obligation to exercise voting rights in accordance with their purpose. In the Constitutional Court’s view the applicant political party had merely provided a forum for voters to share photographs of their ballot papers or their intention to abstain from voting, it had did not itself expressed an opinion. Since the applicant political party had only complained about the restriction of voters’ right to freedom of expression, it had not been personally concerned by the decision of the Kúria.
The relevant provision of the Fundamental Law read as follows:
The relevant provisions of Act CCXXXVIII of 2013 on Initiating Referenda, the European Citizens’ Initiative and Referendum Procedure provide as follows:
“1. § (1) General provisions of the Act XXXVI of 2013 on Electoral Procedure ... shall apply – with the differences included in this Act – to the procedures falling under the scope of this Act.
(2) The National Election Commission may issue guidelines for the election bodies to promote a unified interpretation of the legal provisions relating to procedures regulated by this Act.”
Act XXXVI of 2013 on Electoral Procedure contains the following provisions of relevance to the instant case:
“(1) The following principles shall prevail in the application of the rules of electoral procedure:
Guidelines no. 12/2014 of the National Election Commission on taking ballot papers out of polling station and taking photographs of ballot papers provides, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“1.  Section 182 (1) of the Electoral Procedure Act provides that the voter places the ballot paper in an envelope and drops it in the ballot box; as can be seen from the grammatical and legal interpretation of this provision, also taking into account the protection of fair elections and the bona fide exercise of voting rights in accordance with their purpose, ballot papers are official documents whose purpose is to represent the choice of voters and to establish the results of voting.
Thus, if a voter treats a ballot paper as his or her own and takes it out of the polling station or takes a photograph of it before placing it in the envelope or dropping it in the ballot box, he or she infringes the principle of the bona fide exercise of voting rights in accordance with their purpose. Taking ballot papers out of the polling station, or taking photographs, videos, etc. of them, can also lead to electoral fraud, the prevention of which [furthers] the public interest in protecting the fairness of elections.
The use of ballot papers [in a manner] contrary to their purpose can also infringe the principle of secrecy of elections, as enshrined in Hungary’s Fundamental Law. The secrecy of elections also encompasses the secrecy of ballot papers; thus, taking photographs of voting or of ballot papers is in breach of the principles of the Act on Electoral Procedure. Voting secrecy does not only serve the safe expression of voters’ will, but the realisation of the voting procedure, in accordance with the rule of law and the principles of democracy. Thus, its importance goes beyond the conduct of individual voters. Obviously, voting secrecy does not create an obligation of confidentiality on the voters’ side, but the obligation to exercise rights in accordance with their purpose means that voters should not abuse the fact that voting secrecy can only be partially realised without their cooperation.
In the view of the National Election Commission neither the provisions of the Fundamental Law nor the provisions of the Act on Electoral Procedure mean that ballot papers would constitute the property of voters; therefore, they cannot treat ballot papers as their own [property] and can only use them for the purpose of voting. Voluntary participation in the voting procedure does not mean that a voter may take a ballot paper from the polling station.”
“In the Commission’s view ... official ballots do not constitute voters’ property ... Not even spoilt ballot papers can be at the free disposal of voters. The National Election Commission therefore finds the only conduct that is in compliance with the principles of the bona fide exercise of voting rights in accordance with their purpose and voting secrecy, as enshrined in Article 2 (1) of the Fundamental Law..., is if the voter, while casting his or her vote, does not treat the ballot papers as his or her own but as a means to express his right to vote and to establish the outcome of the voting process. Thus, he or she cannot take the ballot paper out of the polling station and cannot take a photograph with either a telecommunication, digital or any other device with the purpose of showing it to another person.
The purpose of these guidelines is to counteract electoral fraud (for example, through so-called “chain voting”) for the sake of the protection of the fairness of elections.”
Recommendation CM/Rec(2016)5 of the Committee of Ministers to member States on Internet freedom provides as follows:
“2.2.1.    Any measure taken by State authorities or private-sector actors to block or otherwise restrict access to an entire Internet platform (social media, social networks, blogs or any other website) or information and communication technologies (ICT) tools (instant messaging or other applications), or any request by State authorities to carry out such actions complies with the conditions of Article 10 of the Convention regarding the legality, legitimacy and proportionality of restrictions.”
Recommendation CM/Rec(2007)16 of the Committee of Ministers to member States on measures to promote the public service value of the Internet provides as follows:
“Member states should encourage the use of ICTs (including online forums, weblogs, political chats, instant messaging and other forms of citizen-to-citizen communication) by citizens, non-governmental organisations and political parties to engage in democratic deliberations, e-activism and e-campaigning, put forward their concerns, ideas and initiatives, promote dialogue and deliberation with representatives and government, and to scrutinise officials and politicians in matters of public interest.”