The applicant complained that the Slovakian authorities, having arrested him after he had crossed from Ukraine, had failed to inform him of the reasons for his arrest, in violation of Article 5 § 2 of the Convention. They had then returned him to Ukraine, where he had been detained in inadequate conditions in disregard of his alleged status as a minor, in breach of Article 3. He had been unable to participate effectively in the proceedings concerning his detention, and had eventually been returned to Afghanistan in the absence of an adequate assessment of the risks he had faced there, in breach of Article 3, Article 5 §§ 1, 2 and 4, and Article 13 of the Convention. Lastly, he alleged, under Article 34, that an NGO representative had been denied access to him in Ukraine, preventing him from lodging an application for an interim measure with the Court.
The applicant lives in Afghanistan. He was represented by Mr A. Maksymov, a lawyer practising in Kyiv who, at the time the application was lodged, was employed by the Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society (“the HIAS”) Representative Office in Ukraine.
The Government of the Slovak Republic were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková. The Government of Ukraine were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr I. Lishchyna.
The applicant alleged that he had been born in 1993 or 1994, whereas the authorities in Slovakia and Ukraine had recorded his date of birth as 14 January 1992 (see paragraphs 9, 18 and 26 below). In support of his claim the applicant submitted to the Court, together with his application form, a photocopy of his Afghan identity document, in the original language, measuring 6 by 7 cm, and its “unofficial translation” into English by a lawyer from the HIAS Representative Office in Ukraine. According to the translation, the field of the document marked “Date of birth and age” stated “age 8 years in year 2002”. The applicant also submitted to the Court a photograph which he considered showed that he looked like a teenager.
Prior to leaving Afghanistan the applicant lived in the Kunduz province, in the north of the country.
According to the applicant, his father used to work with the National Security Department of Afghanistan. Having arrested some drug smugglers, he was killed in about 2005 by unknown people, possibly associated with the Taliban. In 2010 the applicant’s maternal uncle received a threatening letter. The applicant was unaware of its precise contents, but his uncle deduced that the applicant “also faced a risk related to the killing of his father” and arranged for him to leave the country.
Still according to the applicant, in May 2010 smugglers took the applicant to Tajikistan, where he crossed the border using his passport. His passport was subsequently taken away by the smugglers. He then travelled onward to Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan and Russia. He stayed in Moscow for one month and then entered Ukraine in early July 2010. He stayed in Kyiv for three months. During his journey to Ukraine the applicant was accompanied by his brother-in-law (his sister’s husband). In Ukraine the applicant and his brother-in-law separated. The brother-in-law managed to cross into Slovakia three days after the applicant, travelled to Spain and applied for asylum there.
At 4.10 p.m. on 23 September 2010 the applicant was arrested by the Slovakian border police while crossing into Slovakia illegally with three other Afghan nationals. He had no identity papers.
According to records provided by the Government of Slovakia, at 7.25 p.m. on the same day the applicant was interviewed by border police officers to establish his identity and clarify the circumstances under which he had committed the offence of illegal entry to and residence in Slovakia. Interpretation from Slovak into English was provided. A certain Mr Zazai, apparently a member of the applicant’s group of Afghans, translated from English into Pashto. The applicant’s date of birth was noted as 14 January 1992. The applicant told the police that he wished to go to western Europe and live and work there, and that he was not requesting asylum in Slovakia.
The record of the interview was signed by a police officer and the interpreter from Slovak into English, but not by the applicant or Mr Zazai. The Government of Slovakia submitted that the applicant had been asked to sign the record but had refused without providing a reason. By contrast, two other members of his group did sign similar records.
On 24 September 2010 a decision to expel the applicant was issued. He was also banned from entering Slovakia for five years. He was given a Pashto translation of the guidelines on expulsion, summarising the relevant Slovakian legislation and procedures concerning expulsion of foreigners. According to the Government of Slovakia, the expulsion decision had been translated into Pashto. The document submitted by the Government is mainly in Pashto script. The parts containing general rules and quotes from legislation appear to be in that language, while certain case-specific details, such as the date and the country of destination, Ukraine, are written in Slovak.
At 2 p.m. on 24 September 2010 the applicant was handed over to the Ukrainian authorities.
The applicant alleged that, throughout his time in Slovakia, he had not received any interpretation services or information about the asylum procedure in Slovakia and had had no access to a lawyer. As he spoke no European language, he had tried to ask for asylum with the help of a fellow Afghan who spoke some French. However, the Slovakian officials had not reacted. Despite his efforts to talk to them and to tell them that he was a minor, they had recorded his date of birth as 14 January 1992. They had not provided him with any written decision concerning his return to Ukraine or explained to him any possible avenues of appeal.
Following his expulsion to Ukraine on 24 September 2010, the applicant was placed in the Border Guard’s temporary holding facility in Chop. He alleged that through other Afghan detainees who spoke Russian, he had informed a guard, whom he had taken to be the supervisor, that he was fourteen years old. He also alleged that he had told a representative of Caritas, an NGO, that he was a minor and wished to apply for asylum, and that the Caritas representative had relayed that information to the border guards but that no action had been taken.
According to the applicant, his conditions of detention in the Chop facility were unsatisfactory. The cells were overcrowded. Sometimes the detainees were not guaranteed daily exercise, and “had to make noise in order to be allowed their one-hour walk”.
On an unspecified date the Chop unit of the State Border Control Service of Ukraine (“the SBCS”) issued an order directing the applicant to leave Ukraine voluntarily.
On an unspecified date the SBCS applied to the Zakarpattya Circuit Administrative Court, seeking the applicant’s forcible expulsion from Ukraine and his placement in detention pending expulsion. According to the court decision (see paragraph 18 below), the applicant agreed with the SBCS’s application. Also according to the court decision, on 1 October 2010 the SBCS and the applicant had asked the court to examine the case in their absence by way of a written procedure.
On 13 October 2010 the court allowed the application and ordered the applicant’s expulsion from Ukraine and his detention pending expulsion. The court stated that the applicant had been born on 14 January 1992. It held that he had entered the territory of Ukraine illegally, had no means to return voluntarily and no relatives in Ukraine, and had crossed the border (with Slovakia) illegally. For the court, this showed that he was unlikely to comply with the order to leave the territory voluntarily.
The court also referred to a United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (“UNHCR”) publication entitled Сollection of Country of Origin Information and Legal Materials to be used in Refugee Status Determination (Збірник інформації по країнах походження і юридичних матеріалів для використання в процедурі визначення статусу біженця УВКБ ООН) published in February 2008, apparently in a Ukrainian translation. That publication has not been made available to the Court. According to the circuit court, the publication indicated that “Afghanistan was not a country where crimes against the person occurred” (Афганістан не є країною де вчиняються злочини проти осіб). It therefore concluded that in the event of return to Afghanistan, the applicant’s life would not be at risk. The court observed that the applicant had not lodged an application for asylum and did not wish to apply for asylum in Ukraine.
According to the applicant, he was not aware of the proceedings, he did not have legal representation and did not understand his rights in the proceedings before the court. He had signed a document waiving his right to appear in court without understanding its contents. The court’s decision was not served on him and no information was provided to him on how to appeal. He therefore missed the ten-day time-limit for appeal (see the relevant provision of the domestic law in paragraph 37 below).
On 14 October 2010 the applicant was transferred from the Border Guard temporary holding facility to temporary accommodation for foreign nationals and stateless persons in the Volyn Region, under the authority of the Ministry of the Interior at the time. He alleged that on arrival there, he had told the duty officer that he was fourteen years old. The officer allegedly informed the management of the facility but no action was taken.
On 20 February 2011 the Embassy of Afghanistan in Kyiv conducted a telephone interview with the applicant and on 22 February 2011 issued a travel document for him, indicating his date of birth as 14 January 1992.
On 19 October 2010 the applicant, along with three other Afghans, attended a counselling session with a lawyer from an NGO, a local partner of the International Organization for Migration. One of the Afghans provided interpretation. Information on how to apply for refugee status was provided. The applicant did not contest that the session had been held, but stated that he had no recollection of it.
On 23 February 2011 the applicant lodged an application for asylum in Ukraine. By way of reasoning he stated that he would be “immediately killed” if he were returned to Afghanistan.
On 2 March 2011 an officer from the Volyn Regional Department of the Migration Service (“the Regional Migration Service”) interviewed the applicant concerning his asylum application. The applicant stated that in Afghanistan he used to live in Kunduz, had been studying and had been supported by his maternal uncle. When asked what had led him to leave Afghanistan, he stated that his father had been killed by the Taliban four years earlier and the Taliban had then started threatening him. His uncle had received a piece of paper, the contents of which were unknown to the applicant, and had said that the applicant had to leave the country. Afterwards, his uncle had obtained travel documents for him with which he had had no trouble leaving Afghanistan. The applicant was then asked what was his country of destination and responded that he wished to get to London where his sister lived. He explained that he had travelled from Afghanistan to Tajikistan with his passport and an entry visa, but that the smugglers had then taken them away. He also stated that he had arrived in Ukraine from Russia and had travelled to the border with Slovakia through Kyiv. He had not sought help in Ukraine because the smugglers had promised to get him to London where his sister was living.
A questionnaire based on the same interview recorded the applicant’s answers to a number of standardised questions concerning his identity, history and background. It stated, in particular, that the applicant had been born on 14 January 1992, that his mother tongue was Dari and that he also spoke Pashto.
On 9 March 2011 the Regional Migration Service rejected the applicant’s asylum application as inadmissible (see paragraphs 34 and 35 below for the description of the two stages of the asylum procedure in Ukraine). The Regional Migration Service found that
(i)  the facts on which his application was based were manifestly unfounded, as he could not be defined as a “refugee” under section 1 of the Refugees Act (see paragraph 33 below);
(ii)  since the applicant was not a member of any political, social or military organisation and had not been connected with any violent incidents associated with race, ethnicity, religion or political views, he did not qualify as a refugee under the Refugee Convention;
(iii)  the fact that the country of origin had issued the applicant with a travel document demonstrated that he had benefited from protection in his country of origin, which, pursuant to Article 1.E of the Refugee Convention, meant that the Refugee Convention did not apply to him;
(iv)  the applicant had not applied for asylum while travelling through Tajikistan, Russia or Ukraine but had done so only after being returned from Slovakia to Ukraine. This showed that he had not intended to seek asylum in Ukraine but had meant to reach the United Kingdom, where his sister resided;
(v)  since the applicant had no identity documents, it was not possible to identify him or his country of origin.
According to the applicant, on 11 March 2011 in preparation for his expulsion to Afghanistan, he was transferred to Mukacheve, Ukraine, where the Migration Service’s decision of 9 March 2011 was notified to him.
According to the applicant, on 12 March 2011, a Saturday, an NGO partner of the UNHCR attempted to contact him and other Afghan nationals facing expulsion to provide them with legal advice. However, it was denied access to them, preventing the applicant from applying for an interim measure with the Court under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court.
On the same day the applicant was put on a train to Kyiv.
On 14 March 2011 the applicant was expelled to Kabul.
The applicant alleged that approximately three weeks after his expulsion to Afghanistan, some unknown people had looked for him at his home and left a threatening letter for him. His mother had arranged for him to leave Kunduz for Mazar-e Sharif and Kabul. Since that time, he had been forced to change his place of residence frequently for fear of the people who had killed his father, and had been travelling frequently between Mazar-e Sharif and Kabul.
Under section 1 a refugee was defined as follows:
“... a person who is not a citizen of Ukraine and who, due to a wellfounded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is unable to avail himself of the protection of that country or, due to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of such protection, or who, not having a nationality and being outside the country of his former permanent residence, is unable or unwilling to return to it because of the said fear ...”
Sections 12 to 14 and 16 of the Act provided for a two-stage asylum procedure: admissibility and merits stages. The regional migration services were responsible for examining the initial applications for asylum and decided on the admissibility. If a regional migration service found an application admissible, it instituted proceedings on the merits and made a recommendation to the State Committee for Nationalities and Religions on the merits of the application. The Committee then took a final decision to grant or refuse asylum. Asylum-seekers could appeal against a negative decision taken by the regional migration service either to the Committee or to the courts. The lodging of an appeal constituted grounds for registration of the appellant’s temporary residence in Ukraine.
Section 12 provided that examination of an asylum application was to begin with an interview conducted in a language the asylum-seeker understood, if necessary with the assistance of an interpreter. An inadmissibility decision was to be taken if the applicant did not meet the definition of a refugee provided for in section 1 of the Act (see paragraph 33 above) or if an application was abusive: based on a false identity or lodged by an individual whose previous application had been rejected, unless circumstances had changed.
Section 32 of the Act laid down the procedure for expulsion of foreign nationals and stateless persons from Ukraine. It listed the grounds for compulsory expulsion, which included a serious breach of the legislation concerning foreign nationals and stateless persons, and provided that foreign nationals and stateless persons could be detained at temporary accommodation facilities for the period needed to organise their removal, which was not to exceed six months.
Under Article 186 of the Code an appeal had to be lodged within ten days of the pronouncement of a judgment. If the judgment was delivered in writing, an appeal had to be lodged within ten days of receipt by the applicant of a copy of the judgment.
The Agreement, which entered into force on 1 January 2010, reads in the relevant parts as follows:
Article 3
Readmission of third-country nationals and stateless persons
“1.  The requested State, upon application by the requesting State and without further formalities other than those provided for by this Agreement, shall readmit to its territory third-country nationals or stateless persons which do not, or no longer, fulfill the conditions in force for entry to or stay on the territory of the requesting State provided that ... such persons:
...
(a)  illegally entered the territory of the Member States coming directly from the territory of Ukraine or illegally entered the territory of Ukraine coming directly from the territory of the Member States;”
The report on the 2007 CPT visit to Ukraine (CPT/Inf (2009) 15), published on 19 May 2009, reads in the relevant parts as follows:
“A.  Establishments under the authority of the State Border Service
...
Turning to access to a lawyer, it was limited to visits by pro-bono lawyers from NGOs, who helped foreign nationals file asylum applications and provided them with information on the relevant legal procedures. However, the delegation was concerned to learn that at Chop, the NGO lawyers had limited access to detained persons (i.e. they could only meet persons whose names they already knew). It should also be noted that the provision of legal consultations was hampered by the lack of proper interpretation at the Border Guard detention facilities (see also paragraph 41).
...
The delegation noted that many foreign nationals lacked information on their legal status, the procedure applicable to them and their rights (including the right to lodge complaints). The internal regulations which were posted in the detention areas were, as a rule, available only in Ukrainian. Some other information materials (e.g. the Law on refugees) were also available, but only in French or Russian; Border Guard staff indicated that they had run out of materials in other languages. A positive aspect was the involvement of NGOs in the provision of assistance and information to foreign nationals, on the basis of agreements with the State Border Service. However, the fact that outside bodies were helping foreign detainees does not discharge the State from its responsibility to provide information and assistance to such detainees.
The major complaint of foreign nationals detained was the lack of knowledge of what was happening in their case and how long they would spend in custody. This uncertainty greatly exacerbated the experience of confinement and led to tensions. The observations made during the visit suggest that Border Guard staff need to be more attentive to these problems.
As regards the provision of interpretation, a number of detained foreign nationals complained that, following their apprehension, they had been asked to sign documents in Ukrainian without understanding their content. Even when interpretation had been available, the information provided was allegedly not always comprehensible. The delegation learned that there was a shortage of local interpreters speaking the less common languages; to overcome the problem, plans were being made to set up facilities for distance interpretation at the main border units.”
The UNHCR Position on the Situation of Asylum in Ukraine in the Context of Return of Asylum-Seekers, dated October 2007, reads, in so far as relevant:
“13.  Under the Refugee Law, the Regional Migration Services are responsible for considering the initial applications for asylum and can decide on the admissibility. If the Regional Migration Service decides to admit a case into the procedure, it will then consider the substance and make a recommendation to the [State Committee for Nationalities and Religions]. The SCNR then takes a decision on the case. The SCNR may approve the RMS recommendation or may take a different approach. Asylumseekers can appeal a negative decision from the Regional Migration Service either to the SCNR or to the courts.
...
Regarding the quality of the asylum procedure, one of the main problems in Ukraine’s asylum management (as stated in paragraph 13 above) has been the constant reform of the asylum institutions which have been remodelled by successive governments, and in particular of the central executive body. In March 2007, by decree of the Cabinet of Ministers (No. 201), the State Committee for Nationalities and Religions (previously the State Committee for Nationalities and Migration) became the authorized central body of executive power to deal with asylum issues. Its activities are directed and coordinated by the Cabinet of Ministers through the Vice Prime Minister of Ukraine.
...
With regard to reception standards, neither asylum-seekers nor refugees have adequate access to State-sponsored accommodation, material assistance or employment. According to Article 20 of the Refugee Law, only recognized refugees are eligible for financial aid and accommodation. In Ukraine, there is only one temporary accommodation centre for asylum-seekers and refugees currently in operation. It has a capacity of up to 250 places. According to Article 7 of the Refugee Law, the Regional Migration Services should determine places for temporary accommodation and generally facilitate the provision of housing to refugees and asylum-seekers. In practice, however, the Regional Migration Services are unable to provide such services. Instead, refugees and asylum-seekers have to rent accommodation from private owners. As “foreigners”, the rents requested from them are much higher than those charged to nationals. Rents for private accommodation, especially in the cities, are high and continue to increase. As a result, many refugees are obliged to spend almost their complete income on accommodation. Many remain homeless or live in sub-standard conditions, risking their physical and psychological health.
...
The overall situation motivates some asylum-seekers to try to leave in search of better protection elsewhere. They are often apprehended for attempting to cross illegally the Western border of Ukraine. Detention has therefore been on the increase. Although detention conditions have improved in recent years, they are still poor due to the ever-growing number of irregular migrants and difficulties of the State to cope with the increased numbers. Asylum-seekers are detained jointly with other foreigners and remain in detention for protracted periods. This type of administrative detention may amount to a denial to the right to seek asylum.
...
... UNHCR advises States, to refrain from returning third country asylumseekers to Ukraine as at present no assurances can be given that the persons in question: a) would be readmitted, b) would have access to a fair and efficient refugee status determination procedure, c) would be treated in accordance with international refugee standards or d) that there would be effective protection against refoulement.”
In a 124-page report published in December 2010 and entitled “Buffeted in the Borderland: The Treatment of Migrants and Asylum Seekers in Ukraine”, Human Rights Watch (“HRW”) described the results of their research on the experience of migrants and asylum-seekers returned to Ukraine from Hungary and Slovakia.
According to the report, most of the fifty people who were interviewed and who had been returned to Ukraine from Slovakia or Hungary said they had asked for asylum upon arrival in Slovakia or Hungary, but that their requests had been ignored and they had been swiftly expelled back to Ukraine.
The report deplores the fact that in December 2009 the Slovakian Ministry of the Interior abrogated an agreement with UNHCR and the Human Rights League which since 2007 had permitted NGO lawyers to monitor return procedures at the border.
Concerning the detention of asylum-seekers in Ukraine, the report notes that many of the concerns previously noted by HRW have been addressed. In particular, the material conditions at the centres have improved, all of the facilities visited by the HRW in 2010 looked clean and well-ordered and none were overcrowded. Most of the detainees interviewed in most locations had no complaints regarding lack of hygiene or overcrowding. However, former detainees of the temporary detention facility at Chop indicated that the institution was sometimes overcrowded. The most frequent complaints were about the food, both quality and quantity, and lack of access to lawyers, telephones, the Internet and television. HRW also observed that certain other problems persisted: particularly, access to the asylum procedure; detention of children; mixing of children with adults; corruption; and the disproportionate use of migrant detention in general.
According to the report, migration detainees in Ukraine had no consistent, predictable access to a judge or other authority. Nor did they have access to legal representation to enable them to challenge their detention. Furthermore, there was generally no individualised assessment of the necessity of detaining migrants or asylum-seekers.
The UNHCR’s Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Afghanistan published on 17 December 2010, read, insofar as relevant:
“I.  Introduction
...
UNHCR considers that individuals with the profiles outlined below require a particularly careful examination of possible risks. These risk profiles, while not necessarily exhaustive, include (i) individuals associated with, or perceived as supportive of, the Afghan Government...
In light of the worsening security environment in certain parts of the country and the increasing number of civilian casualties UNHCR considers that the situation can be characterized as one of generalized violence in Helmand, Kandahar, Kunar, and parts of Ghazni and Khost provinces. Therefore, Afghan asylum-seekers formerly residing in these areas may be in need of international protection under broader international protection criteria, including complementary forms of protection. In addition, given the fluid and volatile nature of the conflict, asylum applications by Afghans claiming to flee generalized violence in other parts of Afghanistan should each be assessed carefully, in light of the evidence presented by the applicant and other current and reliable information on the place of former residence. This latter determination will obviously need to include assessing whether a situation of generalized violence exists in the place of former residence at the time of adjudication.
UNHCR generally considers internal flight as a reasonable alternative where protection is available from the individual’s own extended family, community or tribe in the area of prospective relocation. Single males and nuclear family units may, in certain circumstances, subsist without family and community support in urban and semi-urban areas with established infrastructure and under effective Government control. Given the breakdown in the traditional social fabric of the country caused by decades of war, massive refugee flows, and growing internal migration to urban areas, a case-by-case analysis will, nevertheless, be necessary.
...
Eligibility for International Protection
...
Potential Risk Profiles
Individuals Associated with, or Perceived as Supportive of, the Government and the International Community, Including the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
There is a systematic and sustained campaign by armed anti-Government groups to target civilians associated with, or perceived as supporting, the Afghan Government or the international community, particularly in areas where such groups are active.
...
The majority of targeted attacks on civilians by armed anti-Government groups have occurred in those groups’ strongholds. However the number of targeted assassinations and executions of civilians has also increased in other parts of the country previously considered more secure. In the south-eastern and central regions, the number of assassinations and executions allegedly committed by armed anti-Government groups in 2010 has increased in comparison to 2009. Such targeted attacks rose dramatically in parts of the southern region, particularly in Kandahar, where the Taliban have been conducting a systematic and targeted assassination campaign since the beginning of 2010. An average of 21 assassinations per week (compared to seven per week during the same period in 2009) was recorded from June to mid-September 2010, mostly in the southern and south-eastern regions.
UNHCR considers that persons associated with, or perceived as supportive of, the Government and the international community and forces, including Government officials, Government-aligned tribal and religious leaders, judges, teachers and workers on reconstruction/development projects, may, depending on the individual circumstances of the case, be at risk on account of their (imputed) political opinion, particularly in areas where armed anti-Government groups are operating or have control.
...
Eligibility Under Broader International Protection Criteria, Including Complementary Forms of Protection
...
Civilian casualties
...
In the first half of 2010, suicide attacks caused 183 civilian deaths, more than half of which occurred in the southern region; this represents a 20 percent increase compared to the same period in 2009.
Although during the first half of 2010 armed anti-Government groups predominantly targeted military objectives, IEDs and suicide attacks tactics were also used in civilian areas, including along roads used by civilians, around government buildings, outside hotels, in busy markets and in commercial areas.
Notwithstanding sustained efforts to clear mines and UXOs in the last decade and a steady decrease in the number of Afghan victims, mines and explosive remnants cause, on average, 42 casualties per month, a large majority of who are children. In addition to causing loss of life and serious injury, mine contamination has prevented livelihood activities, including by blocking access to agricultural land, water, health and education.256
A further analysis by UNHCR of reported incidents of civilian casualties during the period from 1 July 2010 to 8 October 2010 reveals that the provinces most affected by indiscriminate conflict- related violence are Helmand and Kandahar in the southern region and Kunduz in the north-eastern region.
...
Conflict-Induced Displacements and Voluntary Returns
Increasing insecurity and violence in certain parts of Afghanistan, resulting from the fighting between anti-Government groups and pro-Government forces, continue to cause significant population displacements. The number of conflict-induced IDPs continues to rise and displacement is largely taking place in the southern and western regions of Afghanistan...
...
While there has been an increase in conflict-induced displacement in Afghanistan, it should be noted that voluntary returns, particularly from Pakistan and Iran, are also increasing. Between March and October 2010, over 100,000 Afghans returned, double the number from the same period in 2009. The reasons for return are several, and include: (i) the perception that the security situation in some provinces has improved; (ii) economic factors and (iii) the increased insecurity and natural disasters in the former settlement areas in Pakistan. While thousands of Afghans returned to their home areas, nearly one third currently reside in informal IDP settlements or urban areas in Afghanistan. Some of these settlements are located in the provinces of Nagarhar, Laghman and Kunar, which are experiencing fluctuating but still significant levels of civilian casualties and security incidents. It should be noted that many returns are occurring in the context of deteriorating conditions for Afghans outside the country rather than significant improvements in the security and human rights conditions in Afghanistan.”