The case originated in an application (no. 60371/15) against the Kingdom of Norway lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by A.S. (“the applicant”), a Polish national who lives in O. The applicant, who was granted legal aid, was represented before the Court by Ms N. Hallén, a lawyer practising in Oslo. The President of the Section to which the case had initially been assigned acceded to the applicant’s request not to have her name disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The Norwegian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Emberland of the Attorney General’s Office (Civil Matters) as their Agent, with Ms H.L. Busch as associate.
The applicant alleged that the domestic authorities, by refusing to terminate the foster care placement of her child, X, and by not allowing her to have contact with him or information about his whereabouts, had violated both her and her child’s right to respect for their family life under Article 8 of the Convention.
On 1 April 2016 the Government were given notice of the above complaint and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. In the Court’s letters of 11 September 2019, the parties were invited to make any submissions they might wish on the possible relevance of the Grand Chamber’s judgment in the case of Strand Lobben and Others v. Norway ([GC], no. 37283/13) to the instant case. Both parties made additional submissions further to that invitation.
Written submissions were also received from the Government of Poland, who made use of their right to intervene in the proceedings as a third party under Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1968 and moved to Norway in 1988. In December 2009 she gave birth to X, a boy, following artificial insemination. X has no registered father and the applicant has sole parental responsibility for him. At birth the baby was described as dysmature.
From April 2010, when X was a little under four months old, child welfare services received a number of notifications of concern (bekymringsmeldinger) from health visitors at the municipal health clinic (helsestasjon) and the applicant’s family, concerning, inter alia, lack of interaction between the applicant and X. Based on their enquiries, and after attempting a number of assistance and guidance measures, X was ultimately placed in an emergency foster home on 27 March 2012.
In a decision of 18 September 2012 by the County Social Welfare Board (fylkesnemnda for barnevern og sosiale saker), X was placed in foster care. The Board assumed that the placement would be long-term (plasseringen ... antas å bli langvarig). This entailed to the Board that the purpose of contact sessions was for X to know his roots (ha kjennskap til sitt opphav), not to maintain an attachment to the applicant. In addition, X was particularly vulnerable and had had negative reactions to contact with the applicant. For essentially those reasons, the applicant’s contact rights were set at two hours twice a year, under supervision.
The care order was unanimously confirmed by the City Court (tingrett) on 25 February 2013. The City Court found that there were pervasive and extensive deficiencies in the applicant’s ability to provide care, and that for a long time X had been subjected to extensive and serious neglect in respect of both the physical and emotional care which he received. It stated that it agreed with the municipal child welfare services that one should aim for a long-term placement in care (det bør tas sikte på en langvarig omsorgsovertakelse), but that it could not at that time say whether a full adoption would be better in the long-term. On the issue of contact rights, the City Court stated, inter alia, that regard had to be had to the long-term nature of the placement in care, including that return of X to the applicant’s care was not an aim at the time (tilbakeføring [er] per i dag ikke ... en målsetning). The purpose of contact would therefore be for X to maintain his knowledge of his biological mother (opprettholde sitt kjennskap til sin biologiske mor). In conclusion, the applicant was granted the right to have contact with X – under the supervision of the child welfare services – for one hour twice a year.
In the spring of 2014 the applicant demanded that the foster care placement be terminated, or, in the alternative, that she be granted extended contact rights.
On 5 November 2014 the County Social Welfare Board, composed of one lawyer qualified to act as a professional judge, one psychologist and one lay person, rejected the applicant’s request, following an oral hearing held over two days where eleven witnesses were heard. The applicant was also refused contact rights, and it was decided that she should not be entitled to have information about X’s whereabouts.
On 21 November 2014 the applicant brought a case before the City Court, which was composed of one professional judge, one expert (a psychologist) and one lay person. The court heard the case on 2 and 3 March 2015. The applicant attended the hearing and gave testimony. Fourteen witnesses were heard, including the applicant’s general practitioner (GP), her psychiatrist, a psychologist who had counselled her, and two psychologists whom she had engaged as private experts in the case. Prior to the hearing, on 30 January and 9 February 2015 respectively the City Court had decided that it was not necessary to appoint its own expert or facilitate the applicant’s two privately engaged experts’ observations of the applicant and X together. Both decisions were in line with the municipality’s arguments.
In its judgment of 27 March 2015 the City Court found that the applicant would not be able to provide X with proper care either at that time or in the future, and it therefore declined her application for the foster care placement to be discontinued.
The court based its assessment on the grounds that X was a vulnerable child with special care needs. X had been two years and three months old when he had been placed in an emergency foster home. Up until then, he had been in his mother’s care. When he had been taken into care in 2012, he had been described as having a low level of cognitive, motor and linguistic functioning; he had been emotionally flat, unable to express his own needs, and had had little expectation of interaction with others. He had developed a serious eating disorder, and had had patterns of compulsive behaviour and an abnormally great need for sleep. In a report from an outpatient clinic of 29 August 2012, it had been indicated that X’s symptoms were consistent with pervasive developmental disorders. The symptoms had been partly on the autism spectrum. However, a later assessment at a hospital’s child assessment unit in December 2012 had concluded that he did not have an ordinary autistic disorder. Since the boy had moved into the foster home in March 2013, there had been no suspicion that he was suffering from a developmental disorder.
The City Court also based its assessments on the foster mother’s descriptions of the boy’s development from the time when he had been placed in the foster home. His motor skills had developed well. He had gone from repeating what other people said in a low voice to uttering things himself. Whereas previously he could not accept praise, he was now able to accept it when someone said something positive about him and show that he was pleased with himself. He allowed himself to be comforted and accepted physical intimacy with certain people. He had also shown progress in relation to meals. When he had been placed in foster care, he had not shown when he was hungry. He had liked to be fed and preferred baby porridge. After a long period of adjustment he was now able to eat a more varied diet. He was also able to communicate that he was hungry or full. In stressful situations he still had difficulties swallowing. He had also become socialised. His compulsive behaviour symptoms had decreased, and he tolerated getting his hands and clothes dirty. He still tired easily and had shorter days in kindergarten than other children of his age. However, his need for sleep was normal. He displayed an enormous need for security; he needed to be prepared for events and was very concerned with having everyone in the foster family present. If there were irregularities in his everyday life, he became very restless. Examples of this included when the supervisor visited the foster home or when the family went to their cabin. In such situations, he started thinking that he was going to move.
X’s development had been confirmed by the educational supervisor in his kindergarten. The foster home supervisor had also stated that he had had a steep learning curve from the time when he had been placed in the foster home. S., a psychologist at A. outpatient clinic, had testified that she saw the boy’s development as linked to the fact that his care situation had changed. His needs were being met in the foster home, and his functioning at the time when he had been placed in emergency care could, in all likelihood, be ascribed to his mother’s inadequate care during the first two years of his life. In S.’s assessment, relational or developmental trauma had been inflicted on X while he had been in his mother’s care. The court agreed with S.’s assessment of the causal relationship.
S. had also testified that, given his trauma, X would be vulnerable for the rest of his life. He would be particularly vulnerable to changes and stress, and he would have a far greater need for predictability than other children. On the basis of the evidence presented regarding the boy’s development and the challenges he still struggled with, the City Court also agreed with S.’s assessment on this point.
Given X’s vulnerability and needs, in the City Court’s opinion he would need very sensitive caregivers who would be able to familiarise themselves with his needs and accommodate them.
The City Court did not doubt that the applicant was very involved with her son and that, to the best of her ability, she loved him very much. She had had a deep-rooted desire to become a mother and had gone as far as becoming pregnant by using an unknown donor at a clinic abroad. She had testified in court that this process had demanded a lot from her, and that she had focused strongly on this task both before and during her pregnancy. She had acquired knowledge of children from television shows, among other things, and was very concerned with expert advice.
In examining whether the circumstances had changed, the City Court observed that the care order in 2012 had been based on a professional assessment that the applicant’s care was inadequate in all areas. In the report from the outpatient clinic of 29 August 2012 (see paragraph 14 above), the applicant had been described as having very little in the way of intuitive parenting skills. She was at a loss when situations involving the child arose, and incapable of leading the child or creating structure. She appeared to be insecure, without the ability to create meaning in situations or provide the child with developmental support. The City Court’s judgment of 25 February 2013 (confirming the care order) had also been based on the applicant’s complete lack of general and intuitive competence to provide care (see paragraph 9 above).
The applicant had acknowledged in court that the care order in 2012 had been justified. She had stated that she realised that her interaction with X had been poor and that she had been unable to set limits for him, but had emphasised that the situation was different now. She had taken several courses, among other things, a parenting course – ICDP (International Child Development Programme) – and a course for kindergarten assistants for speakers of minority languages. She had also worked in a kindergarten for about six months, and had referred to her professional references from there. She had allowed herself to be assessed by S.C., a private psychiatrist, who had testified in court that he had not found her to be suffering from any mental health problems. She had also engaged E.S. and S.H.G., psychologists who were experts in the child welfare issues raised in the case.
The court questioned the applicant’s declared acknowledgement regarding the neglect that had formed the basis for the care order in 2012. During her testimony, she had not acknowledged that X had shown signs of problems to any great extent. She had described him as a well-functioning and social child, and had instead questioned how his being taken into care had affected him. The court noted that the applicant had used a great deal of resources in preparing her claim for revocation of the care order in respect of X, and stated that it was positive that she had wanted to strengthen her competence through a parenting course and a work placement for kindergarten assistants. However, the court could not see that these measures had had much effect on her ability to provide care. Her challenge was that she had little intuitive parenting skills. She did not have the capacity to intuitively understand the child’s needs. Although she had wanted to understand the boy’s perspective, she had not been able to. It was not possible to acquire such basic parenting skills through courses and a work placement in a kindergarten. It was therefore difficult to see that the applicant’s position as a carer for X was very different from what it had been at the time the care order had been issued.
The applicant had also testified in court that family members would support her if X were returned to her. She had stated that her father, who was eighty years old, would move to Norway and live with her in her flat. She had also pointed out that both her mother and sister lived in the same city as her. The court could not see that the applicant’s family members were resourceful people who could compensate for her inadequacies as a caregiver to any great extent. Her mother and sister had been a part of her social network in the city all along, and as far as they were concerned, the situation was no different from what it had been at the time the care order had been issued.
The City Court went on to observe that there had been four contact sessions since the care order had been issued in 2012. The most recent contact session had taken place after the County Social Welfare Board’s consideration of the case in November 2014. In the City Court’s opinion, reports from the contact sessions also confirmed that the applicant’s ability to provide care had not changed. She repeatedly corrected X’s perception of who his mother was, despite the fact that he reacted by becoming insecure and confused. She behaved invasively and changed activities frequently, without X showing that he was following her. During the last contact session she had been very concerned with filming the boy, without caring about how this affected their interaction. The court gave consideration to the fact that a supervised contact situation could be a difficult arena in which to display natural caring skills. The applicant had also acted more calmly during one of the other contact sessions, in April 2014. However, viewing the four reports from the contact sessions in conjunction with each other, the court was nevertheless of the opinion that her behaviour showed that she still did not see the boy’s perspectives and needs (ser guttens perspektiv og behov).
X had had strong reactions in connection with the four contact sessions. His foster mother had written down his reactions to all of the contact sessions. The educational supervisor at the kindergarten had noted several of the same reactions. The psychiatric outpatient clinic for children and young people (barne- og ungdomspsykiatrisk poliklinikk – BUP) and the foster home supervisor had also provided statements regarding X’s reactions which the foster family had told them about. The court found that X had sought security after all four contact sessions. Among other things, he had followed his foster mother around the home and called for her. He had been restless before being put to bed, his sleep had been disturbed, and he had woken up several times during the night. He had been tired and worn out, had slept during the day and had needed more sleep at night. He had been fidgety and had changed his play activities frequently, had had heightened emotions, and had become very angry, very sad and very happy. His reactions after the last contact session in November 2014 had been particularly strong. After this session, X’s functioning had deteriorated considerably. He had wet himself during the night and behaved like a baby. He had wanted to be bounced on people’s laps (“ride ranke”) and to put things in his mouth. He had been fidgety when playing, had had to be fed, and had retched while eating. These reactions had lasted two months. X’s foster mother testified that after the last contact session the family had started to doubt whether they would ever again see the boy as he had been before the contact session.
The applicant had argued that X’s reactions were an expression of how much he missed her. This view had been supported by her privately appointed psychologists, E.S. and S.H.G. (see paragraph 21 above). They had argued that the attachment that had formed between X and the applicant during the first two years of his life was strong, and that his reactions had to be interpreted as a sign that he missed his primary caregiver, the applicant. The court had a different interpretation of the reactions after the contact sessions. In its opinion, it was possible that the reactions were somewhat complex. However, its assessment was nevertheless that the reactions were mainly an expression of the boy’s insecure attachment to the applicant and the fact that the contact sessions had had a retraumatising effect on him. His reactions indicated that there was a great risk that returning him to the applicant would seriously jeopardise his mental health, therefore such a return would be completely irresponsible.
In the court’s opinion, assistance measures would not go far towards compensating for the applicant’s inadequate ability to provide care appropriate to X’s needs. This was precisely connected to the fact that her shortcomings were related to basic and intuitive parenting skills.
In the court’s opinion, the attachment condition in the second sentence of the first paragraph of section 4-21 of the Child Welfare Act (see paragraph 38 below) had also been satisfied, for the following reasons.
X had lived in the foster home for about two years. This was a long time in the life of a five-year-old. He had developed greatly during this period. His foster mother had refrained from working outside the home in order to meet his needs, and on the basis of the evidence presented, the court found that X had a particular attachment to her. Reports from the contact sessions showed that X sought contact with his foster parents for confirmation of what he experienced in the context of the contact sessions. He called his foster parents mum and dad, and described his foster brother as his brother. The court found that X’s development during the past two years had been due to the fact that he had established a secure attachment to people who were able to see his particular needs. The court had no doubt that the foster home was now X’s primary care base. As a result of the relational and developmental trauma that had been inflicted on him as a small child, X was very vulnerable to changes. Moving him from a situation where he was currently functioning well would entail a great risk of serious harm to his mental health.
On this basis, as required by the above-mentioned section 4-21 of the Child Welfare Act, the court found that it had been clearly substantiated that X had become so attached to his foster parents and the environment where he was living that removing him might lead to serious problems for him.
On the question of contact rights, the City Court’s judgment contained the following passages:
“The Court has concluded above that [X] has become so attached to his foster home that moving him will lead to serious problems for him. [X’s] placement therefore has a long-term perspective. A contact arrangement is not intended to facilitate or prepare for [X’s mother providing] care in the future [(“fremtidig tilbakeføring”)]. The purpose of a contact arrangement shall be to ensure that [X] knows his biological mother.
In ... the City Court’s hearing in the case in February 2013, contact was set at one hour twice a year, under supervision. This very limited contact arrangement was in effect until the most recent contact session in November 2014.
The Court has described the boy’s reactions in connection with contact in its discussion of whether to revoke the care order. The Court considers that the boy’s reactions are very serious. His reactions after contact are particularly worrying. The reactions after the last contact session lasted around two months. His reactions included regression to the baby stage, bed-wetting, and retching when eating.
It is not uncommon for children who have been placed in foster homes to experience reactions in connection with contact with their biological parents. Such reactions do not necessarily have to form a basis for terminating contact. In the longer term, it can be useful for a child to be in contact with his or her parents, and a contact arrangement must be seen from this perspective. This means that reactions must be accepted to a certain extent.
However, the Court is of the opinion that the reactions displayed by [X] are too extensive and serious to be acceptable. Considering that [X] will start school in autumn 2015, reactions in the form of long-term regression will be particularly harmful to his development, both socially and in relation to his education. It is very important to [X]’s continued development that he is not placed in situations that could seriously harm his mental health.
On this basis, the Court has found that the risk that [X] will be harmed if contact continues is so great that the interests of the biological mother must yield. There are special factors in this case, and exceptional and strong reasons indicate that contact should be denied under the first sentence of the second paragraph of section 4-19 of the Child Welfare Act.”
As to the question of whether the foster parents’ address should be disclosed to the applicant, the City Court stated, inter alia:
“[The applicant] has not reconciled herself with the fact that her son has been taken into care and, together with her extended family, she has shown a strong commitment to having him returned to her care. In connection with the contact sessions, the mother has been very interested in information about her son’s whereabouts. Among other things, she has asked how long the drive to the foster home is. The City Court shares the County Social Welfare Board’s view that it has not been substantiated that there is a risk of kidnapping if the address is disclosed. However, the Court finds that there is a preponderance of probability that the mother will contact [X] if she knows where he lives. Considering the boy’s very strong reactions after contact sessions, the Court finds that such unannounced contact will have a disproportionately strong effect on [him]. He needs to be protected in his established environment. The mother not being entitled to know where the child lives is an obvious encroachment on her rights as the biological mother. However, the Court finds that [the applicant]’s need to know where [X] lives must yield to the boy’s interests. The Court has therefore concluded that the address of the foster parents must be withheld from [the applicant].”
The applicant appealed against the City Court’s judgment to the High Court, which on 22 May 2015 refused leave to appeal.
The High Court observed that after the main hearing the City Court had arrived at the same conclusion as the County Social Welfare Board. That hearing had lasted two days and fourteen witnesses had been called, including the applicant’s regular general practitioner (GP), her psychiatrist, a psychologist who had counselled her, and two psychologists whom she had engaged (see also paragraph 12 above).
In the High Court’s view, the City Court’s judgment appeared to be thorough and well founded. The High Court did not see that not appointing an expert witness had been a procedural error. The question of the applicant’s ability to provide care seemed to have been thoroughly elucidated through, among other things, assessments from A. and F. childcare centres (which had merged) in 2012, other written documentation, and numerous witness statements. In the High Court’s opinion, it had not been necessary to have a psychologist observe the interaction between the applicant and X prior to the main hearing in order to arrive at a satisfactory factual basis for a decision. The report from the last contact session on 12 November 2014 stated that the interaction had not been adequate (lite tilfredsstillende). The City Court had found that X’s reactions after this contact session had been particularly strong (see also paragraph 25 above). Consideration for X’s well-being therefore indicated that restraint should be shown with respect to involving him in an expert assessment. In the opinion of the High Court, no particular circumstances existed that gave any weighty indications in favour of granting leave to appeal.
On 3 July 2015 the Supreme Court’s Committee on Leave to Appeal (Høyesteretts ankeutvalg) rejected an appeal by the applicant against the High Court’s decision.
Articles 102 and 104 of the Norwegian Constitution of 17 May 1814 (Grunnloven), as revised in May 2014, read as follows:
It follows from the Supreme Court’s case-law – for instance its judgment of 29 January 2015 (Norsk Retstidende (Rt.) 2015 page 93, paragraphs 57 and 67) – that the above provisions are to be interpreted and applied in the light of their international law models, which include the Convention and the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights.
The relevant sections of the Child Welfare Act of 17 July 1992 (barnevernloven) read as follows:
“If a child is without care because the parents are ill or for other reasons, the child welfare service shall implement such assistance as is immediately required. Such measures may not be maintained against the will of the parents.
If there is a risk that a child will suffer material harm by remaining at home, the head of the child welfare administration or the prosecuting authority may immediately make an interim care order without the consent of the parents.
In such a case, the head of the child welfare administration may also make an interim order under section 4-19.
If an order has been made under the second paragraph, an application for measures as mentioned in section 7-11 shall be sent to the county social welfare board as soon as possible, and within six weeks at the latest, but within two weeks if it is a matter of measures under section 4-24.
If the matter is not sent to the county social welfare board within the time‑limits mentioned in the fourth paragraph, the order lapses.”
“Unless otherwise provided, children and parents are entitled to contact with each other.
When a care order has been made, the county social welfare board shall determine the extent of contact, but may, for the sake of the child, also decide that there shall be no contact. The county social welfare board may also decide that the parents shall not be entitled to know the child’s whereabouts.
...
Private parties may not demand that a case regarding contact shall be dealt with by the county social welfare board if the case has been dealt with by the county social welfare board or a court of law in the preceding twelve months.”
“The county social welfare board shall revoke a care order when it is highly probable that the parents will be able to provide the child with proper care. The decision shall nonetheless not be revoked if the child has become so attached to people and the environment where he or she is living that, on the basis of an overall assessment, removing the child may lead to serious problems for him or her. Before a care order is revoked, the child’s foster parents shall be entitled to state their opinion.
Parties may not demand that a case concerning revocation of a care order be dealt with by the county social welfare board if the case has been dealt with by the county social welfare board or a court of law in the preceding twelve months. If a demand for revocation of a previous order or judgment has not been upheld with reference to the second sentence of the first paragraph of section 4-21, new proceedings may only be demanded when documentary evidence is provided to show that significant changes have taken place in the child’s situation.”