The case originated in an application (no. 22302/10) against the Kingdom of Sweden lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Swedish national, Mr Raja Arlewin (“the applicant”), on 18 March 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr K. Lewis and Mr J. Södergren, lawyers practising in Stockholm. The Swedish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr A. Rönquist, Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been deprived of effective access to court and that the State had failed to provide him with sufficient protection against allegations that violated his right to privacy.
On 5 March 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1970 and lives in Stockholm. He is self-employed and runs a business.
On 22 April 2004 the Swedish commercial television channel TV3 broadcast an episode of a television show entitled “Insider”, in which it was claimed that “shady transactions and shady characters” were revealed. The show was broadcast live with a few recorded features. In the show, the applicant, who was unknown to the broader public, appeared in pictures and was mentioned by name. He was singled out as the central figure of organised crime within media and advertising and as being guilty of several counts of fraud and other economic offences. The programme was rebroadcast on 25 April and 17 September 2004. At this time, no criminal investigation had been initiated against the applicant.
The television programme was produced in Sweden by the Swedish company Strix Television AB. It was sent by satellite link from Sweden to the London-based company Viasat Broadcasting UK Ltd and from there sent unaltered to a satellite which transmitted the programme to the Swedish audience. The encoded programme was viewable via a satellite receiver or a cable connection in Sweden a fraction of a second after it had been sent by satellite link. Even if it was viewable in the United Kingdom, which is doubtful, it would have been watched there by a small audience. It was presented in the Swedish language for a Swedish-speaking audience, and was sponsored by companies competing in the Swedish market. The anchorman of the show, X, a Swedish national, was a celebrity and a well-known television personality in Sweden; he was also the Chief Executive Officer of Strix Television AB. The show had a long run and was watched by many viewers.
In October 2006 the applicant brought a private prosecution against X for gross defamation, claiming damages in the amount of 250,000 Swedish kronor (SEK; approximately 27,000 euros). He maintained that he had been unreservedly pointed out as the central figure of organised crime within media and advertising and as being directly or indirectly responsible for a large number of serious crimes. He further alleged that X was responsible for the content of the programme since he had failed in his duty to appoint a legally responsible editor (ansvarig utgivare) for the programme and because he had been its anchor.
The applicant relied on Chapters 5 and 6 of the Constitutional Law on Freedom of Expression (Yttrandefrihetsgrundlagen, 1991:1469; hereafter “the Constitutional Law”), regarding freedom of expression offences and liability rules, and Chapter 5 of the Penal Code (Brottsbalken), dealing with defamation, as well as Articles 6 § 2, 8 and 13 of the Convention. In the latter respect, he argued that his appearance in the show breached his right to privacy as well as his right to be presumed innocent and that a decision to dismiss his claims would constitute a violation of his right to an effective remedy. The applicant submitted a legal opinion stating that it would be impossible, or at least not useful, to bring an action in the United Kingdom in the present case since the damage flowing from the television programme at issue had not occurred in the United Kingdom.
X disputed the claim on the grounds, inter alia, that he was not the responsible editor of the show and that he enjoyed the freedom to communicate information as provided for under Chapter 10, section 2 of the Constitutional Law and as clarified by the Supreme Court (Högsta domstolen) in the case NJA 2005 p. 884 (see paragraphs 32 and 33 below).
In a preliminary ruling on 20 May 2008 the Stockholm District Court (Stockholms tingsrätt) dismissed the claim in so far as it was based on the Constitutional Law. It referred to the Supreme Court judgment in an almost identical case, NJA 2002 p. 314 (see paragraphs 28-31 below), and held that Chapters 1-9 of the Constitutional Law were not applicable to the television programme since it could not be regarded as emanating from Sweden. This was because the programme had first been sent by satellite link to Viasat Broadcasting UK Ltd, the British company responsible for the programme content, and thereafter uplinked to a satellite, which had in turn transmitted the programme to viewers in Sweden. As Chapters 1-9 of the Constitutional Law were not applicable, X could not be held responsible for the programme content under Chapter 6. The District Court further held that the applicant’s claims under the Penal Code were to be determined following the main hearing in the case. The court finally drew the parties’ attention to the Supreme Court case NJA 2005 p. 884.
The applicant appealed, repeating what he had stated in his earlier submissions. He further argued that all companies involved in the case were Swedish, including the receiving company in London, allegedly named Viasat AB, with its seat in Stockholm. Although Viasat AB had acquired the right to transmit the show from the Swedish company TV3 AB, it had had no impact on or responsibility for the programme selection. Having regard to the above, the offence committed against the applicant through the programme could not be examined by United Kingdom courts. The applicant also submitted that Swedish courts were competent to examine the case under the Brussels I Regulation (see further paragraph 35 below). X contested the arguments and submitted that it was the company Viasat Broadcasting UK Ltd, whose seat was in the United Kingdom, which was responsible for the programme service and decided on the final content of the programmes.
On 20 March 2009 the Court of Appeal (Svea hovrätt) upheld the District Court’s decision. It held that the issue for it to determine was whether the general provisions in the Constitutional Law were applicable to the programme in question, that is, whether or not the broadcasting of the programme could be considered to have originated from Sweden within the meaning of Chapter 1, section 6(2) of that law. It further stated that the burden of proof concerning the applicability of the Constitutional Law rested on the applicant and that he had not, in response to X’s refutation, established that the decisions concerning the programme content were taken in Sweden. Consequently, Chapters 1-9 of the Constitutional Law were not applicable in the case. The court further held that the material before it indicated that it was possible for the applicant to bring claims before a British court.
The applicant appealed and referred to his earlier submissions. In addition, he requested that a question concerning the interpretation of the Brussels I Regulation be referred to the Court of Justice of the European Union (ECJ) for a preliminary ruling. According to the applicant, the regulation entitled a person claiming non-contractual damages to bring actions where the harmful event occurred. In the present case, the harmful event had occurred in Sweden and the applicant thus should have had the right to bring his action before the Swedish courts. Consequently, the position hitherto taken by the Swedish courts ran contrary to Community law.
On 21 September 2009 the Supreme Court rejected the applicant’s referral request and refused leave to appeal in the case. It held that, since the District Court had found itself competent to examine the applicant’s claims in so far as they were based on grounds other than the Constitutional Law, there was no reason to request a preliminary ruling from the ECJ.
The applicant subsequently withdrew his remaining claims before the District Court since there was no practical prospect of success in a continued procedure. On 17 November 2009 the District Court struck the case out of the list and ordered the applicant to pay X’s legal costs and expenses.
Criminal proceedings were taken against the applicant in regard, inter alia, to the matters described in the television programme. He was convicted of aggravated fraud as well as tax and bookkeeping offences and sentenced to five years’ imprisonment. The criminal proceedings were finalised by a Supreme Court decision to refuse leave to appeal on 4 October 2010. These proceedings, in particular their compliance with Articles 6 and 7 of the Convention, are the subject of an application lodged with the Court on 4 April 2011 (no. 32814/11).
Freedom of expression in the media is regulated in the Freedom of the Press Act (Tryckfrihetsförordningen, 1949:105) and the Constitutional Law. The former regulates the freedom to express oneself in printed matter such as books and newspapers, and the latter regulates freedom of expression in other media such as radio, television, films, sound recordings and certain internet publications. It follows from Chapter 1, section 1(3) of the Constitutional Law that it applies to television programmes and from Chapter 1, section 6(1) that the law applies to the transmission of television programmes directed at the general public and intended for reception using technical aids.
One basic principle in the legislation on freedom of expression in the media is the principle of exclusivity, which guarantees the standing of the Freedom of the Press Act and the Constitutional Law as the sole criminal and procedural laws in the areas of freedom of the press and freedom of expression in other media. In other words, a statement made in media amounting to abuse of the freedom of expression and covered by either of the two laws may only be dealt with in accordance with those laws.
Other basic principles are sole liability (ensamansvar), double coverage (dubbel straffbarhet) and protection of informants (meddelarskydd). The first is set out in Chapter 6, section 1 of the Constitutional Law, according to which liability for freedom of expression offences committed in a television broadcast rests only with the responsible editor. An exception applies when, for example, no qualified responsible editor had been appointed at the time when the offence was committed. In such a situation, the liability instead rests with the person responsible for appointing a responsible editor (Chapter 6, section 2). The person responsible for a freedom of expression offence shall be deemed to have had knowledge of the content of the presentation and to have consented to its publication (Chapter 6, section 4). Any other person who in some other way has contributed to the broadcast is excluded from liability.
Double coverage means that sanctions against statements in the media that are protected under the Constitutional Law may only be imposed if the act is on the list of offences set out in Chapter 7, section 4 of the Freedom of the Press Act, to which Chapter 5, section 1 of the Constitutional Law refers, and at the same time is punishable under criminal law. The list includes, inter alia, defamation and insulting language or behaviour which are punishable under the Penal Code.
The protection of informants and sources has several components: the freedom to communicate information (meddelarfrihet), the freedom to procure information and intelligence (anskaffarfrihet), the right to anonymity and a prohibition against inquiry (efterforskningsförbud), and a prohibition against reprisals (repressalieförbud). The protection applies in relation to public authorities and other public bodies. The freedom to communicate information is set out in Chapter 1, section 1(3) of the Freedom of the Press Act and Chapter 1, section 2 of the Constitutional Law and means that everyone has the right, with impunity, to provide information on any subject for publication in a medium covered by the Freedom of the Press Act or the Constitutional Law.
As noted above, the Constitutional Law is applicable to broadcasts of television programmes that are directed at the general public and intended for reception using technical aids. The scope of the Constitutional Law is primarily decided on the basis of the connection of the broadcast to Sweden. Chapter 1, section 6(2) of the Constitutional Law provides as follows:
“In regard to ... programmes diffused through satellite broadcasts emanating from Sweden, the provisions of this constitutional law on ... programmes in general are applicable.”
It is stated in the preparatory works to this provision that a transmission should be considered to emanate from Sweden if the uplink occurs in an area under Swedish jurisdiction or from abroad, following the transmission of the programme from Sweden via landline or radio links (Government Bill 1990/91:64, pp. 52-53 and 109-110).
Although the Constitutional Law is not applicable to television programmes broadcast from transmitters outside Sweden, the protection of the freedom to communicate and the freedom to procure information and intelligence is maintained. Under the protection for correspondents (korrespondentskydd), laid down in Chapter 10, sections 1 and 2 of the Constitutional Law and Chapter 13, section 6(2) of the Freedom of the Press Act, these freedoms apply even if a radio or television programme is broadcast from transmitters outside Sweden provided that the communication or procurement takes place in Sweden (SOU 2012:55, p. 505). The provision in Chapter 10, section 2 of the Constitutional Law was interpreted in NJA 2005 p. 884 (see paragraph 32 below).
Chapter 9, section 4 of the Freedom of the Press Act, to which Chapter 7, section 1 of the Constitutional Law refers, makes it clear that private prosecution can be instituted by plaintiffs in connection with libel (Chapter 7, sections 4(14) and 4(15) of the Freedom of the Press Act) and certain offences against secrecy that infringe upon an individual’s interests (Chapter 7, sections 5(1) and 5(2) of the Freedom of the Press Act). Correspondents (see previous paragraph) may, however, be held liable only for a limited number of serious offences which do not include libel (Chapter 5, section 3 of the Constitutional Law).
Damages on grounds of libel committed through a television programme may only be awarded if the utterances amount to an offence against the freedom of expression (Chapter 10, section 1 of the Constitutional Law).
Chapter 5 of the The Penal Code provides in so far as relevant:
Section 1
 “A person who points someone out as being a criminal or as having a reprehensible way of living or otherwise furnishes information intended to cause exposure to the disrespect of others, shall be sentenced for defamation to a fine.
If he was duty-bound to express himself or if, considering the circumstances, it was defensible to furnish information on the matter, and he can show that the information was true or that he had reasonable grounds for it, no punishment shall be imposed.”
Section 2
 “If the crime defined in section 1 is regarded as aggravated, a fine or imprisonment for no more than two years shall be imposed for gross defamation. In assessing whether the crime is aggravated, special consideration shall be given to whether the information, because of its content or the scope of its dissemination or otherwise, was calculated to bring about serious damage.”
A Supreme Court decision of 5 June 2002 (NJA 2002 p. 314) concerned an action for gross defamation against two individuals and Strix Television AB due to statements made about the plaintiff in a television programme which had been broadcast by TV3. The programme had been produced by Strix Television AB for TV3 Ltd (now Viasat Broadcasting UK Ltd). The two individuals were employees of Strix Television AB and had contributed to the programme as well as having been its anchors. The programme had been transmitted directly from a studio in Stockholm by a communications satellite to TV3 Ltd’s programme control centre in London and from there, unaltered, via satellite back to Sweden.
The two individuals requested the courts to dismiss the claim on the grounds that they could not be held responsible for the programme content since the Constitutional Law was applicable and they enjoyed the freedom to supply information as provided for under Chapter 10, section 2 of that law.
The Supreme Court initially pointed out that Chapters 1-9 of the Constitutional Law covered broadcasts via satellite in so far as the broadcasts emanated from Sweden within the meaning of Chapter 1, section 6(2) of that law. It considered that it could be assumed that the said rule on transmission of programmes referred to a purely technical transmission to a satellite from where the programmes are broadcast directly to the public in Sweden. In such a case, no real programming activities existed outside Sweden. It further stated that the provisions in the Constitutional Law on sole responsibility and the related provisions are based on programming activities being conducted in Sweden. If, however, the programming activities are conducted abroad, the conditions for applying the legal principles of freedom of the press are largely lacking. In determining whether programming activities are conducted in Sweden or abroad, it is the place where decisions on the programme content are taken which is crucial, and not the place where the programme is actually made or the technical means of broadcasting used.
The programme in question could not be regarded as having emanated from Sweden, as the company in control of programming was TV3 Ltd in London and because the programme had been sent to that company before being linked from there to the satellite transmitting it to the Swedish audience. Consequently, Chapters 1-9 of the Constitutional Law were not applicable to the transmission. However, the court continued, the question whether the defendants were protected as informants under Chapter 10, section 2 of that law did not concern a procedural issue and was therefore to be examined in the continued proceedings on the substance of the case in the lower courts. The court therefore rejected the defendants’ request to dismiss the plaintiff’s claim.
In a judgment dated 20 December 2005 (NJA 2005 p. 884) the Supreme Court dealt with the same individual television programme as in NJA 2002 p. 314. The court noted that it had previously taken the position that the Constitutional Law was not applicable to the broadcast in question, as the programme was found not to have emanated from Sweden. The issue was thus whether the persons summoned before the court in their capacity as programme hosts and participants were covered by the freedom of communication under Chapter 10, section 2 of that law and thereby excluded from liability under tort law for the statements made in the programme. It found that, according to Chapter 10, section 2, compared with section 1, the freedom of communication was applicable to statements in television programmes broadcast from transmitters outside Sweden. It further noted that the protection of informants under the Constitutional Law also covered – with certain exceptions which are not relevant here – persons participating by performing in a television programme. For a person communicating information to be protected in this respect it was also deemed necessary for the information to have been submitted to a receiver of information for publication, as set out in Chapter 1, section 2. This requirement was found to be met as the statements had been made in a live-broadcast programme that had been sent via a communications satellite to a broadcaster abroad before being transmitted to the Swedish public via satellite. In these circumstances, it was clear that the defendants, in their capacity as programme hosts and participants, were covered by the freedom of communication under the Constitutional Law.
Having found that the two individuals were covered by the provision at issue, the court concluded that they could not be held liable for libel in regard to any information given by them in the programme. The court added that this conclusion was valid regardless of the fact that no individual could be held responsible for the programme content as responsible editor or his or her replacement under the provisions of Chapter 6 of the Constitutional Law.
A comprehensive summary of the issue of compensation for violations of the Convention in the Swedish legal order can be found in Marinkovic v. Sweden (no. 43570/10, §§ 21-31, 10 December 2013).
Council Regulation (EC) No. 44/2001 of 22 December 2000 on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters (hereafter the “Brussels I Regulation”) laid down the basic principle that jurisdiction is to be exercised by the EU country in which the defendant is domiciled, regardless of his or her nationality. However, special jurisdiction rules allowed for a defendant to be sued in the courts of another EU country. For instance, matters relating to liability for wrongful acts could be decided by the courts in the place where the harmful event had occurred or could occur. (The Brussels I Regulation was replaced by a new regulation in January 2015, known as the “Brussels I Regulation Recast”, which, in so far as relevant to the present case, contains the same substantive rules.) The relevant provisions read as follows:
Article 1
“1.  This Regulation shall apply in civil and commercial matters whatever the nature of the court or tribunal. It shall not extend, in particular, to revenue, customs or administrative matters.
...”
Article 2
“1.  Subject to this Regulation, persons domiciled in a Member State shall, whatever their nationality, be sued in the courts of that Member State.
...”
Article 3
“1.  Persons domiciled in a Member State may be sued in the courts of another Member State only by virtue of the rules set out in Sections 2 to 7 [Articles 5 to 24] of this Chapter.
...”
Article 5
“A person domiciled in a Member State may, in another Member State, be sued:
...
in matters relating to tort, delict or quasi-delict, in the courts for the place where the harmful event occurred or may occur;
as regards a civil claim for damages or restitution which is based on an act giving rise to criminal proceedings, in the court seised of those proceedings, to the extent that that court has jurisdiction under its own law to entertain civil proceedings;
...”
The EU Audiovisual Media Services Directive (Directive 2010/13/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 March 2010 on the coordination of certain provisions laid down by law, regulation or administrative action in Member States concerning the provision of audiovisual media services; hereafter “the AV Directive”) is applicable to audiovisual media services, i.e. the broadcasting of, inter alia, television programmes. The jurisdiction over the media services providers, that is, the legal person who has editorial responsibility for the programme content and determines the manner of its organisation, is regulated in Article 2:
“1.  Each Member State shall ensure that all audiovisual media services transmitted by media service providers under its jurisdiction comply with the rules of the system of law applicable to audiovisual media services intended for the public in that Member State.
For the purposes of this Directive, the media service providers under the jurisdiction of a Member State are any of the following:
(a)  those established in that Member State in accordance with paragraph 3;
(b)  those to whom paragraph 4 applies.
For the purposes of this Directive, a media service provider shall be deemed to be established in a Member State in the following cases:
(a)  the media service provider has its head office in that Member State and the editorial decisions about the audiovisual media service are taken in that Member State;
(b)  if a media service provider has its head office in one Member State but editorial decisions on the audiovisual media service are taken in another Member State, it shall be deemed to be established in the Member State where a significant part of the workforce involved in the pursuit of the audiovisual media service activity operates. If a significant part of the workforce involved in the pursuit of the audiovisual media service activity operates in each of those Member States, the media service provider shall be deemed to be established in the Member State where it has its head office. If a significant part of the workforce involved in the pursuit of the audiovisual media service activity operates in neither of those Member States, the media service provider shall be deemed to be established in the Member State where it first began its activity in accordance with the law of that Member State, provided that it maintains a stable and effective link with the economy of that Member State;
(c)  if a media service provider has its head office in a Member State but decisions on the audiovisual media service are taken in a third country, or vice versa, it shall be deemed to be established in the Member State concerned, provided that a significant part of the workforce involved in the pursuit of the audiovisual media service activity operates in that Member State.
Media service providers to whom the provisions of paragraph 3 are not applicable shall be deemed to be under the jurisdiction of a Member State in the following cases:
(a)  they use a satellite up-link situated in that Member State;
(b)  although they do not use a satellite up-link situated in that Member State, they use satellite capacity appertaining to that Member State.
If the question as to which Member State has jurisdiction cannot be determined in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4, the competent Member State shall be that in which the media service provider is established within the meaning of Articles 49 to 55 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
This Directive does not apply to audiovisual media services intended exclusively for reception in third countries and which are not received with standard consumer equipment directly or indirectly by the public in one or more Member States.”
In the case of Shevill and Others v. Presse Alliance (C-68/93; judgment of 7 March 1995) the ECJ stated that, on a proper construction of the expression “place where the harmful event occurred” in Article 5(3) of the Brussels Convention (the precursor to the Brussels I Regulation), the victim of a libel by a newspaper article distributed in several Contracting States may bring an action for damages against the publisher either before the courts of the Contracting State of the place where the publisher of the defamatory publication is established, which have jurisdiction to award damages for all the harm caused by the defamation, or before the courts of each Contracting State in which the publication was distributed and where the victim claims to have suffered injury to his reputation, which have jurisdiction to rule solely in respect of the harm caused in the State of the court seized. The criteria for assessing whether the event in question is harmful and the evidence required of the existence and extent of the harm alleged by the victim of the defamation are not governed by the Convention but by the substantive law determined by the national conflict of laws rules of the court seized, provided that the effectiveness of the Convention is not thereby impaired.
In its judgment of 25 October 2011 in the joined cases eDate Advertising GmbH v. X (C-509/09) and Olivier Martinez and Robert Martinez v. MGN Limited (C-161/10) the ECJ interpreted Article 5(3) of the Brussels I Regulation in relation to online content on websites in the following manner (para. 52):
“... [I]n the event of an alleged infringement of personality rights by means of content placed online on an internet website, the person who considers that his rights have been infringed has the option of bringing an action for liability, in respect of all the damage caused, either before the courts of the Member State in which the publisher of that content is established or before the courts of the Member State in which the centre of his interests is based. That person may also, instead of an action for liability in respect of all the damage caused, bring his action before the courts of each Member State in the territory of which content placed online is or has been accessible. Those courts have jurisdiction only in respect of the damage caused in the territory of the Member State of the court seised.”
While the Brussels I Regulation requires EU Member States to make their courts available if jurisdiction is confirmed according to the Regulation, the ECJ noted in Kongress Agentur Hagen GmbH v. Zeehaghe BV (C-365/88; 15 May 1990) that the Regulation does not govern matters of procedure. This means that a court can reject a case for reasons relating to domestic procedural rules as long as the national procedural law does not impair the effectiveness of the Brussels I Regulation.