The case originated in an application (no. 66610/10) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Yevgeniy Nikolayevich Zakharov (“the applicant”) on 16 October 2010.
The applicant was granted leave to present his own case under Rule 36 § 2 in fine of the Rules of Court. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his right to respect for his home had been violated.
On 5 November 2015 the complaint concerning the alleged violation of the applicant’s right to respect for his home was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1944 and lives in Kaliningrad.
Until 1999 the applicant was married to Z. and was living with her in a state-owned flat which had been provided to Z.’s parents. The applicant was registered as living in that flat.
In 1999 the applicant and Z. divorced and the applicant moved in with his new partner, B. At that time he did not apply for deregistration from the flat which he had occupied with his former wife. Later Z. privatised that flat, and the applicant lost occupational right to it.
B. occupied a room in a three-room communal flat under a social tenancy agreement. The other two rooms were occupied by her neighbours. The applicant and B. lived together in that room for the following ten years. They never married and the applicant was not registered as living in the room.
In May 2009 B. died and her neighbours locked the applicant out of the flat. The local housing authority informed the applicant that he had to vacate the room, since he had no legal right to occupy it.
On 28 September 2009 the applicant instituted court proceedings against the local administration, seeking recognition of his right to occupy the room as B.’s family member. He submitted that he and B. had been living in the room as husband and wife since 1988, but that after her death her neighbours had locked him out of the room. He considered that despite the fact that he had not been married to B. and had not been registered as living in the room, he should be regarded as a member of her family who had acquired the right to occupy her room. In particular, he raised the following arguments:
-  he had shared a common household with B.;
-  he had paid for the maintenance of the room;
-  he had assumed the cost of B.’s burial;
-  he had no other housing: he could not return to the flat of his former wife Z. since she had become the owner of that flat and lived there with her new family;
-  on 8 September 2009 he had asked the authorities to deregister him from the flat of his former wife Z.;
-  since his eviction, he had been obliged to live in the school in which he was working as a night watchman.
The local administration submitted that the applicant had not been registered as living in B.’s room, he was not a member of B.’s family and, therefore, he had not acquired any right to occupy her room.
B.’s neighbours were invited to participate in the proceedings as third parties. They confirmed that between 1999 and 2009 the applicant had lived in the room with B. and had provided her with financial support. However, they considered that B.’s room should be allocated to them and not to the applicant, since there were six of them living in two rooms and they needed to upgrade their living conditions.
On 6 May 2010 the Leninskiy District Court (“the District Court”) of Kaliningrad granted the applicant’s claim with reference to Articles 69 and 70 of the Housing Code (see Relevant domestic law and practice below). The District Court established, in particular, that between 1999 and 2009 the applicant had cohabited with B. in the room in question, had shared a common household with her and had been removed from the register at his previous place of residence. The District Court considered that the above circumstances should be regarded as exceptional within the meaning of Article 69 of the Housing Code and that the applicant should therefore be regarded as a member of B.’s family who had acquired the right to reside in the room previously occupied by her.
The local administration did not appeal against the judgment of 6 May 2010.
The third parties appealed against that judgment to the Kaliningrad Regional Court (“the Regional Court”). They submitted that B. had on several occasions chased the applicant away. She had not applied to the authorities with a request to register him as living in her room, and had not asked that his name be added to the social tenancy agreement as a member of her family. The applicant had not paid any utility charges for the room and had been registered as living elsewhere until B.’s death.
On 22 September 2010 the Regional Court quashed the judgment of 6 May 2010 and dismissed the applicant’s claims. The relevant part of the decision of 22 September 2010 reads as follows:
Article 40 of the Constitution provides that everyone has the right to a home. Nobody may be arbitrarily deprived of his or her home.
Article 69 § 1 of the Code provides that members of a tenant’s family include his or her spouse, children and parents if they live together with the tenant. Other relatives and disabled dependants may be recognised as the tenant’s family if the tenant accommodates them as such and if they share a common household with the tenant. In exceptional cases a court may recognise other persons as members of the tenant’s family.
Article 70 provides that a tenant is entitled to share his home with his spouse, children and parents or other persons living with him as members of his family.
In its Ruling No. 8 of 31 October 1995 on certain questions relating to the application by courts of the Constitution of the Russian Federation in the administration of justice, the Supreme Court of Russia held as follows (paragraph 13):
In its Ruling No. 14 of 2 July 2009 on certain questions arising in judicial practice with regard to the application of the Housing Code of the Russian Federation, the Supreme Court of Russia held as follows (paragraph 25):