The case originated in 116 applications against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by 114 Ukrainian nationals and companies based in Ukraine, whose details are specified in the appended tables (“the applicants”).
In the course of the proceedings Mr P. Vasylyev (application no. 17684/08) died, and his wife, Ms V. Vasylyeva, expressed the wish to pursue the application.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr N. Kultchytskiy, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applications, which mainly concern the issues of lengthy nonenforcement of domestic decisions given in the applicants’ favour, were communicated to the Government on various dates.
In accordance with the Yuriy Nikolayevich Ivanov pilot judgment (no. 40450/04, ECHR 2009... (extracts)) addressing the issues of prolonged non-enforcement of domestic decisions, the examination of the applications was adjourned until 15 July 2011.
Meanwhile, Ukraine was directed to adopt the necessary measures in order to solve the problems, in particular to set up an effective domestic remedy or combination of such remedies capable of securing adequate and sufficient redress for the non-enforcement or delayed enforcement of domestic decisions, in line with the Convention principles as established in the Court’s case-law (see Yuriy Nikolayevich Ivanov, cited above, § 94 and point 5 of its operative part).
On 21 February 2012, having noted that  had not adopted the required measures, the Court decided to resume the examination of the applications.
On various dates the Government submitted to the Court a number of unilateral declarations aimed at resolving the non-enforcement issues raised in seventeen applications (the applications concerned are specified in the appended tables). The Government requested the Court to strike the applications concerned out of the list of cases pursuant to Article 37 § 1 (c) of the Convention on the basis of the declarations. The Court examined the declarations and decided to reject the Government’s request.
On the dates set out in the appended tables domestic courts and commissions on labour disputes delivered decisions according to which the applicants were entitled to various pecuniary amounts and/or to have certain actions taken in their favour. The decisions became final and enforceable. However, the applicants were unable to obtain the enforcement of the decisions in due time because of the authorities’ failure to take specific budgetary or regulatory measures, because of the introduction of bans on the attachment and sale of property belonging to State-owned or controlled companies, or because of the bailiffs’ omissions. With the exception of the application no. 27562/09, in which the decision in the applicant’s favour was enforced on 18 November 2008, the domestic decisions in all the present applications have not been enforced in full.
Some of the applicants also made submissions concerning factual and legal matters unrelated to the above non-enforcement issues.
On 5 June 2012 the Verkhovna Rada adopted the Act on the State Guarantees Concerning Execution of Judicial Decisions with the aim of solving the issues of non-enforcement at the domestic level. On 22 June 2012 the President signed the Act. The Act will enter into force on 1 January 2013.
The Act provides for the introduction of the procedures under which pecuniary debts under domestic decisions may be met by the State Treasury where debtor State bodies, State companies, or companies with the ban on the sale of property fail to pay them in due time. The Act also provides for compensation when the authorities delay payments under those procedures.