The case originated in an application (no. 40025/10) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Pavel Ivanovich Lagunov (“the applicant”), on 2 July 2010.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 30 March 2015 the complaint concerning the right to compensation for unlawful detention was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1951 and lives in Izhevsk.
On 27 August 2008 the police arrested the applicant in the street on suspicion of being drunk. He was taken to the police station where he was held for more than two hours. The police charged the applicant with public drunkenness and told him to pay a fine.
Further to a complaint by the applicant, on 8 December 2008 the Pervomayskiy District Court of Izhevsk quashed the police decision, finding that the charge had not been supported by evidence.
The applicant brought a claim for compensation for pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage in connection with his arrest and detention.
By a judgment of 16 November 2009, the Pervomayskiy District Court dismissed his claim. Noting that the claim arising out of administrative detention fell outside the exhaustive list of examples of strict liability under Article 1100 of the Civil Code, the court held that the lawful actions of the police officers could not give rise to liability in tort. It acknowledged that the applicant must have suffered frustration and anxiety as a result of his detention, but determined that his suffering had been “of no legal consequence”.
On 3 March 2010 the Supreme Court of the Udmurtiya Republic upheld the District Court’s decision on appeal.
For a summary of the relevant provisions of Russian law, see Makhmudov v. Russia, no. 35082/04, §§ 47-48, 26 July 2007.