The case originated in an application (no. 25198/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mr Vitalie Iordachi, Mr Vitalie Nagacevschi, Ms Snejana Chitic, Mr Victor Constantinov and Mr Vlad Gribincea (“the applicants”), on 23 May 2002.
The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent at the time, Mr V. Pârlog and subsequently by his successor Mr V. Grosu.
The applicants alleged, in particular, under Article 8 of the Convention that their right to freedom of correspondence had not been respected since the domestic law governing telephone tapping did not contain sufficient guarantees against abuse by the national authorities.
The application was allocated to the Fourth Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
By a decision of 5 April 2005, the Court declared the application admissible and joined the question of victim status to the merits of the case.
The applicants and the Government each filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1), the Chamber having decided, after consulting the parties, that no hearing on the merits was required (Rule 59 § 3 in fine).
The applicants were born in 1972, 1965, 1980, 1961 and 1980 respectively and live in Chişinău. They are members of “Lawyers for Human Rights”, a Chişinău-based non-governmental organisation specialised in the representation of applicants before the Court.
According to the applicants, after the coming to power of the Communist Party the number of violations of human rights increased considerably. In that context their organisation was created, whose sole purpose was the protection of human rights by assisting persons who sought to introduce applications with the European Court of Human Rights.
As a result, the applicants considered that they had caused the Government serious harm in terms of damage to their image and financial loss as a result of the findings of violation in cases they had helped to bring before this Court.
The applicants maintained that they ran a serious risk of having their telephones tapped as a result of their activity, due to the state of the legislation in force. They did not claim to have been victims of any specific interception of their communications, whether by telephone or post, and they had not instituted any domestic proceedings in that respect.
The Government disputed the allegation concerning the increase of the number of violations of human rights after the Communist Party had won the elections.
On 17 January 2008 one of the applicants wrote to the President of the Supreme Court of Justice and asked for statistical information concerning, inter alia, the number of applications lodged by the investigating bodies with courts for interception of telephone conversations and the number of successful and unsuccessful applications.
In a letter of 6 February 2008 the Head of the President's Office of the Supreme Court of Justice replied that in 2005 of a total of 2,609 applications for interception lodged, 98.81% had been successful; in 2006 of the 1,931 applications lodged, 97.93% had been successful; and in 2007 of the 2,372 applications lodged, 99.24% had been successful.
The Operational Investigative Activities Act of 12 April 1994 reads as follows:
“Section 2. The aims of operational investigative activities
Section 4. The legal basis for operational investigative activities
Section 5. Respect for human rights and liberties in conducting operational investigative activities
Section 6. Operational investigative measures
In 2003 this section was amended as follows (amendment in bold):
“Section 6. Operational investigative measures
The operational investigative measures provided for under ..., (l), ... may be carried out only by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Information and Security Service under the statutory conditions and only when such measures are necessary in the interests of national security, public order, the economic situation of the country, the maintenance of legal order and the prevention of very serious offences and the protection of health, morals, and the rights and interests of others. ...”
The section was further amended in 2007 and currently reads as follows (amendment in bold):
“Section 6. Operational investigative measures
The operational investigative measures provided for under ..., (l), ... may be carried out only by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Information and Security Service under the statutory conditions and only when such measures are necessary in the interests of national security, public order, the economic situation of the country, the maintenance of legal order and the prevention of serious, very serious and exceptionally serious offences, and the protection of health, morals, and the rights and interests of others. ...”
Under Article 16 of the Criminal Code the serious offences are considered to be those offences which are punishable with imprisonment of up to fifteen years; very serious offences are intentional offences punishable with imprisonment of over fifteen years; and exceptionally serious offences are those intentional offences punishable with life imprisonment. Approximately 59% of all offences provided for in the Moldovan Criminal Code fall into the category of serious, very serious and exceptionally serious offences.
“Section 7. The grounds for carrying out operational investigative activities
In 2003 this section was amended as follows (amendment in bold):
“Section 7. The grounds for carrying out operational investigative activities
(d)  requests from the bodies carrying out an operational investigative activity based on the grounds provided for in the present section. ...
Section 8. The conditions and manner of carrying out operational investigative activities
In 2003 this section was amended as follows (amendment in bold):
“Section 8. The conditions and manner of carrying out operational investigative activities
(3)  Should danger to the life, health or property of certain persons become imminent, interception of their telephone conversations or other means of communication shall be permitted, following the request or written consent of such persons on the basis of a decision approved by the head of the authority carrying out the investigative activity, and the investigating judge shall give his authority.”
The section received further amendments in 2007 and currently reads as follows (amendment in bold):
“Section 8. The conditions and manner of carrying out operational investigative activities
Section 9. The conduct of operational control
In 2003 paragraph 3 of this section was repealed.
“Section 10. Use of the results of operational investigative activities
Section 11. The authorities which may carry out operational investigative activities
Section 18. Parliamentary scrutiny
Section 19. Supervision by the prosecutor
On 29 June 2007 the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Secret Services and the Centre for Combating Organised Crime and Corruption enacted special instructions in accordance with section 4 (2) of the above Law. The instructions regulated the co-operation between the intercepting bodies and the telephone operators. In particular it obliged the operators to co-operate with the intercepting bodies in order to facilitate the interception of telephone conversations and to provide them with all the necessary information and with unlimited access to their networks.
The Code of Criminal Procedure in force until 12 June 2003 read as follows:
“Article 156 § 1. Grounds for intercepting telephone and other conversations
Article 156 § 2. Manner of interception and recording
Article 156 § 3. Record of the interception and recording
The Code of Criminal Procedure, in force after 12 June 2003, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“Article 41. Competence of the investigating judge
The investigating judge ensures judicial supervision during the criminal prosecution by:
...
authorising the interception of communications, seizure of correspondence, video recordings;...”
...
Article 135. Interception of communications
Article 136. Interception and recording and their authorisation
Article 138. Verification of interception recording
Under section 15(5) of the Advocacy Act of 13 May 1999, a lawyer's professional correspondence can be intercepted only under the conditions provided for by law. Section 15 (13) provides that the confidentiality of a lawyer's correspondence with his client is guaranteed and that such correspondence cannot be intercepted.