The case originated in an application (no. 18498/15) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Azerbaijani national, Mr Aslan Ziyaddin oglu Ismayilov (Aslan Ziyəddin oğlu İsmayılov - “the applicant”), on 3 April 2015.
The applicant, who is a lawyer based in Baku, represented himself. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
Relying on Articles 6, 10 and 14 of the Convention, the applicant alleged that the domestic proceedings concerning his disbarment had been unfair and that his disbarment had amounted to a breach of his right to freedom of expression.
On 3 September 2015 the Government were given notice of the application.
The applicant was born in 1958 and lives in Baku.
The applicant was a lawyer (vəkil) and a member of the Azerbaijani Bar Association (Azərbaycan Respublikası Vəkillər Kollegiyası – hereinafter “the ABA”) at the time of the events described below.
In 1996 he founded the law firm “Visa”, which has its offices in flat 1, 58 Nizami Street, in Baku. The applicant is also one of the founders of the law firm “Aslan Ismayilov and Partners”, which has its offices in flat 4/6, 58 Nizami Street, in Baku. It appears from the case file that an opinion, delivered by an ABA commission and signed by its three members, confirmed that the premises of the law firm “Aslan Ismayilov and Partners” had a separate entrance and could accommodate a law firm. By a letter dated 15 September 2006, the Deputy Chairman of the ABA informed the Ministry of Justice that the constitution of the law firm “Aslan Ismayilov and Partners”, located at flat 4/6, 58 Nizami Street, Baku, was in compliance with the requirements of the Law on Advocates and Advocacy Activity. The law firm “Aslan Ismayilov and Partners” was registered by the Ministry of Justice on 29 September 2006.
The applicant is also a civil-society activist and often appears in the media. In his media appearances he has raised various social problems and has criticised the situation in respect of the country’s legal system and the functioning of different State bodies.
On 18 March 1999 the applicant was disbarred from the ABA. He succeeded in regaining admission on 3 June 2005.
On 3 November 2011 the applicant was subjected to the disciplinary sanction of reprimand following a complaint lodged against him by a client.
On 12 December 2012 the applicant signed a contract with a client (F.A.), agreeing to defend her rights in a divorce and child custody case before the Sabail District Court. On the same day another contract for the defence of F.A.’s rights before the Sabail District Court was concluded between F.A. and the law firm “Visa”. The latter contract was signed on behalf of the law firm by its director, K.M. In addition, by a power of attorney issued on 12 December 2012, F.A. authorised the applicant and K.M. to represent her in the court proceedings. On the same date mandate (order) no. 000679 was issued, confirming that F.A. was represented by the applicant.
The Sabail District Court held several hearings and scheduled the last hearing for 12 February 2013. The day before that hearing, F.A. informed the applicant that she had reached a friendly settlement with the other party and wanted to withdraw her claim. The applicant forgot to transmit this information to K.M., who defended F.A.’s claim before the Sabail District Court at the hearing of 12 February 2013. At that hearing K.M. submitted to the court various documents concerning the child’s health, asking that custody of the child be awarded to F.A.
Following the hearing, F.A. immediately contacted the applicant, complaining about K.M.’s defence of the claim before the court. In particular, she stated that she did not wish to pursue the court proceedings and wanted to reach a friendly settlement with the other party. The applicant informed F.A. that there had been a misunderstanding, in that he had failed to inform K.M. of the friendly settlement between her and the other party.
Following this conversation, at around 4.20 p.m. on the same date the applicant went to the Sabail District Court, where he asked to meet the judge (E.H.) who was in charge of the case. According to the applicant, E.H. agreed to meet him, together with K.M., and they entered E.H.’s office in the court building. The applicant explained the situation to E.H., noting that there had been a misunderstanding and that the parties had agreed to reach a friendly settlement. He asked E.H. to return the documents in support of F.A.’s claim, submitted by K.M. at the court hearing, and to help achieve the resolution of the case by a friendly settlement. According to the applicant, following his explanation the judge suddenly started insulting him, accusing him of submitting forged documents to the court.
In the applicant’s submission, he felt that he was being framed as part of a setup against him, and wished to leave E.H.’s office immediately. However, E.H. did not open the door of his office, which was locked and could be opened only by a button situated under the judge’s desk. E.H. called the duty police officer and other court employees to his office and asked them to draw up a report stating that the applicant had insulted him.
A report (akt) of 12 February 2013 was drawn up and signed by six persons; a police officer (A.), three enforcement officers (icra məmuru) (B., C. and D.) and two court employees (E. and F.). The relevant part of the report reads as follows:
“We, the enforcement officers whose names are set out above and who came to the office of judge E.H., saw that Aslan Ismayilov [the applicant] insulted the judge and threatened him by shouting, told him that “he would get him fired”; at the judge’s request, we took the lawyer Aslan Ismayilov out of the judge’s office.”
Following this incident, on the same day the applicant made representations to the Judicial Legal Council, complaining about E.H.’s alleged unlawful actions. In particular, he complained that the judge had insulted and threatened him in his office. He also noted that E.H. had unlawfully deprived him of his liberty, in that he had locked the door of his office and had not allowed him to leave. In that connection, he compared E.H.’s office with that of officers of NKVD (the abbreviation in Russian of the People’s Commissariat for Internal Affairs known for its political repression in the 1930s and 1940s in the USSR). The applicant further noted that this attitude on the part of the judge was related to a previous judgment, delivered by him in a property dispute in 2012, which the applicant had subsequently succeeded in having overturned by the Supreme Court.
The applicant also sent a similar complaint to the Prosecutor General’s Office and made a statement to the press.
By a letter of 13 May 2013 the Judicial Legal Council informed the applicant that there were no grounds for instituting disciplinary proceedings against the judge.
On 14 February 2013 E.H. sent a letter to the ABA, asking it to examine the applicant’s alleged unlawful actions. In particular, the judge noted that the applicant had unlawfully requested the return of documents submitted to the court after the end of the court hearing, had unlawfully entered his office, and had insulted and threatened him, saying that “he would get him fired”. The judge further noted that the applicant had compared his office with that of NKVD officers and had made a false statement that he had been prevented from leaving the judge’s office.
On 11 April 2013 the ABA Disciplinary Commission held a meeting at which it discussed the judge’s complaint against the applicant. The applicant, who attended the meeting, rejected the complaint against him, stating that he had not insulted or threatened the judge. The applicant also stated that he had entered the judge’s office after obtaining his permission and had asked for the return of the documents submitted to the court. However, the judge had started insulting him, accusing him of submitting forged documents to the court. He also claimed that he had been set up, in retaliation for his involvement in a previous case that had been examined by the judge in question. It appears from the transcript of the meeting that when the chairman of the Disciplinary Commission asked the applicant why he had not submitted an official request to the court asking for the return of the documents, but had entered the judge’s office to ask for them, the applicant answered that he considered his action lawful and did not intend to reply to the questions. Following another question, the applicant stated that all the members of that commission were slaves and corrupt and that, unlike them, he was not deprived of conscience.
On the same day the Disciplinary Commission issued an opinion, deciding to refer the complaint against the applicant to the Presidium of the ABA (Azərbaycan Respublikası Vəkillər Kollegiyası Rəyasət Heyəti – hereinafter “the Presidium”). It held that the applicant had unlawfully entered the judge’s office to ask for the return of the documents submitted to the court and had insulted and threatened the judge; these actions of the applicant constituted an interference with the functioning of the justice system, within the meaning of Article 9 of the Law on Courts and Judges. It also found that the applicant had failed to document the legal services provided to F.A., in breach of Article 5 of the Law on Advocates and Advocacy Activity. It further held that the fact that the law firms “Visa” and “Aslan Ismayilov and Partners” were located at the same address enabled lawyers who were not members of the ABA to share the same office as lawyers who were members of the ABA, contrary to the requirements of Article 17 of the Law on Advocates and Advocacy Activity concerning the protection of lawyer confidentiality (vəkil sirri). Lastly, the Disciplinary Commission underlined that the fact that the applicant had been issued with a warning on several occasions since his readmission to the ABA on 3 June 2005 and had been subjected to the disciplinary sanction of reprimand on 3 November 2011, constituted grounds for imposing disciplinary liability.
On 8 May 2013 the Presidium held a meeting at which it examined the complaint against the applicant. It appears from the transcript of the meeting that it was held in the presence of the applicant, who rejected the judge’s complaint, reiterating his previous submissions. He also stated that the judge’s complaint against him was related to his involvement in a previous case, examined by the same judge, who had refused to rule in favour of his client. In reply to the questions of the Presidium’s members, the applicant stated that he had not submitted forged documents to the Sabail District Court. However, he confirmed that he had said to the members of the Disciplinary Commission that they were slaves and corrupt. Three members of the Presidium submitted that the applicant’s actions at the Sabail District Court had been unlawful and one of them noted that the applicant was acting more as a politician than a lawyer.
On the same day the Presidium, relying on the above-mentioned findings in the Disciplinary Commission’s opinion, decided to refer the applicant’s case to a court with a view to his disbarment. It also decided to suspend the applicant’s activity as a lawyer pending a judicial decision.
On 20 May 2013 the Presidium lodged a request with the Sabail District Court for the applicant’s disbarment.
Following a series of procedural decisions, in July 2013 the examination of the case on the merits was attributed to the Narimanov District Court.
In the course of the court proceedings on 19 August 2013 the applicant lodged a request asking the court to hear K.M. as a witness, as he was the only person who had been present in the judge’s office during the incident. The applicant also submitted that he could not have entered the judge’s office without the latter’s permission, because only the judge himself could open and lock the door of his office using a button situated under his desk; in addition, there was a police officer at the entrance. In that connection, he asked the court to examine the premises where the incident took place, in order to establish whether it was possible to enter the judge’s office without his permission and whether there were security cameras in the court building. Moreover, on 26 August 2013 the applicant lodged a request asking the court to hear the six persons who had signed the report of 12 February 2013.
On an unspecified date the Narimanov District Court dismissed the applicant’s requests. However, it appears from the case file that on an unspecified date the Narimanov District Court asked the Sabail District Court to submit the video recordings of the security cameras situated in the court building. In reply, the Sabail District Court informed the Narimanov District Court that it was not possible to submit these video recordings because the video recordings of the security cameras were kept for a period of only five days.
At the hearing of 9 September 2013, the applicant reiterated his previous requests, pointing out that there was no evidence that he had insulted and threatened the judge. The applicant also stated that he had defended the rights of F.A. on the basis of a contract concluded between them and of mandate no. 000679 issued in that regard. He further stated that the law firms “Visa” and “Aslan Ismayilov and Partners” were located in the same building, but not at the same address, referring to the letter of 15 September 2006 from the Deputy Chairman of the ABA.
On 10 September 2013 the Narimanov District Court delivered its judgment on the merits and ordered the applicant’s disbarment. It relied on the findings of the ABA Disciplinary Commission, holding that the applicant had breached the requirements of Article 9 of the Law on Courts and Judges and Articles 5 and 17 of the Law on Advocates and Advocacy Activity (see paragraph 22 above). The court made no mention of the applicant’s specific arguments against the Presidium’s decision and did not hear K.M. and those who signed the report of 12 February 2013.
On 8 October 2013 the applicant appealed against the judgment. He claimed, in particular, that the first-instance judgment had not been reasoned and had failed to address the evidence submitted in support of his claim. He further complained about the court’s failure to examine the place where the incident had occurred and to hear K.M. and the six persons who signed the report of 12 February 2013.
On 25 November 2013 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal, finding that the first-instance court’s judgment was reasoned. The appellate court was silent as to the specific complaints raised by the applicant in his appeal.
On 3 April 2014 the Supreme Court quashed the Baku Court of Appeal’s judgment of 25 November 2013 and remitted the case to the appellate court for a fresh examination. The Supreme Court held, in particular, that the lower courts had failed to hear K.M. and the persons who signed the report of 12 February 2013, despite a clear request from the applicant to this effect.
On 7 July 2014 the Baku Court of Appeal delivered a new judgment on the merits and upheld the Narimanov District Court’s judgment of 10 September 2013. It appears from the judgment that in the course of its proceedings the appellate court heard K.M., and three of the six persons (A., C. and D.) who had signed the report of 12 February 2013. The judgment does not provide any reason for the appellate court’s failure to hear the other three persons who signed the report. It appears from the judgment that K.M. stated before the appellate court that he and the applicant had entered the judge’s office with the judge’s permission, and that the applicant had not insulted or threatened the judge. He further noted that when the applicant had wanted to leave the judge’s office the judge had not allowed him to do so and had summoned the court employees, asking them to draw up a report. For his part, A. stated that when he went into the judge’s office the applicant and the judge were arguing. However, the police officer did not state that the applicant had insulted or threatened the judge. In their statements, C. and D. stated that they had heard the expression of “I [shall] get you fired”. The appellate court held that when assessing K.M.’s statement it had to take into consideration the fact that he worked with the applicant. The appellate court also held that the very fact that the applicant entered the judge’s office and discussed a case with him was contrary to the requirements of the law, and thus the applicant’s argument that he could not enter the judge’s office without that latter’s permission, which could be proved by security cameras, was irrelevant.
On 3 December 2014 the Supreme Court upheld the Baku Court of Appeal’s judgment of 7 July 2014.