The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission") on 9 September 1994, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 para. 1 and Article 47 (art. 32-1, art. 47) of the Convention.  It originated in an application (no. 16718/90) against the  lodged with the Commission under Article 25 (art. 25) by an Austrian national, Mr Peter Palaoro, on 28 May 1990.
The Commission's request referred to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48) and to the declaration whereby  recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46) (art. 46).  The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) of the Convention.  
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 para. 3 (d) of Rules of Court A, the applicant stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings and designated the lawyer who would represent him (Rule 30).
On 24 September 1994, the President of the Court decided, under Rule 21 para. 6 and in the interests of the proper administration of justice, that a single Chamber should be constituted to hear the instant case and the cases of Schmautzer, Umlauft, Gradinger, Pramstaller and Pfarrmeier v.  .
The Chamber to be constituted for this purpose included ex officio Mr F. Matscher, the elected judge of Austrian nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr R. Ryssdal, the President of the Court (Rule 21 para. 3 (b)).  On the same day, in the presence of the Registrar, the President drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr L. E. Pettiti, Mr R. Macdonald, Mr S.K. Martens, Mr I. Foighel, Mr J.M. Morenilla, Sir John Freeland and Mr J. Makarczyk (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 para. 4) (art. 43).
As President of the Chamber (Rule 21 para. 5), Mr Ryssdal, acting through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Austrian Government ("the Government"), the applicant and the Delegate of the Commission on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 37 para. 1 and 38). Pursuant to the order made in consequence, the Registrar received the Government's memorial on 24 January 1995 and the applicant's memorial on 30 January 1995.
On 3 February 1995 the Commission produced the documents in the proceedings before it, as requested by the Registrar on the President's instructions.
In accordance with the President's decision, the hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, , on 26 April 1995.  The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:  
(a) for the Government  
(b) for the Commission  
(c) for the applicant  
The Court heard addresses by Mr Weitzel, Mr Weh and Mr Cede.  
Mr  lives at Höchst in Vorarlberg.
On 7 November 1987 a police car observed the applicant driving on the motorway at speeds considerably in excess of the maximum speed limits.  At 14.28 hours and 53 seconds he was recorded travelling at 150 kilometres per hour on a stretch of road where a sign indicated the limit to be 100 k.p.h.  Thirty-one seconds later he was recorded travelling at 67 k.p.h. over the general 130 k.p.h. limit for motorways.  The applicant alleged that as the vehicle he was driving was an extremely powerful one, it was difficult for the driver to realise at what speed it was actually travelling.
On 6 December 1987 the Tyrol regional police authority (Landesgendarmeriekommando) drew up a report and imposed two separate fines on the applicant for speeding.  
On 16 November 1988, after administrative proceedings which involved an examination of the reporting police officers (Meldungsleger) in the absence of the applicant, the Imst district authority (Bezirkshauptmannschaft) found the applicant guilty of two speeding offences under the Road Traffic Act (Straßenverkehrsordnung - see paragraph 17 below).  Pursuant to section 99(3) of that Act (see paragraph 18 below) the applicant was fined 4,000 and 6,000 Austrian schillings (ATS), with imprisonment of eight and ten days respectively in default of payment.
The applicant appealed to the Tyrol regional government (Amt der Landesregierung), questioning the precision of the police methods for measuring vehicle speed.  He further contended that, having admitted driving at a high speed on a given stretch of road, he should not have been punished under two different provisions, which had resulted in an excessively high fine.  He therefore requested that the incident be treated as a single offence and the fine reduced accordingly.
On 22 December 1988 the Tyrol regional government reduced the fines to ATS 2,000 and 4,000 respectively, and the penalties in default to four and seven days' imprisonment.  The appellate authority accepted, among other considerations, that speed-measuring techniques could not achieve total accuracy.  The submission that only one offence had been committed was dismissed on the ground that two different provisions had been infringed at two different moments in time.
Mr Palaoro then applied to the  (Verfassungsgerichtshof).  Relying on Article 6 (art. 6) of the Convention, he complained that the administrative criminal procedure did not guarantee a fair trial.  He argued that he should have been given an oral hearing and the opportunity to examine the witnesses - that is to say the police officers - in person.  This would have allowed him to establish that the measuring methods used by the police were often defective.  He further criticised the "principle of cumulative imposition of penalties" (Kumulationsprinzip), by virtue of which the same criminal behaviour could be punished under different provisions.  In this context he referred to Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 ((P7-4) to the Convention.
On 10 March 1989 the  declared the applicant's complaint partly inadmissible as raising questions concerning the application of ordinary law; in so far as the complaint did raise issues of constitutional law, the , referring to its own case-law on the Convention, found that the application did not have sufficient prospects of success.  Among other provisions, Article 144 para. 2 of the Federal Constitution was applied (see paragraph 20 below).
On 19 April 1989 Mr Palaoro requested the  to send his file to the  (Verwaltungsgerichtshof) and on 15 June 1989 he submitted his grounds of appeal to the latter. He stressed that he should have had the opportunity to examine the witnesses directly and that he should not have been punished twice for what he considered to be a single offence.
No public hearing was requested.  
On 25 October 1989 the applicant's appeal was dismissed by the Administrative Court pursuant to section 42(1) of the Administrative Court Act (Verwaltungsgerichtshofsgesetz - see paragraph 24 below). It noted that a formal confrontation with a witness was to be ordered only where it was necessary in the special circumstances of a given case: there was no general right to put questions in person to a witness (section 47 of the Administrative Criminal Justice Act).  The  upheld the respondent authority's grounds for dismissing the applicant's second complaint (see paragraph 12 above).
Section 20(2) of the Road Traffic Act 1960 sets the maximum speed limit on motorways at 130 kilometres per hour.
Section 52(A)(10)(a) of the same Act prohibits travelling in excess of the speed limit indicated on a road sign.  
Under section 99(3)(a) of the Road Traffic Act, breaches of its provisions are punishable with a fine of up to ATS 10,000, with imprisonment of up to two weeks in default of payment.
Article 90 para. 1 of the Federal Constitution (Bundes-Verfassungsgesetz) provides:
"Hearings by trial courts in civil and criminal cases shall be oral and public.  Exceptions may be prescribed by law." 
By Article 144 para. 1 of the Federal Constitution, the Constitutional Court, when an application (Beschwerde) is made to it, has to determine whether an administrative decision (Bescheid) has infringed a right guaranteed by the Constitution or has applied regulations (Verordnung) contrary to the law, a law contrary to the Constitution or an international treaty incompatible with Austrian law.
Article 144 para. 2 provides: 
"Up to the time of the hearing the  may by means of a decision (Beschluß) decline to accept a case for adjudication if it does not have sufficient prospects of success or if it cannot be expected that the judgment will clarify an issue of constitutional law.  The court may not decline to accept for adjudication a case excluded from the jurisdiction of the  by Article 133."  
By Article 130 para. 1 of the Federal Constitution, the  has jurisdiction to hear, inter alia, applications alleging that an administrative decision is unlawful.
Section 39(1) of the Administrative Court Act provides, in particular, that at the end of the preliminary proceedings (Vorverfahren) the  must hold a hearing where the applicant makes a request to that effect.
Section 39(2) reads as follows:  
"Notwithstanding a party's application under subsection (1), the  may decide not to hold a hearing where  
Sub-paragraphs 1 to 3 of section 39(2) were in force in 1958; sub-paragraphs 4 and 5 were inserted in 1964 and sub-paragraph 6 in 1982.  
Section 41(1) of the Administrative Court Act provides:
"In so far as the Administrative Court does not find any unlawfulness deriving from the respondent authority's lack of jurisdiction or from breaches of procedural rules (section 42(2)(2) and (3)) ..., it must examine the impugned decision on the basis of the facts found by the respondent authority and with reference to the complaints put forward ... If it considers that reasons which have not yet been notified to one of the parties might be decisive for ruling on [one of these complaints] ..., it must hear the parties on this point and adjourn the proceedings if necessary."  
Section 42(1) of the same Act states that, save as otherwise provided, the Administrative Court must either dismiss an application as ill-founded or quash the impugned decision.
By section 42(2),  
"The  shall quash the impugned decision if it is unlawful  
(a) the respondent authority has made findings of fact which are, in an important respect, contradicted by the case file, or  
(b) the facts require further investigation on an important point, or  
(c) procedural rules have been disregarded, compliance with which could have led to a different decision by the respondent authority."  
If the Administrative Court quashes the impugned decision, "the administrative authorities [are] under a duty ... to take immediate steps, using the legal means available to them, to bring about in the specific case the legal situation which corresponds to the Administrative Court's view of the law (Rechtsanschauung)" (section 63(1)).
In a judgment of 14 October 1987 (G 181/86) the  held:
"From the fact that it has been necessary to extend the reservation in respect of Article 5 (art. 5) of the Convention to cover the procedural safeguards of Article 6 (art. 6) of the Convention, because of the connection between those two provisions (art. 5, art. 6), it follows that, conversely, the limited review (die (bloß) nachprüfende Kontrolle) carried out by the Administrative Court or the Constitutional Court is insufficient in respect of criminal penalties within the meaning of the Convention that are not covered by the reservation."  
Pursuant to Article 129 of the Federal Constitution, administrative courts called "independent administrative tribunals" (Unabhängige Verwaltungssenate) were set up in the Länder with effect from 1 January 1991.  The functions of these tribunals include determining both the factual and the legal issues arising in cases concerning administrative offences (Verwaltungsübertretungen).
The instrument of ratification of the Convention deposited by the Austrian Government on 3 September 1958 contains, inter alia, a reservation worded as follows:
"The provisions of Article 5 (art. 5) of the Convention shall be so applied that there shall be no interference with the measures for the deprivation of liberty prescribed in the laws on administrative procedure, BGBl [Federal Official Gazette] No. 172/1950, subject to review by the Administrative Court or the Constitutional Court as provided for in the Austrian Federal Constitution."  
Mr Palaoro applied to the Commission on 28 May 1990.  He relied on Article 6 paras. 1 and 3 (art. 6-1, art. 6-3) of the Convention and Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 (P7-4), complaining (a) that he had been unable to bring his case before a tribunal, (b) that he had been denied the right to examine a witness in the administrative proceedings and (c) that he had been punished twice for the same offence.
On 10 May 1993 the Commission declared the application (no. 16718/90) admissible save as regards the complaint under Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 (P7-4).
In its report of 19 May 1994 (Article 31) (art. 31), it expressed the unanimous opinion that  
(a) there had been a violation of Article 6 para. 1 (art. 6-1) of the Convention in that the applicant had not been able to bring his case before a tribunal; and  
(b) the lack of a hearing before the  and the failure by the administrative authorities to allow the witnesses to be examined by the applicant raised no separate issue under Article 6 (art. 6) of the Convention. 
The full text of the Commission's opinion and of the concurring opinion contained in the report is reproduced as an annex to this judgment . 
In their memorial the Government asked the Court to hold that
"Article 6 (art. 6) of the Convention is not applicable in the present case; or alternatively, that Article 6 (art. 6) of the Convention was not violated in the administrative criminal proceedings underlying the application".  