The case originated in an application (no. 60125/11) against the Kingdom of Belgium lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by seven Serbian nationals, Mr V.M. and Mrs G.S.M. and their five children, S.M., E.M., S.M., E.M. and E.M.M., the last of whom died on 18 December 2011 (“the applicants”), on 27 September 2011. The President of the Section acceded to the applicants’ request not to have their names disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicants were represented by Ms E. Neraudau, a lawyer practising in Nantes. The Belgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr M. Tysebaert, Senior Adviser, Federal Justice Department.
The applicants alleged in particular that, on account of the reception conditions in Belgium and their “forced” return to Serbia, the Belgian authorities had exposed them to a situation which endangered their lives and physical integrity (Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention). They also complained that they had not had an effective remedy.
The application was communicated to the Government on 4 February 2013.
The applicants and the respondent Government each filed written observations (Rule 54 § 2). Observations were also received from the nongovernmental organisation Coordination et initiatives pour réfugiés et étrangers (“Ciré”), which had been given leave to intervene in the procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 2).
The applicants, Mr V.M. and Mrs G.S.M., and four of their children were born in 1981, 1977, 2001, 2004, 2007 and 2011 respectively and live in Serbia. Their eldest daughter, who was also an applicant, was born in 2001 and subsequently died on 18 December 2011 after the application had been lodged.
The applicants are of Roma origin and were born in Serbia, where they spent the greater part of their lives. They explained that they decided to leave their country for Kosovo because of the discrimination and illtreatment they had suffered on account of their origin in every sphere: access to the employment market, medical care, schooling difficulties and so forth.
The eldest daughter of the first two applicants had been physically and mentally disabled since birth and had suffered from epilepsy.
After failing to obtain a more secure situation for themselves in Kosovo, in March 2010 the applicants travelled to France, where they lodged an application for asylum. Their application was rejected by a final decision on 4 June 2010.
The applicants stated that in the meantime they had returned to Kosovo, and then to Serbia, in May 2010 owing to the precariousness of their situation in France and their inability to provide for their essential needs.
In March 2011, as their situation had not changed, the applicants decided to go to Belgium, where they lodged an asylum application on 1 April 2011.
During their interview with the “Dublin” department of the Aliens Office on 4 April 2011 the applicants gave an account of their movements to date and expressed their fears in the event of a return to Serbia. The first applicant stated that he had chosen to seek asylum in Belgium because he had been told that he could obtain better treatment for his disabled daughter there. He said that he was suffering from psychological problems. The second applicant said that Belgium had been the choice of the smuggler. When asked about her health, she replied that she was six months’ pregnant. She also mentioned their eldest daughter’s health problems.
The applicants maintained that they had explained the reasons why they refused to return to France, where they had been living in extremely precarious conditions. They submitted that they had not been asked to provide any evidence of having left the territory of the Member States of the European Union (“EU”) or regarding the family members’ state of health.
On 12 April 2011 the Belgian authorities sent France requests to take the applicants back on the grounds that the latter had been unable to prove that they had left the territory of the Member States of the EU for Serbia since their stay in France.
On 22 April 2011, relying on Article 16(3) of Council Regulation (EC) No 343/2003 of 18 February 2003 establishing the criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible for examining an asylum application lodged in one of the Member States by a thirdcountry national (“the Dublin II Regulation”), France refused to take charge of the applicants on the grounds that the couple were considered to have disappeared since May 2010 because they had not collected the notice of final refusal of their asylum application dated 4 June 2010 and this corroborated their statements to the Aliens Office according to which they had left the Schengen Area in 2010 and re-entered it in March 2011, thus leaving for a period of more than three months.
On 2 May 2011 the Belgian authorities asked the French authorities to reconsider their position given that there was no conclusive evidence that the family had left the territory of the Member States for more than three months since their stay in France and the applicants were clearly aware of the rejection of their asylum application in France.
On 6 May 2011 France accepted the request to take the family back pursuant to Article 16(1)(e) of the Dublin II Regulation.
On 17 May 2011 the Aliens Office issued decisions refusing the applicants leave to remain and ordering them to leave the country for France on the grounds that under Article 16(1)(e) of the Dublin II Regulation Belgium was not responsible for examining the asylum application and that France had agreed to take charge of the family. The decisions indicated among other things that the family, who were originally from Kosovo, “had not furnished evidence of their stay” in Kosovo after staying in France nor any certificates regarding any medical treatment or care in respect of the pregnancy, or concerning the child or the father. Considering that France was a country which respected human rights, had democratic institutions, had ratified the Convention and the Geneva Convention on the Status of Refugees, and was bound to implement the directives of the European Union on asylum and that if a return were to raise a problem under Article 3 of the Convention, the family could always lodge an application with the Court for interim measures, the Aliens Office considered that the Belgian authorities did not have to use the sovereignty clause provided for in Article 3(2) of the Dublin II Regulation.
Accordingly, the applicants were ordered to leave the country within seven days and to report to the French authorities at the border crossing. On the same day the applicants were issued with laissez-passer.
On 19 May 2011 the applicants, through their legal representative, contacted the Aliens Office for the purposes of providing it with evidence that they had left the territory of the European Union for more than three months (gynaecologist’s certificates, the second applicant’s health card and proof of enrolment at school of one of their children).
On 25 May 2011 execution of the orders to leave the country were extended until 25 September 2011 on account of the fact that the second applicant was soon due to give birth.
On 16 June 2011 the applicants lodged an application with the Aliens Appeals Board for the decisions refusing them residence permits and ordering them to leave the country to be set aside and for a stay of execution. They argued that the decisions, with the reasons given therein, had not provided them with the examination required by Article 13 taken together with Article 3 of the Convention (M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece [GC], no. 30696/09, § 336, ECHR 2011) of their fears regarding a return to Serbia and of their health problems. Firstly, the reasoning was erroneous and incomplete (error as to their nationality, identifying them as Kosovars instead of Serbs, failure to mention their return to Serbia and their Roma origin). Secondly, they could not be blamed for having failed to provide, during their Dublin interview, documents certifying their health problems and their movements to date or for not having substantiated their fears regarding a transfer to France. Like all Dublin asylum-seekers at that time, when they had attended those interviews they had not been assisted by a lawyer or informed of the documents that they should bring and no document had been requested of them. As they had expressed their fears, the Belgian authorities should have asked the appropriate questions and requested the relevant documents in order to ensure that their return did not infringe their fundamental rights. The applicants also argued that France should not have been determined as the State responsible for examining their asylum applications. Under Article 16(3) of the Dublin II Regulation, the obligations regarding the determination of the State responsible ceased where the third-country national had left the territory of the Member States for at least three months. That was precisely the position the applicants had been in on account of their return to Serbia from May 2010 to March 2011 as certified by the documents subsequently sent to the Aliens Office (see paragraph 20 above). Lastly, they submitted that the Belgian authorities should have used the sovereignty clause or the humanitarian clause both on account of their special vulnerability and of the notoriously difficult situation of the Roma minority in Serbia and of the conditions for the reception of asylum-seekers in France.
The hearing before the Aliens Appeals Board took place on 26 August 2011.
On 23 September 2011 the applicants unsuccessfully sought a further extension of the order to leave the country pending the outcome of the proceedings before the Aliens Appeals Board.
On 27 September 2011 the applicants lodged an application with the Court for interim measures suspending their transfer to France pending the outcome of the proceedings before the Aliens Appeals Board.
On 28 September 2011 the Court refused to indicate an interim measure.
In a judgment of 29 November 2011 the Aliens Appeals Board ruled on the application to have the decisions refusing residence permits and ordering the applicants to leave the country set aside and for a stay of execution.
The Aliens Appeals Board dismissed the ground of appeal regarding the conditions of reception in France and based on the risk alleged by the applicants of being exposed to treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Convention. It found as follows:
“... the Board cannot but observe that the applicants have failed to show that they encountered difficulties in their dealings with the French authorities regarding access to health care for their child or their conditions of reception as asylum-seekers. They have not adduced so much as a shred of evidence regarding the circumstances of the ill-treatment they have allegedly suffered and have merely asserted in their application, without substantiating this with the slightest evidence that could corroborate the facts, “that they found themselves in an extremely precarious situation at the time of lodging their application for asylum and that their only refuge was a night hostel that they had to leave the next morning”. Moreover, although their daughter’s disability had been specified in the “Dublin form”, the parties have not made any allegation whatsoever before the Aliens Appeals Board of encountering particular difficulties in the reception of asylum-seekers as organised by the relevant French authorities.”
The Aliens Appeals Board also criticised the applicants for failing to produce in full the NGO reports that they had cited in support of their application, which had prevented it from checking whether the extracts produced did actually concern France.
The Aliens Appeals Board set the decisions aside, however, on the ground that the Aliens Office had not established the legal basis on which it considered that France was the State responsible for examining the applicants’ asylum application.
On 23 December 2011 the Belgian State lodged an appeal on points of law with the Conseil d’État against the Aliens Appeals Board’s judgment. It disputed the Aliens Appeals Board’s analysis of the applicable legal basis.
In an order of 12 January 2012 the Conseil d’État declared the appeal admissible. In a judgment of 28 February 2013 it rejected it for lack of current interest on the grounds that the operative provisions of the Aliens Appeals Board’s judgment were no longer a source of complaint for the applicants because they had returned to Serbia and had left the territory of the Member States for more than three months with the result that Belgium was relieved of any obligation in the process of determining which Member State was responsible for their asylum application.
In the meantime, on 22 September 2011, the applicants had lodged an application for leave to remain on medical grounds under section 9ter of the Aliens (Entry, Residence, Settlement and Expulsion) Act of 15 December 1980 (“the Aliens Act”) on behalf of their eldest daughter. They referred to the extreme precariousness of their position and the discrimination they had suffered as Roms in Serbia and Kosovo. Citing several international reports in support of their submissions, they argued that for that reason they had no guarantee that they would be able to obtain the necessary treatment for their daughter’s health condition. They sought temporary leave to remain pending the outcome of the asylum proceedings they had instituted in Belgium.
On 30 September 2011 the Aliens Office declared their application inadmissible on the grounds that the medical certificate of 26 June 2011 (see paragraph 38 below), produced in support of their application to have their residence status regularised, certified the existence of a medical problem and stipulated the treatment considered necessary but, contrary to the requirements of section 9ter § 3, 3o of the Aliens Act, did not specify the degree of seriousness of the condition.
The applicants indicated in their observations in reply that they had learnt of the existence of that decision during the proceedings before the Court.
On 1 April 2011 the Federal agency for the reception of asylum-seekers (“Fedasil”) assigned the applicants a reception facility as their mandatory place of registration, namely, Morlanwez asylum-seekers’ reception centre.
The social worker from the centre took down the following account by the applicants of the conditions of their reception in France:
“The family decided to leave France because they had no means of subsistence. They were living in a night shelter which they had to leave in the day. They and the children were out on the streets from 7 a.m. They had to use a pushchair as a wheelchair for S., who is disabled. They had no information of any kind apart from the status of asylum-seeker which had been given to them on their arrival. No doctor, no social worker, no lawyer, no interpreter. They had absolutely no means of communication. They had no idea what they should do or what to expect. S. was not receiving any medical treatment of any kind. When her health deteriorated and she had to be taken to hospital, it was the mother’s sister who drove her to the emergency ward at the hospital and acted as interpreter. Once at the hospital the little girl had [epileptic] fits and her hair fell out. That was what decided the family to return to Serbia”.
The eldest daughter was examined on 26 June 2011 by a neuropsychiatrist at Jolimont-Lobbes Hospital and a medical certificate was drawn up on that day certifying the child’s disabilities.
In that certificate, which was sent to the Aliens Office on 1 July 2011, the doctor noted that the child had “cerebral palsy with epilepsy”, suffered from “severe axial and peripheral hypotonia”, that she could not sit up unassisted and soiled her underwear, that she could not talk and appeared not to understand others. He also noted that the child was taking medicines and that she required physiotherapy and appropriate equipment (orthopaedic braces, seat-brace). Those medical findings were confirmed by a neurological examination carried out on 1 July 2011.
The eldest daughter was admitted to hospital on 7 and 8 July 2011 for her epileptic fits and a neurological report drawn up.
After the second applicant gave birth on 26 July 2011 the family were assigned a new reception centre on 5 August 2011 in an open centre suitable for families, in Saint-Trond in the province of Limbourg.
On 26 September 2011, when the order extending execution of the order to leave the country expired, and as they could no longer benefit from material assistance for refugees, the applicants were removed from the Saint-Trond reception centre.
The applicants travelled to Brussels, where voluntary associations indicated a public square in the municipality of Schaerbeek, in the centre of the Brussels-Capital administrative district, where other homeless Roma families were also staying. They stayed there from 27 September to 5 October 2011.
On 29 September 2011, through their legal representative, the applicants asked the French-speaking community’s General Delegate to the Rights of the Child to intervene urgently with the national authorities responsible for the reception of asylum-seekers.
On the same day the General Delegate sent a letter to the Director-General of Fedasil requesting that accommodation be found urgently.
A signed statement by the General Delegate dated 2 October 2011 indicated that he also contacted the municipality of Schaerbeek in an attempt to find urgent accommodation for the family. According to the General Delegate, the municipal authorities stated that they did not have power to make a decision and that it was for the federal authorities to decide, and Fedasil declared that it did not have power on account of the decision taken by the Aliens Office regarding France’s responsibility for processing the asylum request (see paragraph 18 above). Fedasil also stated that the application to the Aliens Appeals Board (see paragraph 22 above) was not of suspensive effect, which was why the reception centre had applied the rules terminating the right to material assistance.
On 5 October 2011, following the intervention of the General Delegate, the Secretary of State’s office for Asylum and Migration, Social Integration and the Fight against Poverty instructed Fedasil to designate a reception centre as a matter of urgency.
After spending two days at the transit centre of the WoluweSaintPierre municipality, also in the Brussels-Capital administrative district, on 7 October 2011 the applicants were assigned a new reception centre as a mandatory place of registration: the Bovigny reception centre for asylum-seekers in the province of Luxembourg approximately 160 km from Brussels.
The Government maintained that the applicants had failed to register at the centre. The applicants, for their part, stated that they had gone there by train and a special bus but had been sent back to Brussels to Fedasil’s Dispatching Department on the grounds that their “annex 26quater [order to leave the country] was invalid.”
When they got back to Brussels on 7 October 2011 the applicants got off the train at the Brussels Gare du Nord, where they remained without any means of subsistence and with no accommodation despite the very cold weather for nearly three more weeks until their return to Serbia was organised via a charitable organisation as part of the Fedasil return programme. The applicants left Belgium for Serbia on 25 October 2011.
In the meantime, on 12 October 2011, the applicants’ mandatory place of residence had been changed to code 207 “no-show” (see paragraph 81 below) and on 25 November 2011 the applicants’ names were deleted from the waiting register.
After their return to Serbia their eldest daughter’s health deteriorated, forcing the applicants to leave the room they had rented on account of the insalubrious conditions. They went to stay with a relative in Novi-Sad and then to the suburbs in Belgrade.
The applicants’ eldest daughter was admitted to hospital on 4 December 2011 suffering from a lung infection. She died on 18 December 2011.
In a letter to their lawyer of 21 November 2012 the applicants stated that they had been attacked by Serbs on a number of occasions: among other incidents, some men had driven by in a car and broken the windows of their home by throwing stones, and had uttered threats, complaining of their links with the “Belgians” and ordering them to leave Serbia. The first applicant had attempted to defend himself and been beaten up twice by his attackers.
In accordance with the Aliens Act, the Aliens Office is the administrative body which determines the State responsible for examining an asylum application under the Dublin III Regulation (formerly the “Dublin II Regulation”, see paragraphs 100-02, below). The relevant provisions of the Act governing the procedure for determining the responsible State were the same as those described in M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece, cited above (§§ 129-35).
Where another State has agreed to take charge or take back, the Aliens Office will serve a decision on the asylum-seeker refusing leave to remain and ordering him or her to leave the country. It issues a document in accordance with the specimen document appearing in the annex 26quater of the royal decree of 8 October 1980 on the admission, residence and expulsion of aliens. The Aliens Office indicates which country is responsible for examining the asylum application and issues the asylum-seeker with a laissez-passer to enable him or her to enter the country in question.
Decisions taken by the Aliens Office may be challenged by appealing to the Aliens Appeals Board, which is an administrative court established by the Act of 15 September 2006 reforming the Conseil d’État and setting up an Aliens Appeals Board. The powers, jurisdiction, composition and functioning of the Aliens Appeals Board are governed by the provisions of the Aliens Act as amended by the aforementioned Act of 15 September 2006. The procedure to be followed before the Aliens Appeals Board is governed by a royal decree of 21 December 2006.
An application to set aside is not an appeal on questions of both fact and law. The review by the Aliens Appeals Board is a review of the lawfulness of the decision being appealed against.
An application to set aside does not suspend enforcement of the measure in question. However, the legislation provides that it may be accompanied by a request for a stay of execution of the measure, either under the extremely urgent procedure, which itself suspends enforcement of the measure, or under the “ordinary” procedure.
At the material time applications for a stay of execution were governed by the provisions of section 39/82 of the Aliens Act, which reads as follows:
“1.  Where a decision by an administrative authority is subject to an application to set aside under section 39/2, the Board shall have sole jurisdiction to order a stay of execution.
A stay of execution shall be ordered, once evidence has been heard from the parties or they have been duly convened, by means of a reasoned decision of the President of the division hearing the application or the aliens appeals judge whom he or she designates for the purpose.
In cases of extreme urgency a stay of execution may be ordered on an interim basis without evidence having been heard from some or any of the parties.
Applicants who request a stay of execution must opt for either the extremely urgent procedure or the ordinary procedure. They may not, simultaneously or consecutively, either seek a second time to have the third sub-paragraph applied or re-apply for a stay of execution in the application referred to in paragraph 3. Failure to comply may result in the request being declared inadmissible.
By way of derogation from the fourth sub-paragraph and without prejudice to paragraph 3, the rejection of a request for a stay of execution under the extremely urgent procedure shall not prevent the applicant from subsequently requesting a stay of execution under the ordinary procedure, where the application under the extremely urgent procedure was rejected on the grounds that the extreme urgency of the situation was not sufficiently established.
A stay of execution may be ordered only if the grounds relied on are sufficiently serious to justify setting aside the impugned decision, and if immediate execution of the decision is likely to cause serious, virtually irreparable harm.
Judgments ordering a stay of execution may be recorded or amended at the request of the parties.
Except in cases of extreme urgency, the request for a stay of execution and the application to set aside must be submitted in a single document.
The title of the application should specify whether an application to set aside is being lodged or a request for a stay of execution and an application to set aside. Failure to comply with this formality will result in the application being treated solely as an application for judicial review.
Once the application to set aside has been lodged any subsequent request for a stay of execution shall be inadmissible, without prejudice to the possibility for the applicant to lodge, in the manner referred to above, a fresh application to set aside accompanied by a request for a stay of execution, if the time-limit for appeals has not expired.
The application shall include a statement of the grounds and facts which, in the applicant’s view, justify a stay of execution or an order for interim measures, as applicable.
Any order for a stay of execution or other interim measures issued prior to the lodging of the application to set aside the decision shall be immediately lifted by the Division President who issued it or by the aliens appeals judge designated by him or her, if the judge observes that no application to set aside setting out the grounds for such measures has been lodged within the time-limit specified by the procedural regulations.
The Division President or the aliens appeals judge designated by him or her shall rule on the request for a stay of execution within thirty days. If a stay of execution is ordered a ruling shall be given on the application to set aside within four months from delivery of the judicial decision.
If the alien in question is the subject of an expulsion or removal order which is to be enforced imminently, and has not yet lodged a request for a stay of execution, he or she may request a stay of execution of the decision under the extremely urgent procedure. If he or she lodged a request under the extremely urgent procedure in accordance with the present provision no later than five days, but no earlier than three working days, following notification of the decision, the request shall be examined within forty-eight hours of its receipt by the Board. If the Division President or the aliens appeals judge concerned does not give a decision within that time, the First President or the President shall be informed and shall take the necessary action to ensure that a decision is given within seventy-two hours of the request being received. They may even examine the case and take the decision themselves. If no stay of execution is granted the measure shall again become enforceable.
...”
If the person concerned opted for the “ordinary” procedure, he or she could request interim measures, possibly as a matter of extreme urgency, in accordance with section 39/84 of the Act.
For a request for a stay of execution or for interim measures to be granted as a matter of extreme urgency, the enforcement of the expulsion measure had to be imminent (section 39/82, paragraph 4, second subparagraph, and section 39/85, first sub-paragraph, of the Aliens Act). That requirement, inserted by the above-mentioned Act of 15 September 2006, was to be construed in the light of the interpretation of the concept of extreme urgency by the Conseil d’État, in particular in the judgments of the General Assembly of the Administrative Division of 2 March 2005 (nos. 141.510, 141.511 and 141.512):
“[The applicant] must demonstrate that the ordinary procedure for a stay of execution would not be effective in preventing the serious damage alleged, bearing in mind the possibility of lodging a request for interim measures as a matter of extreme urgency during the proceedings ..., the two requests being then examined jointly.
...
It is common ground that, save in exceptional cases where orders to leave the country are accompanied by coercive measures with a view to repatriation, the opposing party does not systematically review their actual enforcement. Accordingly, a mere reference to an order to leave the country that has been issued is not sufficient to demonstrate the existence of extreme urgency.”
Following this line of case-law, the Aliens Appeals Board took the view that, for the danger to be imminent, the alien in question had to be subject to a coercive measure aimed at securing his or her departure from the country. In the absence of such a measure, it considered that a situation of extreme urgency had not been established (see, among many other authorities, judgments nos. 456 of 27 June 2007 and 7512 of 20 February 2008).
Following the introduction of the present application the Aliens Act was amended by the Procedure before the Aliens Appeals Board and Conseil d’Etat (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act of 10 April 2014.
That Act reformed the procedure for applications for a stay of execution as a matter of extreme urgency in order to take account of the lessons drawn from M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece, cited above, the subsequent case-law of the Aliens Appeals Board (see, among other authorities, the seven judgments of the General Assembly of 17 February 2011, nos. 56.201 to 56.205, 56.207 and 56.208) and judgment no. 1/2014 of 16 January 2014 of the Constitutional Court. In that judgment, which dealt with an application to set aside the Act of 15 March 2012 amending the Aliens Act, which set up an expedited procedure for asylum-seekers from “safe” third countries, the Constitutional Court ruled among other things on whether applications to set aside and requests for a stay of execution under the extremely urgent procedure satisfied the criteria of effectiveness laid down by the Court’s case-law on Article 13 of the Convention taken in conjunction with Article 3 and set aside the Act in question in part.
The above-cited provisions, as redrafted, provide that an application for a stay of execution under the extremely urgent procedure must be lodged within ten days, or five if the removal order in question is not the first to have been issued against the person concerned. The conditions for extreme urgency to be made out remain identical. Removal must be imminent, which mainly concerns detainees (see paragraphs 6263 above). However, the Act does not preclude the possibility that other circumstances may justify use of the extremely urgent procedure. The reform also provides that there is a presumed risk of serious and irreversible harm if the violation alleged concerns a right from which no derogation is possible, such as Articles 2, 3 or 4 of the Convention.
Section 9ter of the Aliens Act provides for the possibility of applying for leave to remain on medical grounds. At the material time the relevant parts of this provision provided:
“1.  Aliens resident in Belgium who provide proof of identity in accordance with paragraph 2 and who are suffering from an illness entailing a real risk to their life or well-being or a real risk of inhuman or degrading treatment if no suitable treatment exists in their country of origin or country of residence may apply to the Minister or his or her representative for leave to remain in the Kingdom.
The request must be made by registered letter to the Minister or his or her representative and must include the actual address of the individual concerned in Belgium.
The alien concerned must submit the request together with all the relevant information concerning his or her illness and the availability and accessibility of suitable treatment in the country of origin or the country of residence.
The alien concerned shall submit a standard medical certificate as provided for by royal decree approved by the Cabinet. The medical certificate shall indicate the illness, its degree of seriousness and the treatment considered necessary. ...”
The procedure for examining the application for leave to remain involves two stages. First, the Aliens Office examines the admissibility of the application, particularly the information that must appear on the medical certificate (indication of the illness, its degree of seriousness and the treatment considered necessary). In that connection the Aliens Appeals Board has explained that “the intention [of the legislature] to clarify the procedure would be undermined if the Aliens Office were required to carry out a detailed examination of any medical certificate produced and attached documents, in order to ascertain the nature of the illness, its degree of seriousness or the treatment considered necessary, whilst the [official in question] is neither a medical officer nor other designated doctor” (see, in particular, Aliens Appeals Board, no. 69.508, judgment of 28 October 2011).
The second stage, which concerns only applications that are considered admissible, consists in an examination on the merits of the criteria set out in the Act by the Aliens Office on the basis of an opinion given by a medical officer or other designated doctor.
An application may be lodged with the Aliens Appeals Board to have a decision taken by the Aliens Office on the basis of section 9ter (see paragraphs 57-58, above) set aside.
The general principle, established by section 57 § 1er of the Public Social Welfare Offices Institutional Act of 8 July 1976, is that anyone and any family is entitled to social support in the most appropriate form. This is provided by public social welfare offices established throughout Belgium and administered by the municipalities.
The law provides for a derogation from this general principle with regard to foreign nationals illegally resident in Belgium. Section 57 § 2 1o of the Institutional Act provides, by way of derogation from section 57 § 1, that the mission of the social welfare offices is limited to granting urgent medical assistance to that category of persons where the social welfare office has established that they are in need.
In the case of families with children illegally resident in Belgium and whose state of need has been established by the social welfare office (section 57 § 2, 2o), social support is limited to the material assistance necessary for the child’s development. It is granted exclusively in a reception centre run by Fedasil as provided for in section 60 of the “Reception” Act (see paragraph 86 below).
The Royal Decree of 24 June 2004 setting out the terms and conditions for granting material assistance to foreign minors illegally resident with their parents in the Kingdom provides that in order to obtain this assistance an application must be made by the minor or by the family on his or her behalf to the social welfare office for his or her habitual residence. The social welfare office then carries out enquiries to check that all the statutory conditions are satisfied and makes its decision no later than one month following receipt of the application.  Where the conditions are satisfied and the persons concerned undertake in writing to accept the proposed accommodation, the social welfare office informs the applicants that they can obtain material assistance in a reception centre. The applicants must then report to the Dispatching Department of Fedasil (see paragraph 79 below).
The reception of asylum-seekers is governed by the Reception of Asylum-seekers and other Categories of Foreign Nationals Act of 12 January 2007 (“the Reception Act”) which transposes Council Directive 2003/9/EC of 27 January 2003 laying down minimum standards for the reception of asylum-seekers in the Member States.
Asylum seekers and members of their family who have entered the Kingdom without satisfying the conditions for leave to remain and who lodge an asylum application with the Aliens Office have a right to reception, namely, material assistance enabling them to lead a life in keeping with human dignity (section 1 of the “Reception” Act).
Material assistance includes accommodation; meals; clothing; medical, social and psychological care; a daily allowance; and access to legal aid and services such as interpreting and training (sections 16 to 35 of the “Reception” Act).
In all decisions concerning minors, the child’s interests are paramount (section 37 of the “Reception” Act).
Material assistance is granted by the reception facility or by the social welfare office designated by Fedasil as the “mandatory place of registration” (sections 9 and 10 of the “Reception” Act). Specifically, foreign nationals who have lodged an asylum application must go to the Dispatching Department of Fedasil located in the same building as the Aliens Office to request material assistance and be assigned a reception facility.
All persons who have lodged an asylum application are recorded in a special register – the waiting register – which also records their place of mandatory registration under the code 207.
Persons assigned a reception facility must reside in the designated facility in order to receive material assistance. If they do not reside there the words “no show” will be filled in under code 207 and the rights of the persons concerned will be limited to urgent medical assistance pursuant to section 57 § 2 of the Public Social Welfare Offices Institutional Act of 8 July 1976 (see paragraph 72 above).
In judgment no. 80/1999 of 30 June 1999 the Administrative Jurisdiction and Procedure Court (now the Constitutional Court) observed that section 57 § 2 could not be construed as applying to foreign nationals who, for medical reasons, were totally unable to comply with an order to leave Belgium and that a contrary interpretation would be discriminatory.
An asylum-seeker is eligible for material assistance from the time of lodging his or her asylum application and that eligibility is effective throughout the asylum proceedings. Where the application for asylum is unsuccessful, material assistance will cease when the time-limit for complying with the order to leave the territory served on the asylum-seeker has expired. An appeal on points of law to the Conseil d’État will not trigger a right to material assistance unless the appeal is declared admissible (section 6 of the “Reception” Act).
Àt the time of the events in the present case Fedasil had interpreted this provision to mean that reception facilities to asylum-seekers under the Dublin procedure were in principle suspended on the expiry of the time-limit for complying with an order to leave the country issued in accordance with the specimen form provided in the annex 26quater, from which time the persons concerned were regarded as illegally resident in Belgium. In line with its previous practice, Fedasil’s instructions of 13 July 2012 relating to the cessation of material assistance were as follows:
“An asylum-seeker ... who is served with an annex 26quater may lodge an application to have the decision set aside and a stay of execution ... with the Aliens Appeals Board but such applications do not have suspensive effect and accordingly do not give him or her further entitlement to material assistance.”
Material assistance may be extended in certain situations listed in section 7 §§ 1er and 2 of the “Reception” Act, on condition that the asylum proceedings have ended with a rejection of the application and are not the subject of a decision designating a State other than Belgium as responsible for processing the asylum application. Section 7 § 3 in fine provides that in special circumstances relating to respect for human dignity Fedasil may derogate from the conditions stipulated in section 7.
Furthermore, under section 60 of the “Reception” Act, in respect of minors illegally resident with their parents on Belgian territory and whose state of need has been established by a social welfare office (see paragraph 73 above), Fedasil must continue to provide material assistance in the reception facilities run by the agency.
Beneficiaries of reception facilities are entitled to medical care necessary to lead a life in keeping with human dignity (section 23 of the “Reception” Act). This right extends to asylum-seekers who are not resident in the reception facility assigned to them (section 25 § 4).
In accordance with Article 580, 8o of the Judicature Code, disputes relating to the application of the Public Social Welfare Offices Institutional Act and the “Reception” Act are heard by the relevant employment tribunal. Accordingly, an appeal may be lodged with the employment tribunal against a decision – or even the absence of a decision – by a social welfare office or by Fedasil.
Pursuant to Article 628, 14o of the Judicature Code, the court of the appellant’s domicile, last place of residence or, failing that, the place of his or her last occupation in Belgium has jurisdiction to hear the dispute.
An appeal can be lodged in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Judicature Code, either in ordinary proceedings (writ of summons) or exceptional proceedings, that is to say, in urgent cases, in urgent proceedings by writ served by bailiff or, in cases of absolute necessity, ex parte application. In the latter cases the applicant must provide reasons for the urgency or absolute necessity and explain why the procedure by simple writ of summons does not offer a sufficiently rapid solution.
If appropriate, the employment tribunal may impose a penalty in addition to an injunction. The injunctions are served on the social welfare office or on Fedasil by a bailiff. According to common practice, the asylum-seeker is subsequently summoned to be assigned a reception facility.
Between 2008 and 2013, and in particular in 2011, the reception system for asylum-seekers in Belgium reached “crisis” point on account of a substantial and exceptional increase in the number of asylum-seekers and persistent saturation of the reception network run by Fedasil.
In response to the saturation of the reception network, interpreted as a case of force majeure, Fedasil gave instructions, from April 2009, to no longer provide reception facilities to illegally resident families whose precarious situation had been established by a social welfare office (see paragraph 73 above), as such families were not considered a priority compared with asylum-seekers and were not registered on a waiting list. An exception was made in the event of an injunction, served by a bailiff, by the employment tribunals to provide reception facilities to these families together with a penalty for non-compliance (Fedasil’s Annual Report of 2010) or, from July 2011, in the event of intervention by the federal mediators. The instructions were extended in April 2010 to applications for an extension of medical assistance lodged by persons having received an “annex 26quater”.
The Brussels social welfare office, one of the social welfare offices facing the highest demand, gave instructions in an internal note, from April 2009, to refuse to examine applications by illegal residents and to redirect these to the Dispatching Department of Fedasil.
The employment tribunals gave differing decisions regarding the question whether the social welfare offices or Fedasil should be ordered to provide assistance to illegally resident families. Some courts found against the social welfare offices (for example the Liège Employment Tribunal in a judgment of 7 January 2010) on the grounds that Fedasil could rely on force majeure (saturation of the network) for failing to grant material assistance. The social welfare offices were then obliged to provide assistance. In a situation of that kind the exception provided for in section 57 § 2 of the 8 July 1976 Act (see paragraph 73 above) could not apply and reference had to be made to the general rule in paragraph 1er of that provision, with the social welfare offices accordingly entitled to claim reimbursement of the expenses from Fedasil or the Federal State. Other courts found against Fedasil on the grounds that it could not be a case of force majeure because the situation was foreseeable. The federal authority to which Fedasil belonged was obliged to provide the means necessary “[for the] proper functioning [of Fedasil]” (see, for example, Brussels Employment Tribunal, judgment of 14 May 2009).
The saturation of the reception network also caused major procedural difficulties. The employment tribunals differed in their practice regarding the correct avenue for appealing against decisions by Fedasil and the social welfare offices. Whilst some accepted applications lodged ex parte, others, such as those belonging to the Brussels judicial district (which was the applicants’ district), refused illegally resident families the use of ex parte applications (see, for example, Brussels Employment Tribunal, 16 February 2011). Next, on account of the unmanageably high number of applications lodged with the Brussels courts (which had jurisdiction because foreign nationals no longer entitled to reception facilities had elected domicile at the Aliens Office in Brussels), the President of the Brussels Employment Tribunal could take more than ten days to deliver an emergency order (see, for example, Brussels Employment Tribunal, 6 June 2011). Lastly, execution of the orders against Fedasil or a social welfare office could take up to between four and six weeks after service.
At the material time the Aliens Act allowed families with children whose residence had ceased to be lawful or had become unlawful to be placed in a closed facility.
However, in practice, since 1 October 2008 illegally resident families with children have no longer been placed in detention and open reception facilities have been made available to them pending enforcement of the removal measure.
The principle of non-detention of illegally resident families with children was legally enshrined by the Act of 16 November 2011 inserting section 74/9 into the Aliens Act.
At the material time the “Dublin” procedure was governed by Council Regulation (EC) No 343/2003 of 18 February 2003 establishing the criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible for examining an asylum application lodged in one of the Member States by a third-country national (“Dublin II Regulation”).
The main relevant provisions of the Dublin II Regulation are set out in M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece, cited above (§§ 65-76). Article 16(1) of that Regulation also provides that the Member State responsible for examining an asylum application under the Regulation must take back, firstly, an applicant whose application is under examination and who is in the territory of another Member State without permission (Article 16(1)(c)) and, secondly, a thirdcountry national whose application it has rejected and who is in the territory of another Member State without permission (Article 16 § 1 e)). The obligations specified in paragraph 1 cease where the thirdcountry national has left the territory of the Member States for at least three months (Article 16(3)).
The Dublin II Regulation was recast by Regulation (EU) No 604/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 establishing the criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible for examining an application for international protection lodged in one of the Member States by a third-country national or a stateless person, known as the “Dublin III Regulation”. The main lines of the recast are set out in Tarakhel v. Switzerland [GC], no. 29217/12, §§ 35-36, ECHR 2014 (extracts).
Council Directive No 2003/9 of 27 January 2003 laying down minimum standards for the reception of asylum-seekers in the Member States (“the Reception Directive”) provides that the States must guarantee asylum-seekers
– certain material reception conditions, including housing, food and clothing, in kind or in the form of financial allowances; the allowances must be sufficient to protect the asylum-seeker from extreme need;
– arrangements to maintain family unity;
– medical and psychological care;
– access for minors to the education system, and to language classes where necessary for them to undergo normal schooling.
The Reception Directive was recast by Directive No 2013/33 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 laying down standards for the reception of applicants for international protection, with a view to guaranteeing a common European system for the physical reception conditions and fundamental rights of asylum-seekers, and ensuring that the administrative detention of asylum-seekers is used only as a last resort.
In Cimade and Gisti (C-179/11, judgment of 27 September 2012), the Court of Justice of the European Union (“CJEU”) specified that a Member State in receipt of an application for asylum was obliged to grant the minimum conditions for reception of asylum-seekers laid down in the Reception Directive even to an asylum-seeker in respect of whom it decided, under the Dublin II Regulation, to call upon another Member State, as the Member State responsible for examining his application for asylum, to take charge of or take back that applicant (§ 50). That obligation ceased only when that applicant had actually been transferred by the requesting Member State (§ 58).
In the case of Federaal agentschap voor de opvang van asielzoekers v. Selver Saciri, Sanijela Dordevic, Danjel Saciri et Sanela Saciri (C-79/13, judgment of 27 February 2014), a request for a preliminary ruling was made to the CJEU by the Brussels Employment Tribunal concerning the arrangements for providing the physical reception conditions.  Basing its answer on the text of the Reception Directive and its scheme and purpose and stressing the importance of respect for fundamental rights, in particular respect for human dignity, the CJEU said that the asylum-seeker could not be deprived – even temporarily after an asylum application had been lodged and before being actually transferred to the responsible Member State – of the protection of the minimum standards laid down by that directive (§ 35). With regard to the level of the physical reception conditions, the CJEU said that this must be sufficient to ensure a dignified standard of living and adequate for the health of applicants and capable of ensuring their subsistence (§ 40). Furthermore, the Member States were required to adjust the reception conditions to the situation of persons having specific needs. The financial allowances also had to be sufficient to preserve family unity and the best interests of the child (§ 41). The CJEU specified that where a Member State provided these conditions in the form of financial allowances, those allowances had to be sufficient to enable them to obtain housing, if necessary, on the private rental market (§ 42). Where families were concerned, those allowances had to enable minor children of asylum-seekers to be housed with their parents (§ 45).
Directive 2008/115/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally staying third-country nationals (“the Return Directive”) governs removal and placement in detention where necessary and provides for procedural guarantees.
Belgium ratified the European Social Charter on 16 October 1990 and the revised European Social Charter (“the revised Charter”) on 2 March 2004. It accepted Article 17 of the revised Charter which is worded as follows:
“With a view to ensuring the effective exercise of the right of children and young persons to grow up in an environment which encourages the full development of their personality and of their physical and mental capacities, the Parties undertake, either directly or in co-operation with public and private organisations, to take all appropriate and necessary measures designed:
a.  to ensure that children and young persons, taking account of the rights and duties of their parents, have the care, the assistance, the education and the training they need, in particular by providing for the establishment or maintenance of institutions and services sufficient and adequate for this purpose;
..”
The European Committee of Social Rights (“ECSR”) ruled on Belgium’s compliance with its obligations under Article 17 of the revised Charter regarding the reception conditions of unlawfully present unaccompanied and accompanied foreign minors in the decision of 23 October 2012, Defence for Children International (DCI) v. Belgium, complaint no. 69/2011. The relevant extracts of the decision read as follows:
“56.  According to the DCI, however, because of the saturation of the reception network, FEDASIL has since 2009 been refusing to take in illegally resident families, as they are not prioritises as compared with asylum-seekers and are not registered on any waiting list. As a result of this situation, many families are forced to live in the street with their children. The public social welfare centres, which are competent at the municipal level, have also refused to intervene, referring the responsibilities to FEDASIL. The only legal possibility involves lodging a judicial appeal with the Labour Court in order to force FEDASIL to accommodate them. According to the organisation, 1773 illegally resident families had still not been granted accommodation on 30 September 2010.
The DCI also alleges a targeted refusal to accommodate these families, such refusal being systematic even when the network is not saturated. ...
...
[The] Committee considers that the fact that the Government has, since 2009, no longer guaranteed accompanied foreign minors unlawfully present in the country any form of accommodation in reception centres (through either through the FEDASIL network or other alternative solutions) breaches Article 17§1 of the Charter. The persistent failure to accommodate these minors shows, in particular, that the Government has not taken the necessary and appropriate measures to guarantee the minors in question the care and assistance they need and to protect them from negligence, violence or exploitation, thereby posing a serious threat to the enjoyment of their most basic rights, such as the rights to life, to psychological and physical integrity and to respect for human dignity. Similarly, the fact that at least 461 unaccompanied foreign minors were not accommodated in 2011 and the problems posed by inappropriate accommodation in hotels lead the Committee to the conclusion that the Government failed to take sufficient measures to guarantee non-asylum seeking, unaccompanied foreign minors the care and assistance they need, thereby exposing a large number of children and young persons to serious risks for their lives and health.
Consequently, the Committee holds that there is a violation of Article 17§1 of the Charter.”
The European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (“ECRI”) made the following findings in a report on Serbia (fourth monitoring cycle, CRI(2011)21), published in May 2011:
“62.  NGOs estimate that two-thirds of the Roma population continue to live in informal settlements lacking schools, medical care, water, electricity and sewage facilities. These settlements are overpopulated and are at a great distance from basic facilities and services. In addition, the majority of Roma who live in these settlements do not have the relevant ownership documentation for their homes or land, thus compounding their housing problems. There are Roma settlements in all parts of Serbia with the majority being in Belgrade and in other larger cities and municipalities. The improvement of the living conditions in the settlements is one of the stated goals of the Strategy for Improvement of the Status of Roma and ECRI therefore hopes that the necessary resources will be allocated to measures taken to that end.
ECRI notes with concern that there is strong public opinion against relocating Roma. One specific problem is that when the Serbian authorities propose that Roma will be relocated to appropriate housing, the local population protests and refuses to agree to a Roma population moving into their neighbourhood. It thus appears that measures are still necessary to combat the intolerance and racism faced by Roma in the housing sector.
ECRI notes with concern that there have been many forcible evictions of Roma in and around Belgrade since its first report ... .
...
ECRI notes with concern that in many respects, the hygienic and sanitary conditions in many Roma settlements have not improved since ECRI’s first report. The health situation of Roma, in particular Roma women, children and elderly is particularly alarming and there is a difficulty in access to health care in the absence of the necessary medical registration. The mortality rate of Roma children in Serbia is four times higher than that of the general population.”
In its concluding observations on the initial report of Serbia (CERD/C/SRB/CO/1; 78th session, 14 February-11 March 2011), the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination expressed the following concerns and made the following recommendations:
“14.  The Committee is concerned that the Roma population, in many cases, lives in segregated settlements and experiences discrimination in respect of adequate housing and, in particular, is often subject to forced eviction with no provision of alternative housing, legal remedies, or compensation for damage and destruction of personal property. While noting with interest the Law on Social Housing, the Committee expresses concern about the particular difficulties faced by the Roma when applying for social housing programmes, resulting in a perpetuation of discrimination (arts. 2, 3, 5 (e) (iii) and 6 ).
The Committee urges the State party to ensure that any resettlements do not involve further forced evictions and that procedural protections which respect due process and human dignity be put in place. It recommends that the State party strengthen the measures aimed at improving the housing conditions of the Roma, and in this regard, recommends that it accelerate the implementation of the National Plan for Housing of Roma adopted in 2009. In light of the Committee’s general recommendations 27, paragraphs 30-31 (2000), on discrimination against Roma, and 32 (2009) on the meaning and scope of special measures, it also recommends that the State party intensify efforts to avoid residential segregation of minorities and encourages it to consider developing social housing programmes for the Roma.
The Committee expresses its concern that members of the Roma minority continue to experience segregation with regard to access to education. It is also concerned by the fact that Roma children returnees, upon readmission agreements from Western European countries, face additional difficulties in entering the Serbian educational system, due to inter alia enrolment and placement procedures (art. 3 and 5 (e) (v)).
Bearing in mind its general recommendations 27, paragraphs 17-26 (2000) on discrimination against Roma, 32 on the meaning and scope of special measures, the Committee strongly urges the State party to address de facto public school segregation, and carry out the necessary measures to facilitate access to quality education including through anti-discrimination training for school staff and awareness-raising for parents, increasing the number of Roma teaching assistants, preventing de facto segregation of Roma pupils, and other measures for the promotion of inclusive education. It also encourages the State party to develop specialized and appropriate procedures for the reception, assessment and placement of children returnees and to increase the awareness of school teachers of the importance of such procedures.
While noting with appreciation the efforts taken by the State party to improve the situation of Roma, Ashkali and Egyptians and to prevent and combat racial discrimination against persons belonging to these groups, the Committee is concerned that they are subject to discrimination, prejudice, and stereotyping, in particular in access to employment, health care services, political participation and access to public places (Article 2, paragraph 2, and Article 5 of the Convention).
Bearing in mind its general recommendations No. 27 (2000) on discrimination against Roma and No. 32 (2009) on the meaning and scope of special measures, the Committee encourages the State party to intensify its efforts to prevent and combat racial discrimination against Roma, Ashkali and Egyptians. It recommends that the State party ensure effective implementation of policies aimed at the equal enjoyment by Roma, Ashkali and Egyptians of the rights and freedoms listed in article 5 and special measures to advance their effective equality in employment in public institutions and adequate political representation at all levels. The Committee also encourages the State party to actively carry out campaigns that raise awareness of the difficult position of these groups, in particular the Roma, and build solidarity.”
In his report published on 22 September 2011 following his visit to Serbia from 12 to 15 June 2011 (CommDH(2011)29), the Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe made the following findings and expressed the following concerns:
“3.  Human rights of Roma
In the 2002 census 108.193 persons, approximately 1.44% of the total population, identified themselves as Roma. The actual number is deemed to be much higher. According to the Serbian government’s estimates the actual number of Roma ranges from 250 000 to 500 000.
...
Notwithstanding the government’s efforts to improve the human rights of Roma, the problems facing Roma remain some of the most serious human rights challenges. The Commissioner underlines that the Roma-related projects must be accompanied by resolute efforts to combat prejudice and deep-seated stereotypes against Roma. Efforts are necessary to raise awareness among the Roma population on available mechanisms to combat discrimination. In this context, the Commissioner welcomes the Equality Commissioner’s activities organised in Roma settlements which aim to raise their awareness about the work of her office.
...
a.  Access of Roma to health care
...
Despite the progress made in the area of health care, Roma still face barriers due to lack of information, lack of personal identity documents and poverty. The 2005 Law on Health Insurance aims to enhance access of Roma to health care, as well as to improve their living conditions. This law provides for the right to health care for members of vulnerable groups, including Roma.
In 2011 ECRI noted with concern that in many respects, the hygienic and sanitary conditions in many Roma settlements have not improved since ECRI’s first report in 2008. The health situation of Roma, in particular Roma women, children and elderly persons is particularly alarming due to the absence of necessary medical registration. According to UNICEF, although the official estimates show a decrease in Roma child mortality rates since 2005, this rate is still at least four times higher than the national average.
b.  Access of Roma to quality education
...
However, it is estimated that the number of Roma children attending pre-school education is between 4% and 7%, while 66% of Roma children (as opposed to 94% of the total population) enrol in primary school. According to the Ministry of Education only 16% of Roma enrol in secondary schools, and less than 1% of young Roma attend college or university.
...
The Commissioner is seriously concerned by the fact that the number of Roma children enrolled in schools for children with mild mental disabilities increased from 26.7% in 2002/2003 to 31% in 2008/2009.
In 2011 ECRI expressed concerns that Roma children still face hidden and overt forms of discrimination by school authorities, school staff, teachers, other children and non-Roma parents. Reportedly, as teachers have lower expectations of Roma pupils, there is a tendency to use lower criteria when assessing their performance. The Commissioner is concerned by reports indicating that due to the increase in Roma children attending schools, there is a tendency among non-Roma parents to transfer their children to other schools with fewer Roma children.
...
c.  Access of Roma to employment
ECRI reported in 2011 that Roma in Serbia continue to suffer from a high unemployment rate, low economic activity and almost total exclusion from the public sector. There are almost no Roma in public and state-owned companies, indicating a pattern of discrimination. There are cases where Roma who present themselves for job interviews are informed that the position has been filled, and a few cases of discriminatory job advertising. The majority of Roma are outside the employment system, employed illegally and mostly registered as unemployed.
d.  Access by Roma to adequate housing
The majority of Roma in Serbia live in very poor housing conditions. The problems that Roma face in this field are related to the overpopulation of settlements due to the small number of available housing units, unresolved property issues and illegal constructions, and lack of access to public infrastructures. Some studies have indicated that out of the 593 existing Roma settlements in Serbia, 72% have not been legalised, while in Belgrade alone there are 137 informal settlements.
...
The Commissioner has noted with concern reports on the increased number of forced evictions of Roma from informal settlements in Belgrade. He is particularly concerned by the reported failure by the authorities to comply with legal safeguards during evictions. Physical attacks by state officials during evictions and destruction of personal property without compensation have also been reported in various cases such as the one concerning the evictions in the informal Roma settlement Gazela, Belgrade, on 31 August 2009. Following these evictions 114 Roma families were provided with accommodation in metal containers in settlements scattered around the outskirts of Belgrade.
...
The Commissioner is particularly concerned by the housing situation of the Roma displaced from Kosovo, and Roma who are being forcibly returned from Western European countries. Reportedly they make up around 17% of the Roma populations in informal settlements. They face the harshest living conditions. Their difficult situation is aggravated by the lack of personal identity documents (see also below, sub-section on lack of birth registration and personal identification documents among Roma). Prospects for their local integration are generally bleak.
The Commissioner noted that the living conditions in the informal Roma settlement in Marija Bursać, Blok 61, Belgrade, which he visited on 14 June, are clearly sub-standard and may be qualified as degrading. The settlement hosts approximately forty Roma families and consists of wooden barracks, some of which have been severely damaged due to bad weather. The settlement is not connected to the public utilities system and there are no electricity, water and sanitary facilities. Parents told the Commissioner that because of these living conditions sending children to school is a very difficult task. The Commissioner saw children from the settlement washing their faces with dirty water from a nearby polluted stream. The presence of rats was also reported by inhabitants. On the positive side, the Commissioner has noted that almost all of the inhabitants had obtained personal identity documents through the UNHCR’s EU-funded Roma Inclusion Project.”