The case originated in an application (no. 17739/09) against the Italian Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Italian national, Ms Ermelinda Bozza (“the applicant”), on 23 March 2009.
The applicant was represented by Ms M.T. Marra, a lawyer practising in Naples. The Italian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms E. Spatafora, and their Co-Agent, Ms M.L. Aversano.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that there had been a violation of her right to a hearing within a reasonable time under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 5 June 2015 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1949 and lives in Torre del Greco.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, can be summarised as follows.
In January 1990, a few years after she had applied to the Interior Ministry for a disability pension, Ms T.G., the applicant’s mother, was granted an entitlement to the monthly payment of the pension together with a special allowance on account of her partial blindness.
On 21 October 1994 Ms T.G. filed an application with Torre Annunziata District Court (pretore), sitting as an employment tribunal, to obtain acknowledgment of a re-evaluation of her pension and interest on the arrears.
On 27 March 1998, after the hearing had been adjourned three times, the District Court dismissed the application as out of time. On 24 September 1998 Ms T.G. died.
On 10 March 1999, the applicant, lodged an appeal against that decision, on her own behalf and in her capacity as heir, in Naples District Court.
On 10 December 2002 that court acknowledged the applicant’s right to the recalculated sum and interest for a total of EUR 12,240.26. The decision became final on 25 January 2004.
As the decision was not enforced by the relevant authorities, on 14 June 2004 the applicant served a payment order (atto di precetto) on the National Social Security Agency (Istituto Nazionale della Previdenza Sociale – INPS) for EUR 30,364.38, representing the sum claimed, with interest and taking account of the re-evaluation.
On 25 January 2005 she obtained a garnishee order (pignoramento presso terzi) from the Naples enforcement judge in respect of her whole claim.
On 25 May 2005 the applicant lodged an appeal with the “Pinto” Division of the Rome Court of Appeal, complaining about the excessive length of the proceedings. With regard to the admissibility of her appeal, she argued that, under section 4 of Law no. 89/2001 (the “Pinto Act”), the “final domestic decision” to be taken into account was that of the enforcement judge of 25 January 2005. In consequence, she argued, the six-month deadline for lodging the claim for just satisfaction ought to run from that date.
On 18 May 2006 the Court of Appeal declared the appeal inadmissible as out of time, taking the view that the final domestic decision to be taken into consideration was that delivered by the Naples District Court in the proceedings on the merits, a decision which had become final on 25 January 2004.
The Court of Cassation upheld that decision on 25 September 2008 and dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law.
The relevant domestic law and practice concerning Law no. 89 of 24 March 2001 (the “Pinto Act”) can be found in the judgment Cocchiarella v. Italy ([GC], no. 64886/01, § 23-31, ECHR 2006V). In particular, the text of section 4 of the Act, as applicable at the material time, reads as follows:
“A claim for just satisfaction may be lodged while the proceedings in which the violation is alleged to have occurred are pending or within six months from the date when the decision ending the proceedings becomes final. ...”
As regards the connection between the proceedings on the merits and the enforcement proceedings, the Court of Cassation’s case-law shows that there have been two contradictory approaches, especially in respect of administrative disputes.
According to older case-law, the proceedings on the merits and the enforcement proceedings could be seen as a whole. The Court of Cassation explained that “the date when the decision ending the proceedings [became] final”, within the meaning of section 4 of the Act had to be the date on which the right claimed at the start of the proceedings on the merits was ultimately secured effectively at the end of the enforcement stage (giudizio di ottemperanza). That second (possible) set of proceedings would be brought by a claimant on account of the authorities’ failure to act, where a final decision was not complied with (see, among other authorities, judgments 7978/2005, 14595/2008 and 1019/2009 of the Court of Cassation).
That case-law has been gradually superseded. The Court of Cassation subsequently stated (see in particular judgment 1732/2009) that the two stages were to be considered independent of each other, on account of the features of the administrative enforcement procedure, in particular since the law reforming the administrative courts (Law no. 205/2000).
The Plenary (Sezioni Unite) Court of Cassation intervened in 2009, with judgments 27348 and 27365, in order to resolve the conflict and harmonise case-law in such matters. In the main passages of the above-mentioned judgments, the Plenary Court found as follows:
“Neither can the appellant claim that the Court of Strasbourg, in interpreting the ECHR, has developed a concept of a ‘fair hearing’ whereby the proceedings on the merits and enforcements proceedings – the latter being only hypothetical – are necessarily regarded as a single set of proceedings or as two phases of the ‘same’ proceedings (section 4 of Law no. 89 of 2001 on ‘civil rights and obligations’ (Article 6 of the Convention)), so that their overall duration is taken into account, thus entailing the admissibility of an application for just satisfaction submitted during the enforcement proceedings or within six months from the decision by the enforcements judge which ends the proceedings, within the meaning of section 4 of the [‘Pinto Act’], cited above, or from the ‘final domestic decision’ within the meaning of Article 35 of the Convention.
If such a supranational interpretation had been accepted, our Court [of Cassation] should have followed the interpretation of the supranational court (see judgments SS.UU nos. 1138 and 1339 of 2004) in order to satisfy the requisite compliance with the international legal obligations by which the legislature (Article 117 of the Constitution) and the courts of the States parties [to the Convention] are bound.
... the European Court [of Human Rights] has never actually stated the argument raised in the appeal.
Indeed, the principle of the right to an effective remedy under Article 13 of the Convention requires member States to provide for domestic remedies to guarantee redress for violations of Convention rights, through, inter alia, domestic compensation proceedings, whose duration must be calculated from the date of application until the enforcement of the court ruling. This principle ... does not, however, involve examining each set of proceedings on the merits and each set of enforcement proceedings as if they were to be taken together.
The Strasbourg Court, when dealing with applicants’ complaints about the ineffectiveness of domestic remedies as a result of any delay or lack of timely payment of the sum awarded, in the context of a domestic remedy created to secure redress for the violation of a Convention right, considers together the duration of the proceedings on the merits, concerning the right to redress, and the length of the enforcement proceedings ... which end with the payment, even partial, of the amount awarded in the judgment on the merits, this being the time to be regarded as the dies a quo for the purposes of the six-month time-limit for the lodging of an application with that Court (see ECtHR, Grand Chamber, 31 March 2009, Simaldone v. Italy, no. 22644/03; and Scordino v. Italy, 29 March 2006, no. 36813/97 – examined with nine other cases concerning the effectiveness of the domestic remedy provided for by Law no. 89 of 2001; see also, for other States, Burdov v. Russia, 7 May 2002, no. 59498/00, concerning proceedings for compensation brought by victims of a serious nuclear accident).
In the judgments cited above, among many other authorities, it is stated that, having regard to the effectiveness principle, the enforcement of a judgment must be regarded as an integral part of the proceedings in order to ensure that ‘excessive delays in an action for compensation will [not] render the remedy inadequate’ (Scordino [cited above], §  195) and it must encompass the domestic compensatory remedy providing redress for the damage arising from the violation of Convention rights; the principle therefore is not general in scope ...”
As regards civil disputes, the Court of Cassation found, initially, that the proceedings on the merits and the enforcement proceedings had to be considered separately, in view of their autonomous nature and the specific function of each type (see, among many other authorities, judgments nos. 25529/2006, 25806/2007, 19573/2008, 5536/2010, and decision no. 8256/2011).
Going back on its case-law, in March 2014 (judgment no. 6312/2014) the Plenary Court of Cassation gave a new judgment in this area. In this departure from precedent it found in favour of a holistic approach whereby it would take account of the proceedings on the merits and the enforcement, or the eventuality thereof, as one and the same set of “proceedings”. It found inter alia as follows:
“...[It] is necessary to have regard to the constitutional principle of the effectiveness of judicial protection, as stated in Article 24, paragraph 1, Article 111, paragraphs 1 and 2, and Article 113, paragraphs 1 and 2, of the Constitution ... Respect for this principle requires that judicial protection should not be reduced merely to the right of access to the court, which is secured to everyone, but must encompass each stage of the proceedings provided for in domestic law, even after the claim is lodged, to ensure that the judicial protection of rights is practical and effective ... and it also requires that these individual legal situations, having been brought before a court and acknowledged thereby with final effect, should result in effective satisfaction for the holder of the right that has been claimed and recognised in the proceedings on the merits ...
If, therefore, ‘it must be regarded as constitutionally necessary to provide for a phase of enforcement of judicial decisions, as an intrinsic and essential element of the judicial function’ in the system defined in Article 24, paragraph 1, Article 111, paragraphs 1 and 2, and Article 113, paragraphs 1 and 2, of the Constitution, in order to secure the principle of the effectiveness of judicial protection, if ‘the enforcement of the decision by the court must ... be regarded as an integral part of the proceedings for the purposes of Article 6’ of the European Convention on Human Rights and if, consequently, ‘the enforcement proceedings constitute the second phase of the trial and the right claimed only really becomes effective at the time of the enforcement’, it may necessarily be concluded that, in principle (sia pure in linea di principio), to ensure an interpretation that is compliant with the Constitution and Convention, and respects both the above-mentioned constitutional norms and Article 6 § 1 of the European Convention on Human Rights as interpreted by the Strasbourg Court, a trial that is ‘just’ (Article 111, paragraph 1, of the Constitution) and ‘fair’ (Article 6 of the Convention) must be understood as a single set of judicial proceedings, which begins with access to a court and ends with the enforcement of the final and binding decision ...
Where, in civil or administrative proceedings, the subjective legal situation has been acknowledged in a final and binding judicial decision (the merits ‘phase’), but that decision has remained without effect and the holder of the right acknowledged by the court has had to seek its enforcement (the enforcement ‘phase’), the constitutional safeguard of the effectiveness of judicial protection and Article 6 § 1 ECHR, as interpreted by the Strasbourg Court, require it to be considered that these sets of proceedings form a ‘single trial’ made up of successive and complementary phases ...
From that perspective, any ‘functional and structural differences’ between the proceedings on the merits and the enforcement proceedings will pale into insignificance.”
In the same vein, the plenary Court of Cassation confirmed and clarified the new “holistic interpretation” in its recent judgment no. 9142 of 6 May 2016. It found in particular as follows:
“III.  The question raised by the ordinary division concerns in substance the compatibility of the structure of the ‘Pinto’ procedure ... with the principles stemming from the ECHR as to the functional characterisation of the concept of ‘final decision’: in particular, the present decision seeks to ascertain whether the rule providing for a time bar six months from the end of the proceedings must, in general, apply from the time of the final domestic decision in the proceedings taken as a whole (merits plus execution); or whether, once this principle has been established, it is necessary also to take account of the inaction of the party at issue between the conclusion of the merits phase and the start of the execution phase; in other words, whether the possibility of deferring the dies ad quem in relation to the end of the above-mentioned proceedings, thus to identify the final domestic decision (as the conclusion of the execution phase), is not time-limited by the expiry of the six-month period provided for in section 4 of Law no. 89 of 2001 in its initial version.
...
The preservation of the specificity – even if it is historical – of the procedural rules adopted by a State raises an issue in the perspective of ensuring the conformity of national procedural criteria with European criteria.
...
The Court [of Cassation] takes the view, however, that it is possible to arrive at a balanced result ...
Depending on the parties’ conduct, the proceedings may be regarded as a whole or as being separated into two ‘phases’: if a party allows a considerable time to elapse – and this must be seen in relation to the six-month period provided for in section 4 of Law no. 89 of 2001 – from the time when the decision has become res judicata, that same party cannot subsequently complain about the excessive duration of this part of the proceedings; if, by contrast, the party is active prior to the expiry of the six-month period in order to execute the judgment ..., then it is possible to consider the proceedings as a whole, for the purposes of calculating the duration in question ...
It follows that, when section 4 of Law no. 89 of 2001, as worded prior to the reform of 2012, established the time-barring of the right to compensation for the exceeding of the six-month period, it had been based on the assumption of a case-by-case assessment of the link between the merits phase and the execution phase from the perspective of action rather than that of law ...
The new perspective established by the judgment of the Plenary Court (Sezioni Unite) of 2014 [no. 6312/2014 above-mentioned], which is more in line with the principles of the ECHR – according to the interpretation emphasised previously – ... cannot therefore be extended in an absolute sense, that is to say by ignoring any differences – in structures and in principle – that may be specific to the national system between the merits phase and the execution phase ...: it is precisely by taking account of such differences that it is possible to interpret the rule ... in such a way as to fix, depending on the party’s conduct, the starting-point for the calculation of the six-month period, either on the date when the decision on the merits becomes final or at the time when the right upheld in the previous phase is effectively secured ...”