The case originated in an application (no. 67816/14) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Mr Donatas Kryževičius (“the applicant”), on 10 October 2014.
The applicant was represented by Mr S. Aviža, a lawyer practising in Vilnius. The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Bubnytė-Širmenė.
The applicant alleged that he had been compelled to testify against his wife, contrary to Article 6 § 1 and Article 8 of the Convention. He also alleged that he had not been able to appeal to a higher court against the fine given to him for refusing to testify, contrary to Article 2 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention.
On 11 October 2017 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1983 and lives in Palanga.
On 22 November 2013 the director of company M. lodged a complaint with the Klaipėda police, alleging that the applicant’s wife, who had been providing accounting services to company M., had unlawfully transferred large amounts of money from that company’s bank account to other companies. The director claimed that company M. had not obtained any services from those companies and that he had not pre-approved those transfers.
On 25 November 2013 the Klaipėda police opened a pre-trial investigation into allegations of embezzlement and falsification of documents, under Article 184 § 1 and Article 300 § 1 of the Criminal Code. The director of company M. was questioned as a witness and stated that in May 2012 he had entered into a contract for accounting services with company A., of which the applicant was the director. In accordance with that contract, the applicant’s wife had begun providing accounting services to company M. In the beginning he had been happy with her work, but later he had noticed certain bank transfers which appeared suspicious to him. One such suspicious transfer had been a payment of 120,000 Lithuanian litai (LTL) (approximately 34,750 euros (EUR)) to company A.
On 4 December 2013 the applicant’s wife was granted the status of a “special witness” in the investigation; in line with the Code of Criminal Procedure (hereinafter “the CCP”), she was questioned about her own possibly criminal activity and was exempted from liability for refusing to testify or giving false testimony (see paragraph 27 below). She stated that all the transfers from company M.’s bank account which she had carried out had been pre-approved by its director. She also stated that the transfer to company A. had been made by mistake, and the entire amount had been returned to company M. within a week.
On 9 April 2014 the applicant was called as a witness. He refused to give testimony in relation to his wife’s actions and the payment of LTL 120,000 received by company A. from company M.
On 26 May 2014 a prosecutor from the Klaipėda regional prosecutor’s office gave the applicant a fine of LTL 650 (approximately EUR 188) for refusing to testify, as provided for in Article 163 of the CCP (see paragraphs 31 and 32 below).
The applicant lodged a complaint with a senior prosecutor. He argued that the status of a “special witness” was similar to that of a suspect, and therefore he should not have been compelled to testify against his wife, who had such status. He relied on Article 31 of the Constitution, which prohibits compelling a person to testify against his or her family members (see paragraph 18 below).
On 9 June 2014 a senior prosecutor from the Klaipėda regional prosecutor’s office dismissed the applicant’s complaint on the grounds that, in accordance with the CCP, only the family members of a suspect or an accused were exempt from liability for refusing to testify, but the CCP did not extend such a privilege to the family members of a “special witness” (see paragraph 19 below).
The applicant lodged a complaint with the Klaipėda District Court, raising essentially the same arguments as those which he had raised before (see paragraph 11 above). He also asked the court to refer the matter to the Constitutional Court for a ruling on whether the CCP provisions which exempted the family members of a suspect or an accused from liability for refusing to testify, but not the family members of a “special witness”, complied with the Constitution.
On 9 July 2014 the Klaipėda District Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint and upheld the reasoning in the prosecutor’s decision (see paragraph 12 above). It stated that the applicant’s right not to testify against his wife would have been breached only if his wife had had the status of a suspect and not that of a witness. It also considered that the applicant’s request to refer the matter to the Constitutional Court was “subjective and legally unfounded”. That decision was final and not open to any further appeal.
Subsequently, the applicant lodged an appeal with the Klaipėda Regional Court, but on 22 July 2014 that court refused to examine it, on the grounds that there was no provision for such an appeal in law. The applicant then lodged an application to reopen the proceedings with the Supreme Court, but on 23 September 2014 the court ruled that it had no authority to reopen proceedings concerning procedural penalties imposed under Article 163 of the CCP.
On 11 September 2014 the applicant was questioned as a witness in the pre-trial investigation. He stated that he was the director of company A., which provided accounting services to other companies. His wife worked as the financial director of company A., and from May to November 2012 she had provided accounting services to company M. The applicant stated that he had not known how or why LTL 120,000 had been transferred to the bank account of company A. He knew only that that entire amount had been returned to company M. within a week, in a transfer carried out by his wife.
On 22 September 2014 the Klaipėda regional prosecutor’s office discontinued the pre-trial investigation on the grounds that no criminal offences had been committed. It appears that that decision was not appealed against and became final.
The relevant part of Article 31 of the Constitution provides:
“It shall be prohibited to compel anyone to give evidence against himself or herself, or his or her family members or close relatives.”
Article 82 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (hereinafter “the CCP”) provides:
“The family members or close relatives of a suspect or an accused can refuse to testify or to answer certain questions (neduoti parodymų arba neatsakyti į kai kuriuos pateiktus klausimus).”
Article 38 of the CCP defines family members as: (1) parents, adoptive parents, children, adopted children, siblings and their spouses, if they live with the individual in question; (2) a spouse, live-in partner, or person who is engaged to be married to the individual in question; (3) a spouse’s parents; (4) former spouses.
Article 248 § 1 of the Criminal Code defines close relatives as parents, adoptive parents, children, adopted children, siblings, grandparents, and grandchildren.
In its ruling of 19 September 2000, the Constitutional Court held:
“Article 31 of the Constitution contains a provision setting out that individuals cannot be compelled to give evidence against themselves or against their family members or close relatives. Criminal law allows a witness to refuse to testify on these grounds. However, in cases where such individuals [nonetheless choose to testify and] commit perjury, being aware that they have the right to refuse to testify, they may be held criminally liable.”
In its ruling of 4 June 2012, the Constitutional Court held:
“Article 31 of the Constitution enshrines the concepts of ‘family members’ and ‘close relatives’ expressis verbis. Even though these concepts are not identical, they may include the same persons. ‘Close relatives’ include people who are biologically related to each other to a certain degree, whereas ‘family members’ may include people who are biologically related to each other and people who are not thus related, such as spouses.
The [act of] striving for an open, just and harmonious civil society and a State under the rule of law, which is enshrined in the Preamble of the Constitution, as well as the prohibition on compelling a person to give evidence against himself or herself, or against his or her family members or close relatives, which is enshrined in Article 31 [of the Constitution] expressis verbis, show that close relations are very valuable and protected.”
In its ruling of 12 April 2013, the Constitutional Court held:
“The guarantee provided for in Article 31 of the Constitution means that an individual may refuse to give evidence on the basis of which he or she, or his or her family member or close relative could incur criminal liability, [or] another type of legal liability if a possible sanction would amount to a criminal punishment owing to its nature and severity. However, the legal regulation established in Article 31 of the Constitution may not be construed as meaning that an individual may not voluntarily (that is, without anybody compelling him or her to do so) give evidence against himself or herself, or his or her family members or close relatives ...”
In its ruling of 26 June 2018 in criminal case no. 2K-225-689/2018, the Supreme Court held:
“Article 82 § 2 of the CCP provides that the family members and close relatives of a suspect or an accused may refuse to testify or to answer certain questions. This provision of the CCP implements the prohibition enshrined in Article 31 of the Constitution on being compelled to testify against oneself or one’s family members or close relatives. [That prohibition] means that there cannot be such legal regulation as would allow law-enforcement officials to require an individual to testify against himself or herself, or his or her family members or close relatives, and to apply sanctions in respect of an individual where he or she fails to comply with such a requirement. The prohibition enshrined in the Constitution is directed at State officials and does not regulate the actions of individuals who are being questioned. However, as already stated, that provision guarantees to the latter the right not to testify against themselves, their family members or close relatives. Such a right for individuals who are being questioned is also provided for in Article 82 § 2 of the CCP.
Although the right of the family members and close relatives of a suspect or an accused to refuse to testify or to answer certain questions is included in the section of the CCP entitled “Witnesses, experts and specialists”, in accordance with the prohibition enshrined in Article 31 of the Constitution, it must be concluded that such a right is granted not only to witnesses but also to other persons who are questioned in the course of criminal proceedings, irrespective of their procedural status – victims, suspects, accused. Article 45 of the CCP provides that a judge, a prosecutor or a pre-trial investigation officer must explain to those involved in criminal proceedings their procedural rights and ensure that they are able to avail themselves of those rights. Consequently, if an individual has to be questioned about his or her family members or close relatives, the right to refuse to testify or to answer certain questions must be explained to him or her, regardless of whether such an obligation is explicitly provided for in the CCP Article which regulates questioning at a particular stage of criminal proceedings.”
Until 1 September 2007 Article 80 § 1 of the CCP provided that persons who might give testimony about their own possibly criminal activity could not be questioned as witnesses.
An amendment to the relevant parts of the CCP was adopted on 28 June 2007 and entered into force on 1 September 2007. Since that date, Article 80 § 1 of the CCP has provided that persons who might give testimony about their own possibly criminal activity cannot be questioned as witnesses unless they agree to be thus questioned. Article 82 § 3 of the CCP provides that when such persons are questioned, they have the right to legal representation and to ask that they be granted status as a suspect, and they are exempt from liability for refusing to testify or giving false testimony.
An explanatory report of 5 May 2007 accompanying the draft of the above-mentioned amendment to the CCP stated:
“Article 80 of the CCP provides an exception allowing a person who might testify about his or her own possibly criminal activity to be questioned as a witness. Such an amendment is proposed because, in the course of pre-trial investigations, situations arise when, even after all procedural possibilities have been exhausted, the evidence is insufficient to have a person officially recognised as a suspect, but it is nonetheless necessary to question him or her about circumstances relevant to the investigation. However, such a person cannot be questioned [as a witness] in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and Article 80 of the CCP currently in force. The person’s agreement to being questioned in this way would express his or her procedural willingness to cooperate with the authorities investigating his or her possibly criminal activity. Furthermore, such provisions would allow persons who have immunity from criminal prosecution in accordance with international law to be questioned, as well as persons in respect of whom the law requires permission to be obtained from a competent institution (such as members of parliament or judges). The particularities related to questioning such persons are provided for in Article 82 § 3 of the CCP.”
The relevant parts of recommendations on questioning a witness in line with Article 80 § 1 and Article 82 § 3 of the Criminal Code, adopted by the Prosecutor General on 9 January 2008 and amended on 4 September 2011, provide:
“1. Article 80 § 1 of the CCP allows a person who might give testimony about his or her own possibly criminal activity to be questioned as a witness during a pre-trial investigation, with that person’s consent. This provision of the CCP has created a new type of witness who does not have a separate procedural title. In these recommendations, such a witness is referred to as a special witness.
Article 80 § 1 of the CCP constitutes an exception to the prohibition on persons who might testify about their own possibly criminal activity being questioned as witnesses, and it has to be applied in especially rare cases.
...
The purpose of this provision is to obtain ... factual information which is essential for the investigation, so that the evidentiary value of that information is ensured without the person’s rights being breached and further procedural decisions may be adopted.
The source of such factual information is the person whose procedural status is between that of a witness who has no [procedural interest in the outcome of the case] and that of a suspect.
...
A person may be questioned as a special witness if there is evidence that there has possibly been criminal activity and that the acts in question have possibly been committed by a specific person, but there is insufficient evidence to grant that person the status of a suspect.
If there is sufficient evidence to believe that there has been criminal activity and that the relevant acts have been committed by a specific person (irrespective of whether that person has already been questioned), the provisions of Article 80 § 1 and Article 82 § 3 of the CCP cannot be applied. In such situations, the prohibition on questioning such a person as a witness is applicable, and he or she may only be granted the status of a suspect.
...
The prosecutor adopts a decision to question a person as a special witness either at that person’s written request or with his consent [to be questioned in this way], or when the prosecutor determines ... that the conditions set out in Article 80 of the CCP for questioning the person about his or her own possibly criminal activity are present.
...
The prosecutor’s decision to question a person as a special witness is presented to that person so that he or she may sign it. That decision must explain the rights, duties and liability of a special witness. A person may be questioned as a special witness only with his or her consent. Consent [to be questioned in this way] must be presented in writing and confirmed by the person’s signature. If the person does not agree to be questioned about his or her own possibly criminal activity, that must likewise be indicated in writing and confirmed by his or her signature.
...
... A special witness’s request to be granted the status of a suspect does not bind the prosecutor ... The prosecutor may grant such a person the status of a suspect, or order a pre-trial investigation officer to do so, only if there is sufficient evidence to establish a minimal likelihood that there has been criminal activity and that the acts in question have been committed by the person who has [asked to be recognised as a suspect] ...
If, during the questioning of a special witness, factual information is obtained [indicating] that there has been criminal activity and that the relevant acts have been committed by the person who is being questioned, after the questioning a decision must be made as to whether to grant that person the status of a suspect.
When new relevant information is obtained ... the person who has been questioned as a special witness may be questioned as an [ordinary] witness, or he or she may be granted the status of a suspect ...
...
Procedural penalties may be ordered and other investigative measures may be carried out in respect of a special witness in the same way as with an [ordinary] witness or any other persons, subject to the exceptions provided for in Article 83 §§ 2 and 4 of the CCP ... A special witness cannot be granted anonymity ...
[A special witness] cannot be held liable under Article 83 §§ 2 and 4, that is for failing to appear when summoned by a pre-trial investigation officer, a prosecutor or a court, or for refusing to testify; procedural penalties provided for in Article 163 of the CCP cannot be applied in respect of him or her. [A special witness] cannot be held liable for giving false testimony under Article 235 of the CCP, so he or she is not warned about such liability before being questioned. Such a person can be brought [before a pre-trial investigation officer, a prosecutor or a court] under Article 142 of the CCP. [A special witness] cannot be subjected to remand measures (kardomosios priemonės) and he or she cannot be compelled to testify against himself or herself; however, he or she can be given procedural penalties provided for in Article 163 of the CCP for failing to comply with the lawful orders of a pre-trial investigation officer, a prosecutor, a pre-trial investigation judge or a court, or for interfering with the investigation or examination of a criminal case.
The above-mentioned legal provisions should be applied in cases in which a pre-trial investigation is carried out in order to determine whether there has been criminal activity, as well as in cases in which the circumstances of the criminal activity under investigation are not sufficiently clear – for example, possible violations of road traffic safety or vehicle use regulations; violations committed by managers or other authorised persons in enterprises, institutions and organisations; cases of abuse of office or failure to carry out official duties; breaches of work safety regulations; cases of medical negligence; as well as cases in which the possible perpetrators have not been identified. The above-mentioned legal provisions may also be applied when it is necessary to question persons whose criminal prosecution requires that permission be obtained from a competent institution – State officers and civil servants in respect of whom the law provides limitations as regards opening a pre-trial investigation, and so on.”
In its ruling of 31 January 2017 in criminal case no. 2K55699/2017, relying on its previous case-law (the ruling of 23 June 2009 in criminal case no. 2K-255/2009 and the ruling of 16 June 2015 in criminal case no. 2K-348-303/2015), the Supreme Court held:
“Article 80 § 1 of the CCP provides that persons who are to give testimony about their own possibly criminal activity cannot be questioned as witnesses unless they agree to be thus questioned, in line with the conditions provided for in Article 82 § 3 of the CCP ... In accordance with the emerging case-law of the [Supreme Court], ... the prohibition on compelling someone to testify against himself or herself will be violated if a person who is questioned as a witness is in fact suspected of having committed a criminal offence but for some reason has not been recognised as a suspect in line with the CCP. Testimony which has been obtained in violation of Article 80 § 1 of the CCP cannot be accepted as evidence ... under the CCP. Whether submitting questions to a witness can be regarded as compelling a person to testify against himself or herself must be decided in accordance with the circumstances of each case.”
Article 83 § 2 of the CCP provides that a witness who, without good reason, does not appear when summoned by a pre-trial investigation officer, prosecutor or court, or refuses to testify without lawful grounds, can be punished in accordance with Article 163 of the CCP. The latter provision establishes that persons who fail to comply with the lawful orders of a pretrial investigation officer, a prosecutor, a pre-trial investigation judge or a court can be punished by a fine or detention of up to one month.
In line with Article 163 §§ 1 and 2 of the CCP, a fine may be ordered by a prosecutor, a pre-trial investigation judge or a court. At the material time, the maximum fine which could be ordered under that provision was LTL 3,900 (approximately EUR 1,130).
In line with Article 163 § 2 of the CCP, detention may be ordered by a pre-trial investigation judge or a court, either on their own initiative or at the request of a prosecutor.
Article 83 § 4 of the CCP provides that a witness incurs liability for giving false testimony. Article 235 § 1 of the Criminal Code provides that false witness testimony is punishable by community service or a fine, restriction of liberty, detention, or imprisonment of up to two years. Article 235 § 4 of the Criminal Code provides that a victim or witness cannot be held liable for giving false testimony if, in accordance with the law, he or she had the right to refuse to testify but was not made aware of that right before being questioned.
In its ruling of 29 March 2010 in criminal case no. 2K-168/2011, the Supreme Court held:
“Criminal liability for giving false testimony is provided for in Article 235 of the Criminal Code. Article 235 § 4 provides that a victim or witness cannot be held liable for giving false testimony if, in accordance with the law, he or she had the right to refuse to testify but was not made aware of that right before being questioned. Instances where an individual has the right to refuse to testify are regulated not only by criminal law, but also other legal instruments; therefore, when deciding on the application of Article 235 of the Criminal Code, these legal instruments have to be analysed and assessed as a whole.”
Article 63 § 1 of the CCP provides that, during a pre-trial investigation, complaints against procedural acts and decisions taken by a prosecutor can be lodged with a senior prosecutor. If a senior prosecutor dismisses a complaint, a further complaint can be lodged with a pre-trial investigation judge. Article 64 § 6 provides that decisions taken by a pretrial investigation judge are final and not open to any further appeal, except when the CCP provides otherwise.
Article 163 § 4 of the CCP provides that a person who has been given a penalty by a pre-trial investigation judge or a court for refusing to testify can lodge a complaint with the same judge or court. The decision taken by that judge or court with regard to the complaint can then be appealed against to a higher court.