The case originated in two applications (nos. 72105/14 and 20415/15) against the Portuguese Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Portuguese nationals, Mr Tomás Silva (“the first applicant”) and Mr Mário Alberto Mondim Correia (“the second applicant”), on 30 October 2014 and on 17 April 2015, respectively.
The first applicant was represented by Mr J.J. Ferreira Alves, a lawyer practising in Matosinhos. The second applicant was represented by Ms L. do Fundo, a lawyer practising in Vila Nova de Famalicão. The Portuguese Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. F. da Graça Carvalho, Deputy Attorney General.
The applicants alleged that the dismissal of the paternity proceedings instituted by them constituted a breach of their rights under Article 8 of the Convention.
On 24 May 2016 that complaint was communicated to the Government and the remaining parts of the applications were declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The first applicant was born in 1944 and lives in Oliveira de Azeméis. The second applicant was born in 1970 and lives in Vila Real.
The first applicant was born out of wedlock. His mother always considered T.S. to be his father and from an early age he has been in touch with T.S.’s family, who have always treated him as a relative.
On 26 March 2012 the first applicant instituted an action for recognition of paternity before the Vale de Cambra Court. T.S. objected and argued that the applicant’s claim was time-barred under Article 1817 § 1 of the Civil Code. Mr Silva responded that this provision was unconstitutional because it violated Articles 18 §§ 2 and 3 and 26 § 1 of the Constitution.
On 26 June 2012 the judge gave directions (despacho saneador) setting out those matters that had already been established and those that remained outstanding. In addition, the judge dismissed T.S.’s objection that the applicant’s claim was time-barred, holding that the time-limit set by Article 1817 § 1 was unconstitutional insofar as the limitation thus imposed on the possibility of investigating an individual’s paternity at all times constituted an unjustified and disproportionate restriction of the right of a son to know who his father was. It also found that the exercise of a person’s right to know his parentage could not be subject to temporal barriers and could only be restricted in cases where such exercise of the right would constitute an abuse. The fact that the plaintiff had only instituted the proceedings more than fifty years later could not, in itself, be considered to constitute an abuse.
On an unknown date T.S. challenged the judge’s decision of 26 June 2012 ‒ in the part in which it considered Article 1817 § 1 to be incompatible with constitutional provisions ‒ before the Porto Court of Appeal. On an unknown date the applicant submitted his observations in reply (contraalegações), arguing that the decision should be upheld and the proceedings should not be deemed time-barred.
Meanwhile, on an unknown date, at the request of the first applicant, the Vale de Cambra Court ordered DNA tests which established that T.S. was the applicant’s father. In the light of that result the Vale de Cambra Court asked the parties about the usefulness of continuing the proceedings. T.S. did not acknowledge paternity and requested the Vale de Cambra Court to continue the proceedings.
On 9 April 2013 the Porto Court of Appeal dismissed T.S.’s challenge. It held that Article 1817 § 1 was unconstitutional and that the right to seek judicial recognition of paternity should not be subject to a time-limit.
T.S. appealed to the Supreme Court of Justice.
On 14 January 2014 the Supreme Court dismissed T.S.’s appeal and upheld the decision of the Porto Court of Appeal in its entirety.
On an unknown date T.S. appealed to the Constitutional Court, to which he submitted the question of the constitutionality of Article 1817 § 1 of the Civil Code, pursuant to Article 70 § 1 (a) of the Law of the Constitutional Court.
On 10 March 2014 the Constitutional Court held, with reference to its previous ruling no. 401/2011, that Article 1817 § 1 complied with the relevant provisions of the Constitution.
The first applicant appealed to the Conference of the Constitutional Court (Conferência do Tribunal Constitucional), claiming that Article 1817 § 1 was unconstitutional. On 7 May 2014 the Conference of the Constitutional Court upheld the previous decision of the Constitutional Court and dismissed the applicant’s claim.
As a result of the Constitutional Court’s decisions, the Supreme Court of Justice dismissed the applicant’s action on 9 July 2014.
The second applicant was born out of wedlock. His mother always considered A.M. to be his father.
On 31 March 2014 he brought paternity proceedings before the Vila Real Court and contended that he had always known that A.M. was his father. A.M. objected, arguing that the claim was time-barred.
On 15 June 2013 the Vila Real Court dismissed the second applicant’s action, holding that it was time-barred for being lodged outside the ten-year time-limit established under Article 1817 § 1 of the Civil Code. In addition, it noted that the second applicant had not argued that there were any factors justifying the addition of a further three years pursuant to Article 1817 §§ 2 and 3 of the Civil Code.
On 5 September 2013 the second applicant appealed to the Porto Court of Appeal, challenging the judgment of the Vila Real Court. He argued that the time-limit established under Article 1817 § 1 of the Civil Code for the institution of paternity proceedings was not compatible with the Constitution and that the right to one’s identity should prevail over the rights of the alleged parent.
On 10 December 2013 the Porto Court of Appeal upheld the firstinstance judgment, finding that Article 1817 § 1 of the Civil Code was not incompatible with constitutional provisions, pursuant to Ruling no. 401/2011 of the Constitutional Court. One of the judges dissented, expressing the view that the protection afforded by the Constitution to the fundamental right to personal identity required that the possibility of investigating one’s biological identity should not be subject to a timelimit.
.  On 28 January 2014 the second applicant challenged the decision of the Porto Court of Appeal before the Supreme Court of Justice and asked it to rule that the referred time-limit was unconstitutional.
By a judgment of 27 May 2014 the Supreme Court of Justice quashed the judgment of the Porto Court of Appeal and held that the tenyear time-limit established under Article 1817 § 1 of the Civil Code was unconstitutional.
On an unknown date A.M. lodged a constitutional appeal before the Constitutional Court, which by a summary decision of 25 September 2014 ruled that, with reference to its previous ruling no. 401/2011, the provision was constitutional and ordered that the judgment of the Supreme Court be modified accordingly.
The second applicant appealed to the Conference of the Constitutional Court. On 28 October 2014 the Conference upheld the previous decision.
Following the Constitutional Court decisions, the Supreme Court of Justice dismissed the second applicant’s action on 13 January 2015.
The relevant articles of the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic read as follows:
“...
Laws that restrict rights, freedoms and guarantees must have a general and abstract nature and may not have a retroactive effect or reduce the extent or scope of the essential content of the constitutional precepts.”
“1. Everyone is accorded the rights to personal identity, to the development of personality, to civil capacity, citizenship, to a good name and reputation, to their image, to speak out, to protect the privacy of their personal and family life, and to legal protection against any form of discrimination.
The law shall lay down effective guarantees against the improper procurement and misuse of information concerning persons and families and its procurement or use contrary to human dignity.
The law shall guarantee the personal dignity and genetic identity of the human person, particularly in the creation, development and use of technologies and in scientific experimentation.
Deprivation of citizenship and restrictions on civil capacity may only occur in the cases and under the terms that are provided for by law, and may not be based on political motives.”
“...
Spouses have equal rights and duties in relation to their civil and political capacity and to the maintenance and education of their children.
Children born outside wedlock may not be the object of any discrimination for that reason, and neither the law, nor official departments or services may employ discriminatory terms in relation to filiation.”
Pursuant to Articles 1873 and 1817 § 1 of the Civil Code provide that a claim for establishing paternity can be brought at any time until the child reaches the age of majority. The right to seek paternity recognition by judicial decision lapses ten years after the person has attained the age of majority.
In addition, Article 1817 § 3 of the Civil Code provides for a supplementary three-year period within which paternity proceedings can be instituted. According to this provision, a person can seek paternity recognition by judicial decision within three years of one of the following events: a) paternity being successfully challenged by a third party; b) the applicant’s becoming aware, after the expiry of the ten-year time-limit, of a factor or circumstances which may justify the proceedings, in particular where they have ceased to be treated as a son or daughter; c) in the event that paternity has not been established, the investigating party’s becoming aware of facts and circumstances which warrant the investigation. The three-year period shall be counted in addition to the general ten-year timelimit.
The current text of the above provision is the result of a legislative evolution brought about by virtue of the case-law of the Constitutional Court which, in its Ruling no. 23/2006, ruled that the previous text of Article 1817 § 1 of the Civil Code (adopted by the Decree Law 496/77 of 25 November 1977) – which had established a two-year time-limit from the date of reaching the age of majority or the date of emancipation of the minor for the exercise of his or her right to start paternity proceedings – was incompatible with Articles 26 § 1 and 36 § 1 of the Constitution. Moreover, the legislative amendment was not limited to extending the period during which paternity proceedings could be started: it also put an end to autonomous application of the time-limit, which continued regardless of whether there was any justification for the exercise of the right. Law no. 14/2009 of 1 April 2009, which amended the text of Article 1817 § 1 to its current version, also added the supplementary threeyear time-limit provided for by paragraph 3 of Article 1817.
The case-law of the Supreme Court of Justice does not present a consistent approach on the constitutionality of the ten-year time-limit established under Article 1817 § 1 of the Civil Code.
.  On the one hand, the Supreme Court has held on several occasions that the ten-year time-limit set by Article 1817 § 1 was unconstitutional (see, for example, judgments of 8 June 2010, 21 September 2010, 27 January 2011, 6 September 2011, and 31 January 2017). In these cases, the Supreme Court found that the imposition of a time-limit on the exercise of the right to seek judicial recognition of paternity was a disproportionate interference with an individual’s right to personal identity. In other cases, however, the Supreme Court has held that the time-limit in question was not incompatible with the Constitution since the right to institute paternity proceedings was not, by its nature, indefeasible (see, for example, its judgments of 17 November 2015 and 8 November 2016).
In Ruling no. 401/2011 of 22 September 2011 the Constitutional Court was called upon to rule on whether Article 1817 § 1 of the Civil Code was compatible with the Constitution. The Constitutional Court dismissed, by seven votes to six, the objection raised as to constitutionality and ruled that the provision in question was not disproportionate in that it did not violate the constitutional right to know one’s biological parents and to establish the commensurate legal bond, which itself fell within the scope of the fundamental rights to personal identity and to found a family. In the view of the Constitutional Court judges, such a limitation did not prevent the holder of the right from exercising it but merely imposed on him or her the onus of doing so by a given deadline. The Constitutional Court noted, inter alia, that the existence of a legislative deadline was intended to avoid the unjustified prolongation of an indeterminate situation as regards the legal establishment of the parental relationship. It noted that there was a public interest in having both biological and legal paternity established as soon as possible in order to have a legally sound parental relationship for as long as possible. In addition, there was an interest in ensuring legal certainty in respect of the putative father and his family due to the personal and patrimonial consequences of the recognition of paternity. In the Constitutional Court’s view the tenyear time-limit established under Article 1817 § 1 of the Civil Code was therefore reasonable in terms of ensuring that there was no time limit imposed for instituting paternity proceedings during a phase of the son’s life in which he was not mature enough to make a firm decision.
The Ruling was accompanied by six dissenting opinions, including that of its original rapporteur. These essentially expressed the view that the requirement for protection of the assets pertaining to the investigating party was not compatible with any form of limitation, and that even if it were possible to limit the investigating party’s interests, in the case in question such limitation was not justified when the proportionality of the various conflicting interests was weighed up.