The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission") on 10 July 1992, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 para. 1 and Article 47 (art. 32-1, art. 47) of the Convention. It originated in an application (no. 13126/87) against the  lodged with the Commission under Article 25 (art. 25) by an Austrian national, Mr Karl Sekanina, on 21 April 1987.
The Commission’s request referred to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48) and to the declaration whereby  recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46) (art. 46). The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 6 para. 2 (art. 6-2).
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 para. 3 (d) of the Rules of Court, the applicant stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings and designated his lawyer (Rule 30), who was given leave by the President to use the German language (Rule 27 para. 3).
The Chamber to be constituted included ex officio Mr F. Matscher, the elected judge of Austrian nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr R. Ryssdal, the President of the Court (Rule 21 para. 3 (b)). On 26 September 1992, in the presence of the Registrar, the President drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr R. Bernhardt, Mr L.-E. Pettiti, Mr B. Walsh, Mr N. Valticos, Mr R. Pekkanen, Mr A.B. Baka and Mr J. Makarczyk (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 para. 4) (art. 43).
Mr Ryssdal assumed the office of President of the Chamber (Rule 21 para. 5) and, through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Austrian Government ("the Government"), the Delegate of the Commission and the applicant’s lawyer on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 37 para. 1 and 38). Pursuant to the order made in consequence, the Registrar received the Government’s memorial and the applicant’s claims under Article 50 (art. 50) of the Convention on 16 December.
On 2 February 1993 the Commission produced various documents, as requested by the Registrar on the President’s instructions.
In accordance with the President’s decision, the hearing took place in public in the , , on 24 February 1993. The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:
- for the Government
- for the Commission
- for the applicant
The Court heard addresses by the above-mentioned representatives, and also their replies to its questions.
Mr Karl Sekanina is an Austrian national and lives in .
On 1 August 1985 he was arrested by the police on suspicion of having murdered his wife. Mrs Sekanina had fallen from a window of their matrimonial home, on the fifth floor of a building in , on 4 July 1985.
The day after his arrest he was questioned and remanded in custody. He remained in custody until 30 July 1986, his detention being extended on several occasions. The Linz Court of Appeal (Oberlandesgericht) ordered the last such extension on 30 April 1986; it ruled, pursuant to Article 193 paras. 3 and 4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, that the applicant could be kept in detention until he had been in custody for a total of one year. In addition to the murder of his wife, the applicant was accused of having threatened a fellow detainee in connection with certain admissions relating to the murder charge. The decisions of the Austrian courts were based on various items of evidence and testimony.
On 30 July 1986 an assize court (Geschworenengericht) sitting at the  (Landesgericht) acquitted the applicant on both the charges brought against him. The jury dismissed the first charge by seven votes to one and the second charge unanimously.
The operative provisions and grounds of the judgment read as follows:
"Pursuant to Article 259 para. 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, Karl Leopold Sekanina is acquitted on the charges brought against him, namely:
(1) that he did on 4 July 1985 intentionally kill his wife, Maria Sekanina, by hitting her with a plastic bucket, as a result of which she fell out of the open window of a fifth floor flat and sustained fatal injuries on striking the ground from a height of approximately 16.5 metres; and
(2) that he did at the beginning of August 1985, by making a death threat, namely that ‘he would catch his cell-mates outside and kill them’ if they ‘gave him away’, force Egon Werger to remain silent about the statements made by Karl Sekanina in his detention cell concerning the course of events on 4 July 1985.
...
GROUNDS
The acquittal is founded on the jury’s verdict."
With regard to the first charge, the record (Niederschrift) of their deliberations stated as follows:
"There is no conclusive evidence on which to convict Mr Sekanina of murder. According to the medical report by Professor Kaiser, Mrs Sekanina could still have called her husband a murderer. The testimony of certain witnesses appears to us to be unreliable."
On the second charge, they noted that the three other fellow detainees of the persons in question had denied hearing serious death threats.
Consequently, the applicant was immediately released. The prosecution did not appeal against the acquittal.
On the following day the applicant applied for a contribution from the State to the costs necessarily incurred in his defence, in accordance with Article 393a of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 15 below), and for compensation for the pecuniary damage sustained on account of his being kept in detention.
On 4 November 1986 the public prosecutor’s office expressed the opinion that the costs sought were excessive and also opposed the claim for compensation, on the ground that the conditions laid down by section 2 (1) (b) of the 1969 Law on Compensation in Criminal Cases (Strafrechtliches Entschädigungsgesetz - the "1969 Law" - see paragraph 16 below) were not satisfied.
The  Regional Court gave two separate decisions.
On 12 December 1986 it awarded Mr Sekanina 22,546.50 schillings in respect of his necessary defence costs. His appeal against the amount awarded was dismissed by the Linz Court of Appeal on 15 January 1987.
On 10 December, on the other hand, the  had refused to award the compensation sought. In its opinion,
"A claim to compensation under section 2(1)(b) of the [1969] Law ... is conditional on the applicant’s being cleared of the suspicion of which he was the object in the criminal proceedings. A person who has been detained is so cleared only if all the suspicious circumstances telling against him have been satisfactorily explained, so that they cease to constitute an argument for the suspect’s guilt.
Regard having been had to the prosecution evidence considered as a whole, however, it was not possible to dispel all the suspicions concerning the commission of the offence. Serious grounds for suspecting Mr Sekanina still subsist, in particular his numerous and repeated threats, the acts of violence and aggressive behaviour which have come to light, his evident satisfaction at his wife’s death, the description of events given to a cell-mate, the different versions of how the accident happened, the fact that he was under severe financial pressure, his unsuccessful efforts to obtain care and custody of his two children and the consequent build-up of aggressiveness, and his hopes of receiving payment under a life-insurance policy taken out on his wife. In addition, the jurors’ voting shows that they decided to acquit him only by giving him the benefit of the doubt."
On 25 February 1987 the Linz Court of Appeal upheld this decision. It rejected the argument that section 2(1)(b) of the 1969 Law (see paragraph 16 below) was unconstitutional and in breach of Article 6 para. 2 (art. 6-2) of the Convention in that it required, in addition to an acquittal, the absence of all suspicion. The court held that the presumption of innocence had to be respected in the proceedings prior to the verdict, but did not confer on every detainee the right to compensation in the event of an acquittal. The impugned provision did not refer to guilt but to continuing suspicion. The finding by a court that suspicions subsisted did not conflict with the presumption of innocence. The Court of Appeal added:
"The appeal also fails on its merits. Contrary to what is argued by the appellant, it cannot be inferred merely from the voting of the jury ... that such a clear verdict meant that suspicion had been removed. In order to establish whether or not such suspicion subsists, it might be more useful to refer to the record of the jury’s deliberations. The content of this record ... suggests rather that in the jury’s opinion all suspicion had not been removed. However, as the court called upon to rule under the [1969] Law ... is not bound, in its assessment of the position as regards suspicion, by the verdict (of acquittal) at the trial, not even the record of the jury’s deliberations is of decisive importance.
It can hardly be denied that following the police inquiries and also after the judicial preliminary investigation there were strong grounds for suspecting the appellant. Indeed, the Linz Court of Appeal decided on 30 April 1986 ... that Sekanina could be kept in detention on remand for up to one year, thereby confirming the strength of the suspicion. In the appealed decision, the finding by the court below that suspicion subsisted was properly founded in particular on the numerous repeated threats made by Mr Sekanina, his acts of violence, his evident satisfaction at his wife’s death, the description of the events given to a cell-mate, the different versions of how the accident happened, the severe financial pressure, his unsuccessful attempts to obtain care and custody of his two children, and his hopes of receiving payment under a life-insurance policy taken out on his wife. With respect to the different versions of the accident related by the appellant to third parties, the Court of Appeal refers in particular to the evidence given at the trial of 28 to 30 July 1986 by the witnesses Gundula Sekanina (pp. 45, 50 and 51 of the transcript of the trial) and Johanna and Kurt Schöllnberger (pp. 105, 106, 117 and 119 of the transcript). The appellant told his fellow employee Siegfried Wurzinger that he had been in another room at the time of the fall (Wurzinger, pp. 126, 127), whereas Brigitte Grasböck noticed during the fall that the claimant - wearing a light-coloured vest - was already at the window, the entire upper part of his body being visible. He had been holding a bucket out of the window with outstretched arms and pouring water; in addition when he came down to his wife he had, she thought, been wearing a blue vest (Grasböck, pp. 65 and 66 of the transcript). During his interrogation (which was taken down in writing) by the Linz Federal Police on 2 August 1985 (p. 214, volume 1), the appellant placed on record that shortly before the fall his wife had quarrelled with him. According to the evidence of the witness Egon Werger, the appellant had told him that ‘during the quarrel he’ - Sekanina - ‘[had run] towards his wife in a rage’ (pp. 166 and 167 of the transcript). The appellant was described by several witnesses as quick-tempered and violent (pp. 44 and 82 of the transcript). He is said to have made death threats against his wife several times, the last occasion being about a week before her death (pp. 113 and 572 of volume 1, p. 216 of volume 2, and pp. 58, 75, 76, 102, 115, 142 and 143 of the transcript of the trial). Finally, it may also be noted that on 3 July 1985, the day before his wife’s death, the appellant pressed his tailor for a dark jacket he had ordered in 1983, as he now needed it."
The Court of Appeal concluded:
"Having had regard to all these circumstances, the majority of which were not disproved at the trial, the jury took the view that the suspicion was not sufficient to reach a guilty verdict; there was, however, no question of that suspicion’s being dispelled."
Under Article 259 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
"The accused shall be acquitted by judgment of the court:
...   2. ...   3. where the court finds that the act giving rise to the prosecution is not an offence under the law or that the alleged offence was not made out or that it has not been established that the accused committed the act of which he is accused or that circumstances exist which deprive the act in question of its criminal character or that the continuation of the prosecution is ruled out on grounds other than those set out in paragraphs 1 and 2."
According to Article 393a of the same code:
"(1) Where the prosecution is not brought solely on the basis of a private action seeking conviction or a private action for damages (Article 48), if an accused is acquitted ..., the federal authorities shall, on an application to this effect, make a contribution to the costs of the defence. The contribution shall cover the expenses necessarily and genuinely incurred by the accused and in addition, except in the case provided for in Article 41 para. 2, a flat-rate contribution to the costs of his defence lawyer ...
(2) ...
(3) A claim for compensation shall not be allowed where the accused has deliberately caused the suspicion which gave rise to the criminal proceedings or where the proceedings have come to an end solely because the accused carried out the act in question in a state in which he was not responsible for his actions or because the authorisation for the prosecution was withdrawn during the trial."
Entitlement to compensation for detention on remand during criminal proceedings in which the person concerned is acquitted is governed by section 2(1)(b) of the 1969 Law, which provides as follows:
"(1) A right to compensation arises:
..."
Mr Sekanina applied to the Commission on 21 April 1987. He alleged that there had been a violation of the principle of presumption of innocence guaranteed by Article 6 para. 2 (art. 6-2). When dismissing his claim for compensation for wrongful detention, the Austrian courts had considered that, despite his acquittal, he was still the object of suspicion.
On 3 September 1991 the Commission declared the application (no. 13126/87) admissible. In its report of 20 May 1992 (made under Article 31) (art. 31), it expressed the opinion that there had been a violation of Article 6 para. 2 (art. 6-2) (by eighteen votes to one). The full text of the Commission’s opinion and of the dissenting opinion contained in the report is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.