The case concerns allegations of racially motivated police brutality in respect of the applicants, who state that they are ethnic Roma, and were minors at the material time, and the alleged failure of the respondent State to carry out an effective investigation into those allegations. The applicants rely on Article 3 of the Convention, Article 14, taken in conjunction with Article 3, and Article 1 of Protocol No.12.
The applicants were born in 1997 and 2001 respectively and live in Skopje. They were represented by European Roma Rights Centre, a nongovernmental organisation based in Brussels, Belgium, which was granted leave to represent the applicants by the President of the Section.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms D. Djonova.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
At the time of the events, X was sixteen years old and Y was thirteen years old.
At 8.20 p.m. E.R., a twenty-year-old woman at the time, was attacked (punched, kicked and threatened with a knife) by two young men on a street in Skopje near a Roma neighbourhood. The assailants stole her bag. In a police report about the incident drawn up at 9 p.m., E.R. described both assailants as males with darker skin (темен тен) (Roma) aged between sixteen and eighteen (she also provided details of their clothing).
An immediate alert was issued to all police patrols. At 8.30 p.m., near the place of the attack, four police officers members of the “Alfa” unit intercepted a person (later identified as applicant X), as he matched the profile of one of the assailants involved in the previously reported incident. As stated in a report by the Sector for Internal Control and Professional Standards (“the Sector”) within the Ministry of the Interior (“the Ministry”) (see paragraph 11 below), during the arrest no force had been used against X, who had cooperated with the police. At 8.40 p.m. further police officers and E.R. arrived at the scene. E.R., seated in a car, identified the person (X) as one of the assailants. At 9.10 p.m. X was “deprived of his liberty” on account of suspected robbery. According to police records of that day, no items connected with the robbery were found on X; he was handed over to other responsible police officers (from a police station) in “good psychological and physical condition”; Z.M., X’s father, was summoned to the police station, where both of them, in the presence of an ex officio attorney, signed records to the effect that they had no complaints concerning the conduct of the police and sought no legal and medical assistance. At the interview, X admitted to the crime, but he was inconsistent as to who his accomplice had been (the applicant Y or N.U., Y’s brother). N.U. and his father R.U. were also interviewed that day in the police station. X was released the next day at 12.10 a.m.
There have been no police records regarding Y.
On 20 May 2014 at 2 p.m. X was admitted to Skopje hospital. According to medical records of that date and a medical certificate of 4 June 2014 issued by the same hospital, X was diagnosed with bruising (нагмечување) to his head, neck and chest (and scratches on his chest). Xray examination of 20 May 2014 noted “orderly findings” (уреден наод) and the absence of “traumatic changes to the skeleton of the head, chest and neck spine”. The medical certificate concluded “bodily injury”. The records noted that, as explained by X, he had been physically attacked by police and hit on the head, neck, chest and abdomen.
Pursuant to a request by Z.M. and R.U., on 18 June 2014 the HCHR complained to the Sector that the applicants had been beaten and ill-treated by police officers at the scene of 19 May 2014. It was alleged that a certain K.S. had witnessed police officers intercepting the applicants on the street and punching and kicking both of them (X had also been hit with a truncheon), while asking them to “admit where the bag is, where have you put it?”. She had called their fathers who had arrived shortly after, while the officers had still been beating X. There had been other bystanders, and according to K.S. and the applicants’ parents who had witnessed the incident, X had not been aggressive. R.U. had noticed that Y, his son, who had been thirteen years old at the time, had been “evidently upset, crying, had urinated in his pants and had an intense redness on his face”. The same night he had called the emergency police number from his mobile to report the incident. In the police station, X had initially been interrogated for two hours in the absence of his father or a lawyer. During that time he had allegedly been beaten. After his father had been called to attend the examination, he had not been assisted by an interpreter, despite the fact that he had limited command of Macedonian. Under duress (insulted and threatened with the words “find the bag or I’ll kill you in front of your father”), X had admitted the crime. Both Z.M. and R.U. had been required to sign, in the presence of an ex officio lawyer, certain documents purporting to be “certificates that children [had been] released”. X was released between 12.30 a.m. and 1 a.m. the next day. In support of the complaint, the applicants provided statements by Z.M., R.U. (who also stated that X had been beaten with a truncheon) and K.S., as well as the medical evidence reproduced in paragraph 9 above.
On 15 July 2014 the Sector, relying on police records described in paragraph 7 above, dismissed the complaint as unsubstantiated, asserting that the police officers had not overstepped their authority. In its account of the events, the Sector stated that at the date and time in question, four police officers had intercepted one person (X); he had been apprehended without any force being used because he had cooperated with the police; two other police cars (with further police officers and E.R.) had arrived on the scene; a larger group of Roma people (including X’s father) had meanwhile gathered, complaining loudly, but there had been no need for the police to intervene. According to the Sector, no other actions had been taken on the scene in respect of any other person. As regards the medical evidence described in paragraph 9 above, the Sector reiterated that the X-ray examination had noted “orderly findings”. It further stated that “[the Sector] would not comment on the findings of bodily injury”. Lastly, it noted the absence of any indication that action had been taken in respect of Y. From the interview with the police officer on duty who had received R.U.’s call and the audio recordings, the Sector concluded that R.U. had been instructed to report the incident to the police station, which he had failed to do. In September 2014 the Ombudsman reached the same findings and informed R.U. that he would terminate the proceedings.
On 3 September 2014 the applicants, represented by a lawyer, and the HCRH filed a criminal complaint to the public prosecutor against four unidentified police officers on account of ill-treatment, torture, violence and racial discrimination in relation to the events of 19 May 2014, punishable under the Criminal Code. They alleged that they had been intercepted on a street and beaten by police officers (punched (Y was also slapped in the face) and kicked (X was also beaten with truncheon)) because they had been Roma (Y had not matched the reported age of the assailants, see paragraph 6 above). At the same time the police officers had been asking them to “admit where the bag is, where have you put it?”. They further reiterated that the same night R.U. had called the emergency police number from his mobile phone to report the incident, submitting that no steps had been taken to investigate that report. In support they submitted the medical evidence regarding X and requested that the public prosecutor examine the applicants, their fathers, K.S., a certain S.S. and N.U. (who had also allegedly witnessed the events complained of) and the police officers involved. They also submitted copies of their application to the Sector and the latter’s reply (see paragraphs 10 and 11 above).
On 6 August 2015 the applicants requested that the higher public prosecutor reviewed the work of the first-instance prosecutor in the absence of any action on his part. In his reply of 21 September 2015, the higher public prosecutor informed the applicants that there were two criminal complaints regarding related events (see paragraphs 24 and 25 below) and that appropriate measures would be taken.
On 25 March 2016 the applicants requested the higher public prosecutor to take over the prosecution in view of the inactivity of the firstinstance public prosecutor. By letter of 28 March 2016 the higher public prosecutor notified the applicants’ representative that information had been requested from the competent first-instance prosecution’s office. The applicants made similar request on 21 October 2016.
At a meeting of 25 November 2016, the first-instance public prosecutor informed the applicants’ lawyer of the difficulties in establishing X’s whereabouts in the proceedings against him (paragraphs 24 and 25 below). The applicants’ lawyer confirmed that the applicants lived in Skopje and that she was in contact with them.
In a letter of 2 December 2016, the first-instance public prosecutor informed the higher public prosecutor that he had requested that the Ministry of the Interior should identify the police officers involved in the events of 19 May 2014. That request was repeated on 6 November 2017.
On 25 December 2017 the first-instance public prosecutor examined Y in the presence of his lawyer. Y reiterated that police officers had slapped and punched them (X had been beaten more and subsequently taken to police station). R.U. added that Y had urinated in his pants and had blood on his mouth. The public prosecutor also examined the accused police officers whose identity had meanwhile been determined. They all denied the accusations. X did not attend the interview. The lawyer said that he would ensure X’s presence in order to testify. According to a letter of 10 May 2018 sent by the first-instance public prosecutor to the Government Agent in the context of the present proceedings, that assurance has not yet been met.
On 21 December 2016 the applicants submitted two separate civil claims (relying, inter alia, on the Discrimination Act (Закон за спречување и заштита од дискриминација)) asking the courts to establish that the Ministry and the first-instance public prosecutor’s office dealing with their criminal complaint had discriminated against them on grounds of their Roma origin and to award them just satisfaction on that basis. In both claims they reiterated their allegations as submitted in their criminal complaint (see paragraph 12 above), namely that they had been beaten by four police officers on the scene solely because they were ethnic Roma (Y  had not matched the reported age of the assailants, see paragraph 6 above). They argued that police officers had punched (Y had been slapped in the face) and kicked them and had asked them to “admit where the bag is, where have you put it?”. The applicants requested that the court, inter alia, examine them personally, and also Z.M., R.U., K.S., S.S. and N.U. as eyewitnesses, and admit in evidence the medical certificates of 20 May 2014 (see paragraph 9 above). They also referred to international materials (see paragraphs 28 and 29 below) and the Court’s case-law concerning discrimination against Roma people.
The applicants claimed that the public prosecutor’s inactivity visàvis their complaint of police brutality had been due to their Roma origin. The Skopje Court of First Instance established, inter alia, that police had intercepted the applicants and tried to “secure their presence for identification” by E.R. A fairly large group of people (around forty) had gathered. Further police officers and several police cars had arrived at the scene. Y had been handed over to his father with an instruction to bring him to the police station for identification. As stated in the judgment, these facts were established on the basis of the exchange between the Sector and the HCHR (see paragraphs 10 and 11 above) and R.U.’s testimony. According to the court minutes, R.U. also stated that when he had arrived on the scene, he had seen that Y had blood on his nose and mouth. He had taken him to a doctor who had noted no injury, but said that Y had been frightened and stressed. By decision of 17 November 2017, the court dismissed the claim by Y and noted that X had meanwhile (on 21 September 2017) withdrawn the claim in his regard (by a written statement to which his father consented). It found no evidence that the defendant had suffered any discriminatory conduct motivated by Y’s Roma origin. On the contrary, the complexity of the case, namely the fact that the criminal complaint had concerned unidentified officers accused on several counts, required extensive examination irrespective of the ethnic belonging of the persons concerned. The time required for the public prosecutor to take the necessary actions was not excessive and could not imply the existence of discrimination. The evidence adduced by Y (reports and Court’s case-law) could not lead to different facts that would require the shifting of the burden of proof on to the defendant.
Y complained, arguing, inter alia, that the first-instance court had not explained why the public prosecutor had processed the criminal complaint against X more expeditiously than their complaint of police brutality, and how long the investigation would have to have been to be considered unreasonable. He submitted that the public prosecutor should first of all have interviewed the applicants, but that he had failed to do so because they were Roma and the accused were police officers, and that he had provided sufficient evidence and facts in support of his claim to require the burden of proof that there had been no discrimination to be shifted on to the defendant.
On 29 March 2018 the Skopje Court of Appeal upheld the lower court’s decision finding no grounds to depart from the reasons provided therein.
The parties submitted copies of court minutes of October and December 2017 in the context of these civil proceedings regarding the examination of R.U. and N.U. (Y’s father and brother, respectively). R.U. stated that, inter alia, after the encounter with the police, Y had blood on his mouth; his face had been red and he had urinated in his pants. Y had told him that police officers had slapped and kicked him. During the interview in the police station, police officers had shouted “you Gypsies, you lie and steal”. N.U. stated that, inter alia, he had seen that police officers slapping, punching and kicking Y, and shouting “You Gypsies, you only cause trouble”. Y had been bleeding from his mouth; he had been frightened and had urinated in his pants.
No information has been provided on whether the proceedings before the Skopje Court of First Instance have been completed.
On 23 May 2014 the Ministry lodged a criminal complaint against X on charges of robbery, relying on X’s admission (see paragraph 7 above) and the fact that E.R. had identified X as one of the assailants in an identification parade organised on 22 May 2014. Since X had his official home address in Prilep, the case was assigned to Prilep public prosecutor. After the summons sent to his address in Prilep was returned by the postal service, Prilep public prosecutor was informed by the Ministry (in November 2014 and May 2015) that X lived at an unknown address in Skopje.
The Prilep Court of First Instance held several hearings pursuant to a request by the public prosecutor for an educational measure (воспитна мерка). Since X’s whereabouts were unknown, the court issued a search and arrest warrant. Since X remained unreachable (недостапен), on 15 March 2016 the court suspended the proceedings (се прекинува). On 16 June 2017 Prilep Court of First Instance ordered the educational measure of “enforced supervision by the parents”. In the presence of his father and an officially appointed lawyer, X admitted that on 19 May 2014 both Y and he had attacked E.R.; Y had threatened her with a knife; they had stolen her bag; police officers had arrived and both of them had started running in different directions; Y, with the bag, had managed to escape. X testified in Macedonian. Z.M., his father, reiterated that the police had beaten him that day. No information was provided on whether X had appealed against this decision, and if so what the outcome had been.
On 17 July 2017 the ERRC informed the Court that X wished to withdraw his application. As explained in the letter, on 17 June 2017 X had had a lengthy meeting with the police, after which he had instructed his legal representatives that he no longer wished to pursue the proceedings before the Court and the domestic courts. By letter of 13 October 2017, after X had been informed that the present case had been communicated to the respondent Government and that the applicants had been granted anonymity, X indicated his wish to pursue his application.
The Government submitted copies of several final judgments rendered between October 2015 and August 2017 in which the domestic courts, relying on the Discrimination Act, acknowledged that the Ministry had discriminated against the plaintiffs, all Roma, and awarded them just satisfaction. All cases concerned border incidents in which the plaintiffs were not allowed to leave the respondent State (P4-1228/13; P4-160/15; P4-190/15; P4-730/15; P4-14/16; P4-130/16).
In its Concluding Observations on the third periodic report submitted by the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia adopted at its 3191th meeting held on 20 July 2015, the Committee stated, inter alia, that:
“Torture and excessive use of force by law enforcement officials
The Committee is concerned about reports of police brutality and excessive use of force by law enforcement officials, particularly against Roma and members of other minorities. It is also concerned about reports of ill-treatment and torture by prison staff in detention facilities. The Committee is also concerned about the lack of investigation of and prosecution for crimes committed by law enforcement personnel. (arts. 2, 7 and 9).”
In its Concluding Observations on the third periodic report of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia adopted at its 1317 meeting (CAT/C/SR.1317) held on 7 May 2015, the Committee stated, inter alia, that:
“...
Impunity for acts of torture and ill-treatment
The Committee notes with concern that 242 complaints of excessive use of force and violence by police officers were filed with the Ombudsman and the Sector for Internal Control and Professional Standards (SICPS) between 2009 and 2013 .... NGO sources also point to a lack of transparency of the parliamentary oversight committee which has allegedly not taken any action on torture or illtreatment by police.
...
Violence against Roma
While appreciating the establishment of the national action plans (NAP) and other efforts undertaken to combat intolerance and hatred towards ethnic minorities, especially Roma, the Committee remains concerned at information regarding excessive use of force by police officials against the Roma including those committed by members of the “Alfa” unit. The Committee is also concerned at the investigation into the case on 5 May 2013 where approximately 50 police officers, including those belonging to the special police unit “Alfa”, allegedly forcibly entered several Romani houses and local shops in a Roma neighbourhood ‘Topaana’ in Skopje, and used excessive and arbitrary force when they were attempting to arrest a person. It was alleged that, without providing any explanation, the police harassed and pushed people, and that police officers kicked and punched and hit them with batons, injuring 10 individuals (art. 11 and 16).”