The case originated in an application (no. 47159/08) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Ms B.S. (“the applicant”), on 29 September 2008.
The President of the Chamber decided, of his own motion, not to disclose the identity of the applicant (Rule 47 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by Ms V. Waisman, a lawyer practising in . The Spanish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr F. Irurzun Montoro, State Counsel.
On 25 May 2010 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided that the Chamber would rule on the admissibility and merits at the same time (Article 29 § 1 of the Convention).
Both the applicant and the Government filed written observations. Observations were also received from the European Social Research Unit (ESRH) at the Research Group on Exclusion and Social Control (GRECS) at the University of Barcelona and from the AIRE Centre, which had been given leave by the President to take part in the proceedings as third-party interveners (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 2).
The applicant, who is of Nigerian origin, was born in 1977 and has been lawfully resident in  since 2003.
On 15 July 2005 the applicant was on the public highway in the El Arenal district near Palma de Mallorca, where she worked as a prostitute, when two officers of the national police force asked to see her identity and then ordered her to leave the premises, which she did immediately.
The applicant alleged that later the same day, after returning to the same place, she had noticed the same police officers coming towards her and had attempted to flee. The police officers had caught up with her, struck her on the left thigh and on her wrists with a truncheon and again demanded to see her identity papers. She alleged that during the altercation, which had been witnessed by a number of people including two taxi drivers and the security guards of a nearby discotheque, one of the police officers had insulted her, saying things like “get out of here you black whore”. She was released after presenting her papers to the police officers.
Again according to the applicant, on 21 July 2005 the same police officers stopped her again and one of them hit her on the left hand with his truncheon.
That day the applicant lodged a formal verbal complaint with Palma de Mallorca investigating judge no. 8 and went to hospital to have her injuries treated. The doctors observed inflammation and mild bruising of the left hand.
The file was allocated to Palma de Mallorca investigating judge no. 9, who decided to open a judicial investigation and requested an incident report from the police headquarters. In his report of 11 October 2005 the chief of police of the Balearic Islands explained that police patrols were common in the district concerned on account of the numerous complaints of theft or physical attacks regularly received from the local residents and the resulting damage done to the district’s image. He added that foreign female citizens present in the area often attempted to escape from the police because the latter’s presence hindered them in their work. In the present case the applicant had attempted to avoid inspection by the police but had been stopped by the officers, who had asked her to show her papers without at any time making any humiliating remarks or using physical force. With regard to the identity of the officers, the head of police indicated that the ones who had stopped and questioned the applicant the first time were from the patrol formed by the police officers Rayo 98  and  Rayo 93 (code names given to the officers). Contrary to the applicant’s assertions, those who had stopped her on 21 July 2005 belonged to a different patrol, called Luna 10.
In a decision of 17 October 2005 Palma de Mallorca investigating judge no. 9 issued a provisional discharge order and decided to discontinue the proceedings on the ground that there was insufficient evidence that an offence had been committed.
That decision was served on the applicant or her representative on 23 April 2007, at the latter’s request.
The applicant applied to Palma de Mallorca investigating judge no. 9 to have the decision reversed, and subsequently appealed. She complained of the discriminatory attitude of the police officers and requested that various evidence-gathering measures be taken, such as identification of the officers in question and taking witness statements from the persons who had been present during the incidents. In a decision of 10 June 2007, investigating judge no. 9 refused to reverse his decision on the grounds that the applicant’s allegations had not been corroborated by objective evidence in the file. The judge observed that
“the medical report [provided by the applicant] contains no date and, in any event ... mentions only inflammation and bruising of the hand, with no mention of any injury to the thigh.
[The facts submitted] merely show that the applicant repeatedly failed to obey police orders given in the course of their duties, designed to prevent the shameful spectacle of prostitution on the public highway.”
An appeal by the applicant was examined by the Balearic Islands Audiencia Provincial, which gave a decision on 16 October 2007 allowing the appeal in part, setting aside the discharge order and ordering proceedings for a minor criminal offence to be instituted before the investigating judge against the two police officers, who had been identified on the basis of the information contained in the report drawn up by the police headquarters.
In the context of those proceedings the applicant asked to be able to identify the officers through a two-way mirror. Her request was rejected on the grounds that this was an unreliable method of identification given the length of time that had already elapsed since the incidents and the fact that the officers in question had been wearing helmets throughout, as the applicant had acknowledged. No evidence against the accused was taken during the trial.
On 11 March 2008 investigating judge no. 9 gave judgment at the end of a public hearing during which evidence was heard from the police officers charged, who were not formally identified by the applicant. In his judgment the judge observed that during the judicial investigation an incident report had been requested from the police headquarters according to which the officers involved had stated that no incident had occurred when they had stopped and questioned the applicant. The judge drew attention to the fact that the medical report provided by the applicant did not specify the date on which it had been drawn up. Furthermore, the findings in the report were not conclusive as to the cause of the injuries. Lastly, the judge reproduced verbatim the grounds of the decision of 10 June 2007 relating to the applicant’s conduct and the purpose of the intervention by the police and concluded that her allegations were not objectively corroborated. In the light of those arguments, the judge acquitted the police officers.
The applicant appealed. She challenged the refusal to allow her to identify the perpetrators through a two-way mirror and criticised the fact that the only investigative measure taken by the investigating judge in response to her complaint had been to request a report from the police headquarters.
In a judgment of 6 April 2009, the Palma de Mallorca Audiencia Provincial dismissed her appeal and upheld the investigating judge’s judgment. It pointed out that the right to use a range of evidence-gathering measures did not include the right to have each and every proposed measure accepted by a court. In the instant case identification through a two-way mirror would not have added anything to the evidence on the file.
Relying on Articles 14 (prohibition of discrimination), 15 (protection of physical integrity) and 24 (right to a fair trial) of the Constitution, the applicant lodged an amparo appeal with the . In a decision of 22 December 2009, the  dismissed the appeal on grounds of a lack of constitutional basis for the complaints raised.
The applicant was stopped and questioned again on 23 July 2005. On the same day she went to the casualty department of a public medical centre, where the doctor observed abdominal pain and bruising on the hand and knee.
On 25 July 2005 she lodged a criminal complaint with Palma de Mallorca investigating judge no. 2, alleging that one of the police officers had struck her on the hand and knee with a truncheon and that the officers had singled her out on account of her racial origin and had not stopped and questioned other women carrying on the same activity. She also stated that she had subsequently been taken to the police station, where she had refused to sign a statement drawn up by the police saying that she admitted having resisted police orders. Referring to the incidents that had occurred during the first episode, the applicant requested the removal of the police officer who had assaulted her and that her complaint be joined to the one previously lodged with investigating judge no. 8. Neither of her requests was granted.
The case was allocated to Palma de Mallorca investigating judge no. 11, who decided to open a judicial investigation. The applicant requested certain evidence-gathering measures, including obtaining from the police the identification numbers of the officers who had been on duty on 15 and 23 July. In the alternative, should that information not permit identification of the police officers responsible, the applicant requested that all the police officers who had patrolled the area during those days be summoned so that they could be identified through a two-way mirror. Her request was rejected.
In the course of the judicial investigation, investigating judge no. 11 requested an incident report from the police headquarters.
A report by the Balearic Islands chief of police dated 28 December 2005 explained, firstly, that the applicant had admitted working as a prostitute in the area in question, which was an activity that had given rise to numerous complaints from local residents. In that connection he considered that the sole purpose of the applicant’s complaints (including the one of 15 July) had been to allow her to pursue her occupation unhindered by the police. With regard to the identity of the officers in question, the chief of police observed that the computer records had not registered any intervention on 23 July; only those of 15 and 21 July had been recorded in respect of that area.
On 22 February 2006 investigating judge no.11 issued a provisional discharge order and decided to discontinue the proceedings on the grounds that there was insufficient evidence that an offence had been committed.
The applicant sought to have that decision reversed by the judge and subsequently appealed. The judge dismissed her request by a decision of 31 July 2006. Subsequently, the Palma de Mallorca Audiencia Provincial dismissed her appeal on 7 March 2007. The Audiencia referred both to the report of the police headquarters in which there was no record of an intervention by the police on the alleged date and the statements in the report regarding the applicant’s true motives in lodging her complaints. It also considered that the medical report supplied by the applicant did not enable the cause of the injuries to be unequivocally established.
Relying on Articles 10 (right to dignity), 14 (prohibition of discrimination), 15 (right to physical and mental integrity) and 24 (right to a fair trial) of the Constitution, the applicant lodged an amparo appeal with the . In a decision of 14 April 2008, the  dismissed the appeal on grounds of a lack of constitutional basis for the complaints raised.
...