The present case concerns the alleged abduction and subsequent disappearance of the applicants’ relative in Dagestan in 2012, and the ineffectiveness of the ensuing investigation into the matter.
The applicants were born in 1976 and 1956 respectively and live in Makhachkala, Dagestan. They are represented before the Court by lawyers from Memorial Human Rights Centre, a non-governmental organisation in Moscow.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the applicants, may be summarised as follows.
The applicants are the wife and mother respectively of Mr Timur Danilin, who was born in 1977. At the material time, the applicants and Mr Danilin lived in Makhachkala, Dagestan.
On the morning of 25 March 2012 Mr Danilin took the first applicant to work in his VAZ-2109 car. He was supposed to pick her up from work at 1 p.m. that day. However, he did not arrive. The first applicant tried calling him, but to no avail.
In the evening, the first applicant and her relatives started searching for Mr Danilin. At about 10 p.m. the first applicant received a call from an unfamiliar number; it was Mr Danilin, who said that he had been beaten, his car and mobile phone had been taken from him and he needed help. Then another man who introduced himself as a police officer from the village of Novolak (also referred to as Novolakskoye in the documents submitted) told the applicant to bring 50,000 roubles (about 1,300 euros) to the police station in that village in exchange for Mr Danilin’s release. When later in the evening the first applicant with about a dozen of her relatives arrived there, the police officers at the police station denied any knowledge of Mr Danilin’s whereabouts and demanded that they return home or they would be “detained as well”.
According to the applicants, several days later they were informed by the residents of Novolak of the following. At about 9.30 p.m. on 25 March 2012 Mr Danilin had been seen, severely beaten, in a courtyard in Lenina Street in Novolak. He had been speaking with Mr L.A. and the latter’s mother and elder brother. Then the neighbourhood police officer, G.A., who had been passing by, asked him what had happened. Mr Danilin had told him that he had been beaten, and that his car and his phone had been taken from him.
Then Officer G.A. had called the police, who had arrived a few minutes later. Officer R.Kh. (also referred to as R.S. in the documents submitted) and two other police officers from the operational investigations unit (СОГ) had emerged from the police UAZ vehicle. When Mr Danilin had seen the officers, he had tried to run away, but they had fired shots in the air and threatened to shoot him. Then the officers had forced Mr Danilin into their vehicle and driven off to the Novolak police station. At some point later Mr Danilin had been transferred from the Novolak police station to the Khasavyurt Counterterrorism Centre.
The Government neither contested the facts as submitted by the applicants nor advanced an alternative version of the events.
On 26 March 2012 the first applicant complained to the police and the Dagestan Department of the Federal Security Service (FSB) of Mr Danilin’s abduction by the police.
Following a preliminary examination, on 12 April 2012 the Khasavyurt Department of the Investigative Committee opened a criminal case under Article 105 of the Criminal Code (murder). The investigation of the criminal case can be summarised as follows.
On 16 April 2012 the first applicant was granted victim status and questioned. In her statement to the investigators, she alleged the involvement of the police in the abduction of Mr Danilin.
On 7 May 2012 the first applicant received a letter from the Internal Investigations Department of the Dagestan Ministry of the Interior which stated that they “were verifying the potential involvement of the neighbourhood police officer G.A. in the disappearance of Mr Danilin”.
On 17 May 2012 the head of the Dagestan Investigative Committee criticised the investigation of the criminal case as ineffective and “intentionally dragged out” and ordered that “in view of its publicity” it be transferred to the investigators at the headquarters of the Dagestan Investigative Committee.
On 25 May 2012 the deputy head of the Dagestan Investigative Committee criticised the investigation as “carried out in an insufficiently professional manner” and issued orders to be carried out by the investigators in the criminal case. Those orders included obtaining the CCTV footage from the cameras installed along the perimeter of the Novolak police station and questioning of all of the police officers who were on duty at the Novolak police station on 25 and 26 March 2012.
On 4 July 2012 the investigators seized one CCTV camera from the Novolak police station to examine its footage.
On 5 July 2012 the investigators questioned Officer B.M., who stated that he had been the on-duty officer at the Novolak police station on the date of Mr Danilin’s disappearance. According to him, on the date of the disappearance, a group of four or five of Mr Danilin’s relatives had arrived at the Novolak police station. Two or three of them had seemed drunk and behaved aggressively. Mr Danilin’s relatives had not lodged any official complaints, but had demanded that he show them the log of the persons detained at the police station, as well as the cells where the detainees were kept. He had refused to do so. Given that no complaints of abduction had been lodged, he had not registered any. Officer B.M. also stated that the Novolak police station had sixteen CCTV cameras and their footage was stored for seven days, after which it was overwritten.
Two police officers from the Novolak police station, R.Kh. and G.A., questioned by the investigators on 5 and 9 July 2012 respectively, confirmed that they had been at the police station on 25 March 2012, but denied in general terms having any information pertaining to the disappearance of Mr Danilin. They also stated that the police station had either fifteen or sixteen CCTV cameras on its premises and that the footage was regularly overwritten after several days.
Between 9 and 16 July 2012 the investigators questioned five officers from the Novolak police station’s operational investigations unit. None of them could recall the events of 25 and 26 March 2012 owing to the passage of time. They denied having any information concerning the disappearance of Mr Danilin and had no idea why Mr Danilin’s relatives would think that the police had been involved in the incident.
On 16 July 2012 (the date was also given as 16 June 2012 in the documents submitted), the investigators’ superiors from the Investigative Committee of the Russian Federation reviewed the investigation file. As a result, they criticised the investigation as ineffective, protracted and “organised in an unacceptably poor manner”. They ordered that the investigators take a number of important steps without delay and report to them on a monthly basis on the progress made.
On 7 August 2012 the second applicant was granted victim status in the criminal case and questioned. Her statement was similar to the applicants’ submissions before the Court. In her opinion, officers from local law-enforcement agencies had been involved in the abduction and subsequent disappearance of her son.
On various dates in September 2012 the investigators questioned several more officers from the Novolak police station, all of whom denied having any information concerning Mr Danilin’s disappearance.
On 25 October 2012 the expert examination of the CCTV camera seized from the Novolak police station concluded that it did not contain any footage and that it was impossible to recover the footage from 25 and 26 March 2012.
On 24 December 2012 the investigators’ superiors again criticised the investigation for failing to take basic steps, stating that it had been suspended prematurely and ordering that the proceedings be resumed.
On 31 January 2013 the investigators questioned several officers from the Novolak police station, all of whom stated that they had no information as to whether any of their colleagues had officially registered any incidents on 25 and 26 March 2012, including the one relating to Mr Danilin’s disappearance.
On 26 February 2013 the investigators’ superiors again criticised the investigation for failing to take basic steps, stating that it had been suspended unlawfully and prematurely and ordering that the proceedings be resumed. The document stated, in particular, the following:
“... it transpires from the complaint [that the second applicant lodged against the investigation] that the mother of police officer G.A., Ms R., had visited [the second applicant] at home and told her that on 25 March 2012 Timur Danilin had been beaten by police officers from the Novolak police station and placed in the temporary detention unit at the station. He had managed to escape and run into the street [where, in a courtyard,] he had encountered Mr L.A., whose telephone he had used to call [the first applicant] ... Then Officer G.A. had arrived and ... several minutes later a LadaPriora car without registration numbers had also arrived with the head of the Novolak police station, Officer R. Kh., and two other officers, Z.M. and S.A. The officers had fired several gunshots in the air to ensure that Mr Danilin would not run away. After that the officers had put Timur Danilin in their car and taken him to the Khasavyurt Counterterrorism Centre. The residents of the houses situated in the vicinity had witnessed the incident. On the morning of 26 March 2012 the head of the Novolak police station had returned to the scene and warned the local residents to keep silent about the incident.
To date, [the second applicant] has not been questioned about this incident; nor has Ms R., the mother of Officer G.A., been identified and questioned ...
To verify the information concerning the persons detained at the Novolak police station between 25 and 27 March 2012, it is necessary ... to question all of the individuals who, according to the station’s detention log, were detained there and who could therefore verify whether Mr Danilin had been taken there ...”
On 4 April 2013 the investigators questioned the applicants about the complaint lodged by the second applicant with the investigators’ superiors. Their statements reaffirmed the information provided in the complaint (see the paragraph above).
Between April 2013 and March 2014 the investigation was suspended on several more occasions and each time it was resumed as a result of criticism by the investigators’ superiors, who stated that the suspensions had been premature and unlawful. On 20 April 2014 the investigation was suspended for the last time; the documents submitted show that the orders given by the superiors were not complied with.
It appears from the documents submitted that the investigation is still pending, the whereabouts of Mr Danilin have not been established and the perpetrators of his abduction have not been identified.
For a summary of the relevant domestic regulations, see Turluyeva v. Russia, no. 63638/09, §§ 56-64, 20 June 2013.