The case originated in four applications (nos. 30198/04, 30200/04, 3484/05 and 36298/07) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four Romanian nationals. The details of the applicants including the introduction date of their applications and the date of their communication to the Government are indicated in the table enclosed as an annex to this judgment. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Răzvan-Horaţiu Radu, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
In accordance with Protocol No. 14, after informing the respondent Government, the applications were assigned to a Committee of three Judges.
The applications concern the non-enforcement of final judgments rendered in disputes between the applicants and the State authorities in charge with the calculation and payment of retirement benefits.
By final judgments delivered by the domestic courts between 19 March 2002 and 3 March 2005, the applicants’ civil actions were admitted and the relevant pension authorities were obliged to recalculate the applicants’ pensions so as to include additional benefits (all applications) and to issue new retirement decisions in this respect (all applications except application no. 36298/07 where the recalculation could have been implemented without necessarily issuing a new decision). In spite of the applicants’ undertakings to have them enforced, such as instituting compulsory enforcement proceedings and writing numerous petitions to the relevant authorities, all judgments remained not enforced or were enforced with delay (application no. 3484/05). The details as to the subject matter of the cases, reference dates for the start and end of the proceedings and the delays in the enforcement are set out in the appended table.
The relevant domestic law concerning the execution of final judgments, namely excerpts of the Civil Procedure Code and Law no.188/2000 on the powers and functions of bailiffs, is summed up in the Court’s judgment in the case of Topciov v. Romania ((dec.), no. 17369/02, 15 June 2006).
On 26 January 2011 the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe adopted this Resolution by which it notes with grave concern the continuing existence, in some of the member states, of major systemic deficiencies which cause large numbers of repetitive findings of violations of the Convention. In this context the Assembly urged  to tackle with priority the problem of non-enforcement of final court decisions.