The case originated in an application (no. 8927/11) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Vladimir Nikolayevich Ruban (“the applicant”), on 15 October 2010.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms N. Burns, a lawyer practising in Wembley, London. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented most recently by their Acting Agent, Ms O. Davydchuk of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that in sentencing him the domestic courts had not applied the most lenient criminal provisions, in violation of Article 7 of the Convention.
On 6 January 2014 the above complaint under Article 7 was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant, Mr Vladimir Nikolayevich Ruban, is a Ukrainian national, who was born in 1972 and is currently serving a life sentence.
On 13 August 1996 the Voznesensk local prosecutor’s office in the Mykolayiv region started an investigation into the murder of four persons on 12 August 1996.
On 18 October 1999 the Donetsk Regional Prosecutor’s Office started investigating the murder of A.
On 10 November 1999 the Slavyansk Police Department of the Donetsk region started an investigation into hooliganism concerning R.
On 22 November 1999 the above three investigations were joined. Several persons were suspected of committing the above crimes as a group, one of them being the applicant.
On 14 December 1999 the Donetsk Regional Prosecutor’s Office formally charged the applicant in absentia with the above crimes. He was also placed on the list of wanted persons. The same day the investigation in respect of the applicant was suspended until he was apprehended; the criminal proceedings continued in respect of the other suspects.
On 23 December 2002, the Donetsk Regional Court of Appeal convicted and sentenced G., P. and F. for the above mentioned crimes.
On 2 February 2004 the Slavyansk Local Court ordered the applicant’s detention.
On 28 June 2007 the applicant was apprehended by the Yartsevo Prosecutor’s Office in the Smolensk region, Russia.
On 31 March 2008 the investigation was resumed after the applicant had been extradited to Ukraine. The same day the applicant was formally charged with participation in an organised criminal group together with G., P., F. and two other persons, who had died in the intervening time. The applicant was accused of strangling A., of killing four persons together with G. in 1996 and inflicting grievous bodily harm on R. in a murder attempt, the latter crime in the context of the extortion of R’s brother. All these crimes had been committed as a group.
On 22 May 2008 the investigation was completed and on 26 June 2008 the case was transferred to the Donetsk Regional Court of Appeal.
On 10 July 2009 the Court of Appeal, acting as a first-instance court, found the applicant guilty of aggravated murder and banditry and sentenced him to life imprisonment.
The applicant and his lawyer appealed, considering that the applicant’s guilt had not been proved.
On 15 July 2010 the Supreme Court of Ukraine upheld the judgment of 10 July 2009. On that day the applicant’s lawyer submitted an additional appeal claiming that the Court of Appeal had to apply the most favourable wording of the relevant provisions of the Criminal Code, which was that between 29 December 1999 and 29 March 2000 when the death penalty had already been abolished and life imprisonment had not yet been introduced. The Supreme Court in its decision noted that the applicant had been sentenced correctly.
The Constitution provides for jurisdiction of the Constitutional Court as follows:
“The Constitutional Court of Ukraine is the sole body of constitutional jurisdiction in Ukraine.
The Constitutional Court of Ukraine decides on issues of conformity of laws and other legal acts with the Constitution of Ukraine, and provides the official interpretation of the Constitution of Ukraine and the laws of Ukraine.
...”
“The jurisdiction of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine encompasses:
1)  Deciding on issues of conformity with the Constitution of Ukraine (the constitutionality) of the following:
- laws and other legal acts of the Verkhovna Rada (the Parliament) of Ukraine;
- decrees of the President of Ukraine;
- decrees of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine;
- legal acts of the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea.
These issues are considered on an appeal by: the President of Ukraine; at least forty-five National Deputies of Ukraine; the Supreme Court of Ukraine; the Human Rights Representative of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine; the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea;
2)  The official interpretation of the Constitution of Ukraine and the laws of Ukraine;
On issues envisaged by this Article, the Constitutional Court of Ukraine adopts decisions that are mandatory for execution throughout the territory of Ukraine, that are final and shall not be appealed.”
“... Acts of Parliament and other legal acts or their provisions that have been declared unconstitutional shall lose their force from the date of adoption of the relevant decision of the Constitutional Court on their unconstitutionality ...”
The relevant provisions of the Code (as worded prior to 29 December 1999) provided as follows:
“Murder: (a) committed for profit ... (c) committed because of the victim’s official or public activity ... (i) committed by a hired killer ... (j) committed premeditatedly by a group of persons or an organised group
shall be punishable by imprisonment of eight to fifteen years or by the death penalty and, in cases provided for by subparagraph (a), with confiscation of property.”
Following the decision of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine concerning the death penalty (see below), the Verkhovna Rada passed Law no. 1483 of 22 February 2000 amending the Criminal Code; the death penalty, as a punishment for some crimes, was replaced with life imprisonment. The amendments entered into force on 29 March 2000.
In its decision the Constitutional Court of Ukraine examined the constitutionality of the death penalty and found it unconstitutional. It decided as follows:
“1.  The provisions ... of the Criminal Code of Ukraine which provide for the death penalty as a form of punishment are declared to be contrary to the Constitution of Ukraine (unconstitutional).
The provisions of the Criminal Code of Ukraine which have been declared unconstitutional shall be null and void from the date of adoption of this decision by the Constitutional Court of Ukraine.
The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall bring the Criminal Code of Ukraine into line with this decision of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine.”
On 5 April 2001 the Verkhovna Rada adopted a new Criminal Code which entered into force on 1 September 2001. Under paragraph 2 of Article 115 of the Code, aggravated murder is punishable by imprisonment for a term of ten to fifteen years, or life imprisonment.
On 15 April 2008 the Verkhovna Rada passed the Amendment Act on Humanisation of Criminal Liability (“the Amendment Act”), which amended certain provisions of the Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure. In particular the amended Article 5 of the Criminal Code contains the following provisions:
“1.  A law on criminal liability which decriminalises an action, mitigates criminal liability or otherwise improves the situation of a person, shall have a retroactive effect; it shall apply to persons who had committed the relevant act before such a law entered into force, including persons serving their sentence or those who have completed their sentence but have a criminal record.
...
If a law on criminal liability has been amended several times after the person had committed the act foreseen by this Code, the law which decriminalises an act, mitigates criminal liability or otherwise improves the situation of a person shall have retroactive effect.”
The Supreme Court of Ukraine applied to the Constitutional Court with a request for interpretation of the relevant provisions of the 1960 Criminal Code. The necessity of such an interpretation was explained by the large number of petitions lodged by persons sentenced to death prior to Law no. 1483 (see paragraph 21 above) and whose sentences had been commuted to life imprisonment after the Act in question had come into force. The Supreme Court considered that after the adoption of the decision of the Constitutional Court on the abolition of the death penalty, the 1960 Code changed and was a new law which mitigated criminal liability for particularly grave offences and hence applied retroactively to those who had committed crimes prior to the enactment of Law no. 1483.
In its decision, with reference to the admissibility decision in the case of Hummatov v. Azerbaijan ((dec.), nos. 9852/03 and 13413/04, 18 May 2006), the Constitutional Court decided in particular that after its decision of 29 December 1999 on the abolition of the death penalty, the Criminal Code had not become a new law that mitigated criminal liability for particularly serious crimes. It noted in particular:
“4.  The Constitutional Court of Ukraine proceeds on the basis that from the date of adoption by the Constitutional Court of its decision of 29 December 1999 and prior to entry into force of Law no. 1483, there was a period of time during which the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine was deciding on amendments to the [Criminal] Code of 1960 concerning replacement of the death penalty with another type of punishment – life imprisonment. This period was due to the non-simultaneous loss of force of provisions of the Code of 1960 on the death penalty and the entry into force of Law no. 1483 introducing of a new type of punishment...
However, the fact that this interim period of time existed does not mean that the then relevant sanctions under the Code of 1960 lost their alternative character and foresaw only imprisonment for a maximum term of fifteen years as a punishment. This is confirmed, in particular, by the fact that the Code of 1960 established a non- alternative sanction – imprisonment for up to fifteen years – for murder without aggravating circumstances (Article 94). However, the legislature did not establish the same punishment for murder with aggravating circumstances, because it considered that there had to be a possibility for the court to apply a more severe criminal punishment (Article 93 of the Code of 1960).
...
In addition, the Constitutional Court considers that after its decision of 29 December 1999 the Code of 1960 did not become a new law that mitigated criminal liability of individuals who had committed particularly serious crimes ...
The Constitutional Court proceeds from the basis that paragraph 4 of Article 5 of the [Criminal] Code of 2001 provides that [the Code] could be changed only by another law on criminal liability and not by a decision of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine, which is authorised only to declare provisions of the law on criminal responsibility unconstitutional.”
It concluded therefore that the provisions of the Criminal Code, as amended by the Act of Parliament of 22 February 2000, which entered into force on 29 March 2000, on replacement of the death penalty with the life imprisonment, should be understood as a new Act which mitigated criminal liability and had retroactive effect.
This opinion was adopted in reply to the Ukrainian request for accession to the Council of Europe. It contained, among other things, the following point:
“Application by Ukraine for membership of the Council of Europe
... 12. The Parliamentary Assembly notes that Ukraine ... intends:
...
2. to sign within one year and ratify within three years from the time of accession Protocol No. 6 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms on the abolition of the death penalty, and to put into place, with immediate effect from the day of accession, a moratorium on executions ...”
In 1999 in the process of monitoring Ukraine’s compliance with its undertakings, the Parliamentary Assembly noted significant shortcomings in hounouring its commitments, in particular, the failure of Ukraine to abolish the death penalty. The recommendation noted in particular:
“Honouring of obligations and commitments by Ukraine
The Assembly recalls its Recommendation 1395 and its Resolution 1179 on the honouring of obligations and commitments by Ukraine adopted on 27 January 1999, in which it:
‘considers that the Ukrainian authorities, including the Verkhovna Rada, are responsible to a great extent for the failure to respect the commitments Ukraine entered into when becoming a member of the Council of Europe ...
Moreover, Ukraine committed itself to ratify within three years from the time of accession (9 November 1995) Protocol No. 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights on the abolition of the death penalty; the deadline is now over and the protocol has not been ratified
...
Moreover, it appears from the aide-mémoire submitted by the Ukrainian delegation on 22 June 1999, that the following developments took place recently:
...
- on 14 June 1999, the Constitutional Court began to examine a motion forwarded by parliamentarians on the initiative of the Ukrainian delegation to the Council of Europe regarding the unconstitutionality of the death penalty;
...
This is the reason why the Assembly decides that it would be appropriate to start at the first part of the 2000 Ordinary Session, in accordance with Rule 6 of its Rules of Procedure, the procedure aiming at suspending the rights of the members of the Ukrainian delegation to table official documents in the sense of Rule 23 of the Rules of Procedure, take on duties and vote in the Assembly and its bodies, while maintaining those members’ rights to attend and to speak at Assembly part-sessions and meetings of its bodies, unless further developments regarded as substantial progress in the sense of Resolution 1179 of January 1999 have taken place.”
The decision of the Constitutional Court of 29 December 1999 concerning the unconstitutionality of the death penalty (see paragraph 22 above), was positively commented on by the President of the Parliamentary Assembly:
“Parliamentary Assembly President welcomes the abolition of the death penalty in Ukraine
STRASBOURG, 05.01.2000 -– "The decision of the Ukrainian Constitutional Court that the death penalty is unconstitutional and can therefore no longer be applied, is a welcome step forward in the honouring of Ukraine’s obligations and commitments as a member state of the Council of Europe. I trust that this decision will soon be followed by the formal ratification of Protocol 6 to the European Human Rights Convention concerning the abolition of the death penalty,’" said Lord RUSSELL-JOHNSTON, President of the COUNCIL OF EUROPE Parliamentary Assembly (*).
‘"I also wish to congratulate the Ukrainian parliament on the adoption of the laws on political parties and on the ratification of the European Charter for regional or minority languages. These three decisions brought Ukraine significantly closer to the fulfilment of the Assembly Resolution 1194 adopted in June 1999’", the President added.
‘"This progress is of the utmost importance at this stage of the monitoring procedure. In June the Assembly had decided to start the procedure to suspend certain rights of the Ukrainian delegation if no further compliance with the Assembly’s requests is accomplished before the end of this month’ ", Lord Russell-Johnston said.
‘"I trust that, encouraged by this success, the Ukrainian authorities will now keep the momentum and continue to take the initiatives necessary to complete the process of democratic reforms’", the President concluded.
Resolution 1194 stated that the Ukrainian authorities, including the Parliament -the Verkhovna Rada - were responsible to a great extent for the failure to respect their commitments and obligations as a member of the Council of Europe. Further progress was necessary to bring the Ukrainian legislation into conformity with European standards and to ensure that the Ukrainian authorities observe these principles in their practical work.
------------
(*) President Lord Russell-Johnston was formally informed about these developments yesterday by a letter of Oleksandr TKACHENKO, President of the Ukrainian Parliament.”