The case originated in an application (no. 28074/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Frano Smoje (“the applicant”), on 14 July 2003.
The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs Š. Stažnik.
On 25 April 2005 the Court decided to communicate the complaint concerning the length of the proceedings to the Government. Applying Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time.
The applicant was born in 1950 and lives in .
On 1 January 1997 the Act on Restitution of and Compensation for Property Taken during the Yugoslav Communist Regime (“the Denationalisation Act”) entered into force.
Pursuant to section 22 of the Denationalisation Act, nationalised flats in respect of which third persons had acquired specially protected tenancies (stanarsko pravo), were not to be restored to their former owners. The tenants had a right to purchase the flats from the Fund for the Restitution of and Compensation for Property Taken (Fond za naknadu oduzete imovine) under favourable conditions set out in the Specially Protected Tenancies ( to Occupier) Act. At the same time, the former owners or their heirs had the right to financial compensation in respect of the flats. Exceptionally, the former owners or their heirs had a right to restitution in kind of their nationalised flats in respect of which no “tenancy relationship” (stanarski odnos) existed.
In 1958 a flat in  owned by the applicant's grandmother was nationalised by the Communist authorities. Subsequently, it was given to a certain D.P. who acquired a specially protected tenancy of the flat. When D.P. died in July 1996 the tenancy was transferred to his wife A.P. She died in October 1996.
On 27 February 1997 the applicant instituted administrative proceedings before the Office for Property Affairs of the  (Županija Splitsko - Dalmatinska, Gradski ured za imovinskopravne poslove, “the Office”) seeking restitution in kind of the abovementioned flat. He relied on the Denationalisation Act.
Since the Office did not give a decision within the statutory time-limit of two months, on 6 April 1998 the applicant lodged an appeal for failure to respond (see paragraph 30 below) with the Ministry of Justice (“the Ministry”).
As no decision on his appeal of 6 April 1998 had been given within the statutory time-limit of two months, the applicant first filed a rush note with the Ministry on 9 June 1998. On 10 July 1998 he brought an action for failure to respond (see paragraph 31 below) against the Ministry in the  (Upravni sud Republike Hrvatske).
On 17 September 1998 the Office decided to stay the proceedings pending the outcome of concurring administrative and civil proceedings (see below under 2.). On 23 March 1999 the applicant extended his initial appeal of 6 April 1998 to the Ministry to include the decision on the stay of proceedings. Since no decision was given on that appeal either, on 21 June 1999 the applicant filed a rush note with the Ministry and then, on 7 July 1999, extended his initial action for failure to respond (that was pending before the ) to include the Ministry's failure to decide on his extended appeal.
On 28 June 2000 the  gave judgment for the applicant and ordered the Ministry to decide, within sixty days, on his appeal against the decision to stay the proceedings.
On 27 February 2002 the , sitting as a court of full jurisdiction, delivered a decision dismissing the applicant's appeal against the decision to stay the proceedings. The court held that the principal issue in concurring administrative and civil proceedings was the existence of the tenancy relationship on the flat. Since that issue was decisive for the question whether the applicant was entitled to restitution in kind or compensation, it was justified to stay the proceedings.
On 15 June 2002 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint against that decision with the  (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske) alleging a violation of his constitutional right to property. On 10 December 2002 the  declared the applicant's complaint inadmissible as premature because the impugned decision did not concern the merits of the case.
On 25 July 2005 the Office for Property Affairs decided to resume the administrative proceedings.
At the hearing held on 6 September 2005 the Office requested the relevant local authorities to provide the documentation necessary to calculate the amount of compensation to be awarded to the applicant for the flat in question.
After the receipt of the aforementioned documentation, the Office held another hearing on 1 September 2006 at which the applicant requested to be granted a time-limit for further submissions and presentation of some additional evidence. The Office granted the request and also invited the applicant to provide some further documentation. The Government submitted that the applicant has so far not complied with that request.
The proceedings are still pending before the Office as the first-instance administrative authority.
Other proceedings concerning the flat in question
Meanwhile, on 7 January 1997 N.K., the daughter of D.P. and A.P. (see paragraph 7 above) applied to the Commission for Housing Affairs of the  (Županija Splitsko - Dalmatinska, Komisija za stambene poslove) to be recognised as holder of a specially protected tenancy of the abovementioned flat. On 17 January 1997 the Commission declared her request inadmissible for lack of jurisdiction.
On 24 February 1997 the competent Ministry dismissed her appeal. N.K. then brought an administrative action in the  challenging that decision.
On 17 February 1999 the  quashed the administrative authorities' decisions and remitted the case to the first-instance authority.
In the resumed proceedings, on 2 December 2002 the Commission for Housing Affairs again dismissed N.K.'s request for lack of jurisdiction. On 24 July 2003 the Ministry dismissed her appeal and upheld the first-instance decision. As N.K. did not bring an action in the , the decisions of the administrative authorities became final.
On 2 February 1997 the Town of  (“the local authorities”) brought a civil action in the Split Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Splitu) against N.K. seeking her eviction. Soon afterwards, N.K. filed a counter-claim seeking the conclusion of a lease contract under so-called protected rent (zaštićena najamnina) in respect of the flat. It appears that at some point the applicant joined those proceedings as an intervener (umješač) on the side of the local authorities.
On 10 June 2003 the Split Municipal Court dismissed the claim of the local authorities while accepting that of N.K. The court found that she had ex lege acquired a specially protected tenancy of the flat after the death of her mother A.P., and that she was therefore entitled to conclude a lease contract under the protected rent with the plaintiff. The applicant appealed as intervener.
On 21 May 2004 the  (Županijski sud u Splitu) dismissed the applicant's appeal and upheld the first-instance judgment which thereby became final.
Relying on the courts' findings that she had ex lege acquired a specially protected tenancy of the flat, on 15 December 2004 N.K. concluded, instead of a lease contract with the local authorities, a sale contract with the Fund for the Restitution of and Compensation for Property Taken (see paragraph 6 above) by which she bought the flat in question. Shortly afterwards she recorded her ownership of the flat in the land register.
“In the determination of his rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law.”
Section 62
“1. Everyone may lodge a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court if he or she deems that the decision of a state authority, local or regional self-government, or a legal person invested with public authority, on his or her rights or obligations, or about suspicion or accusation for a criminal offence, has violated his or her human rights or fundamental freedoms, or right to local or regional self-government, guaranteed by the Constitution (hereinafter: constitutional right)...
If another legal remedy is allowed against the violation of the constitutional rights [complained of], the constitutional complaint may be lodged only after this remedy has been exhausted.
In matters in which an administrative action or, in civil and non-contentious proceedings, an appeal on points of law (revizija) are allowed, remedies shall be considered exhausted only after the decision on these legal remedies has been given.”
Section 63
 “(1) The Constitutional Court shall examine a constitutional complaint whether or not all legal remedies have been exhausted if the competent court fails to decide a claim concerning the individual's rights and obligations or a criminal charge against him or her within a reasonable time ...
(2) If a constitutional complaint ... under paragraph 1 of this section is upheld, the  shall set a time-limit within which the competent court must decide the case on the merits...
(3) In a decision issued under paragraph 2 of this section, the  shall assess appropriate compensation for the applicant for the violation of his or her constitutional rights ... The compensation shall be paid out of the State budget within three months from the date a request for payment is lodged.”
The Administrative Procedure Act
The Administrative Disputes Act
The relevant part of the Civil Obligations Act (Zakon o obveznim odnosima, Official Gazette, nos. 53/91, 73/91, 3/94, 7/96 and 112/99) provided as follows:
The 's practice