The case originated in an application (no. 10493/12) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Oleksiy Ivanovych Adnaralov (“the applicant”), on 8 February 2012.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms N. Okhotnikova, a lawyer practising in Kharkiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms N. Sevostianova, from the Ministry of Justice.
On 27 November 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1955 and lives in Kharkiv.
On 5 May 2004 the applicant was arrested by four police officers on suspicion of bribe-taking. The police officers took him to the Kharkiv Dzerzhynskyy District Police Station, where he was held overnight. According to the applicant, the police officers beat him for several hours, forcing him to confess.
On 6 May 2004 the applicant was taken to the Kharkiv City Prosecutor’s Office. He complained of ill-treatment to a senior prosecutor from the above office. The prosecutor referred the applicant for a forensic medical examination.
On 7 May 2004 the applicant was diagnosed with concussion and admitted to hospital.
On 8 May 2004 the applicant underwent a forensic medical examination, which established that he had numerous bruises on his face, chest, legs and arms, as well as a damaged tooth.
On 11 May 2004 criminal proceedings were instituted against the applicant on charges of bribe-taking. They were eventually terminated on 27 April 2007 for lack of corpus delicti.
On 2 June 2004 the applicant lodged another complaint of ill-treatment with the Kharkiv City Prosecutor’s Office.
On 23 June 2004 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Kharkiv Regional Prosecutor’s Office about the failure to examine his complaint of 2 June 2004.
On 12 August 2004 the Kharkiv Dzerzhynskyy District Prosecutor’s Office refused to institute criminal proceedings against the police officers. That decision was quashed by the higher prosecutor on 7 October 2004 and an additional inquiry was ordered.
On 28 October 2004 the Kharkiv Dzerzhynskyy District Prosecutor’s Office ordered a forensic medical examination of the applicant, which was conducted between 28 December 2004 and 13 January 2005. The experts’ opinion confirmed the previous medical findings (see paragraphs 7 and 8 above) and concluded that the injuries had been the result of blows with blunt objects and had been inflicted during the period indicated by the applicant. The experts further opined that it could not be excluded that the injuries had originated in the circumstances indicated by the applicant, as they could all have been inflicted by fists.
On 23 September 2005 the Kharkiv Frunzenskyy District Prosecutor’s Office refused to institute criminal proceedings concerning the applicant’s allegations of ill-treatment. That refusal was quashed by the Kharkiv Regional Prosecutor’s Office on 31 May 2006.
On 15 June 2006 the Kharkiv Frunzenskyy District Prosecutor’s Office again refused to institute criminal proceedings concerning the applicant’s allegations of ill-treatment. In a letter dated 10 August 2008, the Kharkiv Regional Prosecutor’s Office informed the applicant that the decision of 15 June 2006 had been quashed and that the prosecutor who had conducted the inquiry would be subjected to disciplinary sanctions for the improper performance of his duties.
On 29 March 2007 the Kharkiv City Prosecutor’s Office issued a decision refusing to institute criminal proceedings concerning the applicant’s allegations. That decision was subsequently quashed.
On 8 January 2008 the Kharkiv City Prosecutor’s Office again refused to institute criminal proceedings concerning the applicant’s allegations of ill-treatment. That decision was quashed by the Kharkiv Kyivskyy District Court on 17 October 2011 and the case was remitted for further inquiries.
On 17 February 2012 the Kharkiv City Prosecutor’s Office once again refused to institute criminal proceedings concerning the applicant’s allegations of ill-treatment.
On 19 June 2012 the above decision was quashed by the Kharkiv Kyivskyy District Court, which sent the case file back to the prosecutor for further inquiries. The court noted, inter alia, that it had previously remitted the case for further inquiries, but that its instructions had not been followed. Furthermore, the applicant had not been questioned and the medical evidence had not been assessed. The first-instance court’s decision was upheld on appeal by the Kharkiv Regional Court of Appeal on 9 July 2012.
On 31 August 2012 the Kharkiv City Prosecutor’s Office refused to institute criminal proceedings concerning the applicant’s allegations of ill-treatment. The applicant challenged that decision in the Kharkiv Kyivskyy District Court on 20 September 2012.
On 19 November 2012 a new Code of Criminal Procedure came into force. On 12 December 2012, in accordance with the provisions of the new Code, the Kharkiv Dzerzhynskyy District Prosecutor’s Office entered the relevant information in the newly established “Integrated Register of pre-trial investigations” and started criminal proceedings in respect of the applicant’s allegations of ill-treatment.
On 6 February 2013 the prosecutor issued a decision to terminate the above-mentioned criminal proceedings.
On 4 March 2013 the Kharkiv Dzerzhynskyy District Court rejected the applicant’s complaint against the decision of 6 February 2013.
On 4 April 2013 the Kharkiv Regional Court of Appeal quashed the prosecutor’s decision of 6 February 2013.
On 7 June 2013 the applicant asked the Kharkiv Regional Prosecutor’s Office to supervise the investigation into his allegations of ill-treatment.
On 14 July 2013 the Kharkiv Dzerzhynskyy District Prosecutor’s Office issued a decision to terminate the criminal proceedings for lack of corpus delicti in the actions of the police officers.
On 30 September 2013 the Kharkiv Regional Prosecutor’s Office informed the applicant about the decision of 14 July 2013.
On 8 October and 3 December 2013 the applicant asked the Kharkiv Dzerzhynskyy District Prosecutor’s Office to send him a copy of the decision of 14 July 2013.
On 12 February 2014 the prosecutor sent the applicant a copy of the decision of 14 July 2013.
On 21 February 2014 the applicant challenged the decision of 14 July 2013 before the investigating judge of the Kharkiv Dzerzhynskyy District Court.
On 15 April 2014 the Kharkiv Dzerzhynskyy District Court quashed the decision of 14 July 2013 and remitted the case to the prosecutor for further investigation. The court concluded that the investigator had not followed the instructions of the appellate court indicated in its decision of 4 April 2013 on remittal of the case for further investigation, and had terminated the criminal proceedings without conducting the necessary inquiries or carrying out a comprehensive examination of the circumstances of the case.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution read as follows:
“Everyone has the right to respect for his or her dignity.
No one shall be subjected to torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment that violates his or her dignity ...”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, as in force prior to 19 November 2012, provided:
“A court, prosecutor, investigator or body of inquiry must, to the extent that it is within their power to do so, institute criminal proceedings in every case where signs of a crime have been discovered, take all necessary measures provided by law to establish the circumstances surrounding the crime, identify those guilty of the crime and punish them.”
“Criminal proceedings shall be instituted on the basis of:
(1)  an allegation or notification from an enterprise, institution, organisation, official, representative of an official body or the public and individual citizens;
(2)  notification from a representative of the authorities or the public, or individual citizens who have apprehended a suspect at the place where the crime was committed or caught him red-handed;
(3)  [the suspect’s] appearance with an acknowledgement of guilt;
(4)  information published in the media;
(5)  direct detection of signs of a crime by a body of inquiry, investigator, prosecutor or court.
[Criminal] proceedings may be instituted only where there is sufficient information that a crime has been committed.”
“Allegations or notifications ... of a crime may be made in writing or orally ...”
“A prosecutor, investigator, body of inquiry or judge shall accept allegations or notifications of crimes [which have been] committed or [are] being prepared, including in cases that are outside their jurisdiction.
On receipt of an allegation or notification of a crime, the prosecutor, investigator, body of inquiry or judge shall adopt, within three days, one of the following decisions:
(1)  to institute criminal proceedings;
(2)  to refuse to institute criminal proceedings;
(3)  to remit the allegation or notification for examination in accordance with [the rules of] jurisdiction.
Simultaneously, all possible measures shall be applied to prevent the further commission of the crime or to put an end to it ...
Before instituting criminal proceedings, the prosecutor, investigator or body of inquiry shall conduct an inquiry, if it is necessary to verify [information contained in] an allegation or notification of a crime. [Such an inquiry] shall be completed within ten days by means of collecting explanations from individual citizens or officials or by means of obtaining necessary documents.
Before instituting criminal proceedings [information contained in] an allegation or notification of a crime may be verified through detection and search activities ...”
“A decision by an investigator or body of inquiry refusing to institute criminal proceedings may be appealed against to the relevant prosecutor. If that decision was taken by a prosecutor, an appeal may be lodged with a higher prosecutor. The appeal shall be lodged by the person whose interests are concerned or by his/her representative within seven days from the date of receipt of a copy of the decision.
If the prosecutor refuses to set aside the decision ... the person whose interests are concerned or his/her representative may lodge an appeal with a court under the procedure prescribed by Article 236-1 of this Code.
...”
“The person whose interests are concerned or his/her representative may lodge an appeal against a decision of a body of inquiry, investigator or prosecutor ... refusing to institute criminal proceedings with [the relevant] court within seven days of notification of the decision by the prosecutor ...”
“[The relevant court sitting as a] a single-judge bench shall examine the appeal against a decision of a body of inquiry, investigator or prosecutor ... refusing to institute criminal proceedings within ten days of its receipt.
The judge shall obtain the materials on the basis of which the decision ... was taken, examine them, and inform the prosecutor and the appellant of the date on which the hearing on the appeal is scheduled. If necessary, the judge may hear the appellant in person.
Having examined the appeal, the judge ... shall take one of the following decisions, depending on whether the requirements of Article 99 of this Code were observed:
(1)  to set aside the decision not to institute criminal proceedings and remit the materials for additional inquiry or open a criminal case;
(2)  to reject the appeal.
The judge’s order is not amenable to appeal ...”
On 19 November 2012 a new Code of Criminal Procedure came into force. The relevant provisions of the Code read as follows:
Article 214
Opening of pre-trial investigation
“1. An investigator or a prosecutor shall immediately, but not later than 24 hours after submission of an allegation or notification that a criminal offence has been committed, or having found themselves from any source circumstances that may indicate that a criminal offence has been committed, be required to enter such information in the Integrated Register of pre-trial investigations and shall open an investigation ...
The pre-trial investigation shall begin as soon as data have been entered in the Integrated Register of pre-trial investigations ...”
Article 284
Termination of criminal proceedings
“... 3. An investigator or a prosecutor may issue a decision to terminate criminal proceedings, which is amenable to appeal in accordance with the procedure established by this Code.
...
A copy of the investigator’s decision to terminate the criminal proceedings shall be sent to the complainant, the victim, and the prosecutor. The prosecutor has the right to quash the decision on the grounds of its unlawfulness or lack of substantiation within twenty days of receipt of the copy of the decision. The prosecutor may also quash the investigator’s decision to terminate the criminal proceedings following a complaint lodged by a complainant or a victim, if such a complaint has been lodged within ten days of receipt of a copy of the decision by the complainant or the victim.
A copy of the prosecutor’s decision to terminate the criminal proceedings shall be sent to the complainant, the victim, his/her representative, the suspect, and the defence counsel.
...
The court’s decision to terminate the criminal proceedings may be challenged on appeal.”
Article 303
Decisions, acts or inaction of the investigator or the prosecutor, which are amenable to appeal during the pre-trial investigation, and the right to appeal
“1. During the pre-trial proceedings the following decisions, acts or inactions of the investigator or the prosecutor are amenable to appeal:
1) the inaction of the investigator or the prosecutor, consisting of the failure to enter information about a criminal offence in the Integrated Register of pre-trial investigations after receipt of an allegation or notification of a criminal offence ... as well as failure to perform other investigative acts which he or she is obliged to perform within the time-limits defined by this Code - by the complainant, the victim, his or her representative or legal representative, the suspect, his/her counsel or legal representative ...
...
3) the investigator’s decision to terminate the criminal proceedings - by the complainant, the victim, his or her representative or legal representative;
4) the prosecutor’s decision to terminate the criminal proceedings - by the complainant, the victim, his or her representative or legal representative, the suspect, his/her counsel or legal representative ...”
Article 305
Legal consequences of lodging a complaint against a decision, act or inaction of the investigator or the prosecutor during the pre-trial investigation
“1. The lodging of a complaint against decisions, acts or inaction of the investigator or the prosecutor during the pre-trial investigation shall not stop the execution of the decision or the act of the investigator or the prosecutor.
The investigator or the prosecutor may set aside his or her own decisions referred to in paragraphs 1, 2, 5 and 6 of Article 303 of this Code, or terminate the act or inaction complained of, which results in the termination of the proceedings concerning the complaint.
The prosecutor can set aside his or her own decisions referred to in paragraph 3 of Article 303 of the Code and appealed against in accordance with the procedure provided for in paragraph 5 of Article 284 of this Code, which results in the termination of the proceedings concerning the complaint.”
Article 306
Procedure for examination of complaints about decisions, acts or inaction of the investigator or the prosecutor during the pre-trial investigation
“1. Complaints about decisions, acts or inaction of the investigator or the prosecutor shall be examined by an investigating judge of a local court ...
Complaints about decisions, acts or inaction during the pre-trial investigation shall be examined within seventy-two hours of receipt of a complaint, except for complaints about the decision to terminate criminal proceedings, which shall be dealt with within five days of receipt of the complaint.
Examination of complaints about decisions, acts or inaction during the pre-trial investigation shall be carried out with the mandatory participation of the person who lodged the complaint or his or her defence counsel or representative, and the investigator or prosecutor whose decisions, acts or inaction are being challenged. The absence of the investigator or prosecutor shall not be an obstacle to examination of the complaint.”
Article 307
Decision of the investigative judge following examination of a complaint about a decision, act or inaction of the investigator or the prosecutor during the pre-trial investigation
“... 2. A ruling of the investigating judge following the examination of a complaint about a decision, act or inaction during the pre-trial investigation may concern:
1) the quashing of the decision of the investigator or prosecutor;
2) the obligation to terminate an act;
3) the obligation to perform a certain act;
4) the dismissal of the complaint.
The ruling of the investigating judge following the examination of a complaint about a decision, act or inaction of the investigator or the prosecutor is not amenable to appeal, unless it concerns a decision on the dismissal of a complaint about a decision to terminate criminal proceedings.”
Article 309
Rulings by the investigating judge amenable to appeal during a pre-trial investigation
“... 2. During a pre-trial investigation the decisions of the investigating judge to dismiss a complaint against a decision to terminate criminal proceedings ... may be challenged by means of an appeal.”
Article 310
Procedure for appealing against decisions by an investigating judge
“1. The decisions of the investigating judge may be challenged in accordance with the appeal procedure.”