The case originated in an application (no. 2304/06) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Ilya Valeryevich Kalashnikov (“the applicant”), on 5 December 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr E. Markov, a lawyer practicing in Budapest. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 6 May 2013 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1978 and is serving a sentence in a prison in KamenskUralskiy.
In 2003 the police of the Sverdlovsk region were investigating a gang operating in Serov. They made four arrests, one of which was of the applicant. In interviews on 10 and 12 February 2003 the applicant incriminated two of his accomplices as ringleaders and was released on his own recognisance.
Soon thereafter, the police found out that the applicant was preparing to flee. On 8 May 2003 they re-detained him, charged him with robbery and interviewed him as the accused. The applicant confessed to the robbery and once again incriminated his accomplices. Later the same day a court ordered pretrial custody and he was placed into the temporary-detention ward at Serov railway station (ИВС ЛОВД на станции Серов).
The parties disagree about what happened at the station.
According to the applicant, during his stay there he was interviewed daily. The investigators urged him to confess and to testify under the threat of violence and transfer to another prison for “processing” (на «разработку»). The applicant rejected these demands.
According to the authorities, the applicant was afraid of reprisals from the accomplices whom he had denounced. To avoid the dangerous encounters, the applicant asked to be placed in Remand Centre 1 of Yekaterinburg (СИЗО № 1 г. Екатеринбурга). Instead, the police decided to place him in Novaya Lyalya prison (ИК № 54 г. Новая Ляля) because at that time all other suitable detention facilities were housing his codefendants.
On 16 May 2003 the applicant was escorted to Novaya Lyalya. He was accommodated in a punishment cell for high-security convicts (ШИЗО ПКТ), which at that time was functioning as a pretrial-detention facility (ПФРСИ).
The parties disagree about what happened in that prison.
According to the applicant, he shared his cell with two convicts, both police collaborators, who mistreated him at the behest of the administration to coerce a false confession.
Warders mistreated the applicant too. Thus, on 21 or 22 May 2003, two officers (one in plain clothes, the other in camouflage) walked him out for interrogation, put his hands against the wall and several times hit him on the buttocks with a rubber truncheon and a wooden stick. They made the applicant strip to his underwear, and one officer punched the applicant in the lower back. Then they turned him around, and one officer punched him in the stomach and slapped him several times on the right eye leaving it black.
The mistreatment was repeated daily. The officers would handcuff the applicant, squeeze his fingernails with pliers, insert needles under his fingernails, kick him in the groin, verbally abuse him and threaten him with sodomy. On return to his cell, the applicant, still undressed and handcuffed, had to face violent cellmates.
The assailants wanted the applicant to extend his confession to other and more serious crimes and to identify the two accomplices as ringleaders. The applicant gave in to the pressure and, according to one source, wrote a dictated confession, or, according to another source, signed a pre-written confession without reading it.
According to the authorities, throughout his time in Novaya Lyalya the applicant had a cell to himself because he had to be isolated from convicts for his own safety. He was never interviewed or mistreated. The warders’ contact with him was limited to small talk during daily rounds. The applicant never sought medical aid.
On 4 June 2003 the applicant was transferred to the Serov town temporary-detention ward (ИВС г. Серова). No injuries were recorded on his admission. The applicant made no remarks or complaints about the alleged mistreatment in Novaya Lyalya. He was still afraid that one particular ringleader might kill him and told the police that he would revoke his incriminating testimony should he ever meet that man. On the same day the applicant confessed to more crimes.
Later the same month, investigator M. of the Serov town prosecutor’s office interviewed the applicant. The applicant complained about the mistreatment. M. decided to have the applicant forensically examined.
On 11 June 2003 the doctor discovered five long bruises left by a truncheon or stick on the applicant’s buttocks no more than four weeks earlier. M. sent the report to the Nizhniy Tagil prosecutor’s office overseeing penitentiaries. The applicant also made a formal complaint to the public prosecutor.
The prosecutorial investigation into the alleged mistreatment lasted until May 2005. It was conducted by the Serov town office and the Nizhniy Tagil office for penitentiaries. In total, four investigators refused to institute criminal proceedings seven times for lack of evidence of a crime. To reach that conclusion, they had interviewed the applicant, investigator M., the alleged perpetrators (both cellmates and warders), and witnesses (the officers who had detained the applicant and sent him to Novaya Lyalya, a paramedic from the station custody suite, the governor, warders, a paramedic, and inmates from Novaya Lyalya, and a paramedic and cellmates from the town custody suite). In addition, the investigators studied documents (prison complaints books, cell accommodation records, useofforce reports, and medical files).
In the last refusal to prosecute, of 3 May 2005, the investigator pointed out incongruities in the applicant’s story: the applicant had been changing the date of his encounter with the warders, the overall duration and kind of mistreatment, the number of violent cellmates, and the nature of his injuries. The investigator also considered that the forensic report of 11 June 2003 did not prove the alleged mistreatment.
On 1 February 2006 the Tagilstroyevskiy District Court of Nizhniy Tagil refused judicial review of that decision. On 16 June 2006 the Sverdlovsk Regional Court upheld that ruling.
During his trial, from February to June 2004, the applicant pleaded not guilty to certain charges and claimed that his confessions had been coerced. To investigate that claim, the Sverdlovsk Regional Court interviewed the officers who had detained the applicant, his warders, and the forensic doctor who had discovered the injuries.
On 9 June 2004 the court dismissed the claim as a defence tactic, found the applicant guilty of theft, robbery, armed robbery and belonging to a gang, and sentenced him to 22.5 years’ imprisonment.
On 6 June 2005 the Supreme Court commuted the sentence to 21 years in view of the applicant’s confession and aid in incriminating the accomplices.