The case originated in an application (no. 57148/08) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Ms Miryana Georgieva Petrova (“the applicant”), on 31 October 2008.
The applicant was represented by Ms S. Stefanova and Mr M. Ekimdzhiev, lawyers practising in Plovdiv. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms I. Stancheva-Chinova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that she had been unable to effectively challenge the refusal to grant her security clearance for access to State secrets on the basis of which her employment contract with the National Security Service had been terminated. This refusal had constituted a denial of her right of access to a court.
On 7 September 2015 the complaint concerning a lack of access to a court under Article 6 was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1950 and lives in Sofia.
The applicant had been employed by the National Security Service as a system operator since 1981. She submitted that, on account of the nature of her duties, she had held a security clearance permitting her access to classified information constituting State secrets. According to the applicant’s job description, being in a possession of such a security clearance had been a prerequisite to her holding her post.
On 30 April 2002 the Classified Information Protection Act (hereinafter “the Act”) was promulgated in the State Gazette. Under the Classified Information Protection Act, permits granting access to classified information that had been issued under the legal provisions existing before the entry into force of the Act were to remain valid until their replacement by security clearance allowing access to classified information. The heads of organisational units employing persons who possessed an access permit and whose positions required that they have access to classified information were to request the issuance of security clearance, in accordance with the requirements of the Act. Non-compliance with that provision would result in the invalidation of the respective existing access permits.
On 3 June 2003, in compliance with that obligation, the Director of the National Security Service issued a decision refusing the applicant security clearance allowing access to classified information. The applicant submitted that that decision had been based on a psychological test. The decision did not contain any reasoning in respect of the refusal, apart from a reference to Section 57 of the Classified Information Protection Act.
The applicant lodged an appeal against the refusal with the State Commission for Information Security. The latter, by a decision of 5 February 2004, upheld the refusal. That decision was final and not amenable to judicial review.
.  On 27 April 2004, the Director of the National Security Service ordered that the applicant be dismissed. The reason given for the termination of her employment was the refusal to grant her security clearance, possession of which was an indispensable condition of her being able to perform her duties.
.  The applicant challenged her dismissal at three levels of jurisdiction. She contested the objectivity and the lawfulness of the dismissal procedure, arguing that she had fulfilled all conditions for the issuance of security clearance and that she had been dismissed on account of the negative personal relationship between her and her direct supervisor. In the applicant’s view, the clearance had probably been refused because she had suffered from depressive neurosis in 1995, a condition which according to her was no longer relevant. The applicant’s request that a report by a psychiatric expert be commissioned was refused by the Sofia District Court.
.  By its judgment of 11 May 2005 the Sofia District Court rejected the applicant’s claims, reasoning that the refusal of the Director of the National Security Service to grant security clearance to the applicant was a final and valid administrative act, and it rendered the applicant’s dismissal inevitable because she was no longer able to perform her duties. The court added that the refusal was not amenable to any judicial review; therefore, the court was not competent to examine, within the framework of the dismissal proceedings, any substantial or procedural questions related to its lawfulness.
On appeal, the Sofia City Court, by a ruling of 6 April 2006 upheld the lower court’s decision, endorsing its reasoning.
On 19 June 2008, the Supreme Court of Cassation upheld those rulings.
Article 120 of the Constitution provides:
“1.  The courts shall review the lawfulness of the administration’s acts and decisions.
Natural and legal persons shall have the right to seek judicial review of any administrative act or decision which affects them, save as expressly specified by statute.”
Section 40 § 1 of this Act provides that under no circumstances other than those stipulated under section 39 (concerning access to classified information in connection with the performance of a limited scope of official duties at the highest level of State authority) shall clearance for access to classified information be issued to any person, unless he/she meets the following requirements: he/she must a)  be a Bulgarian citizen; b)  be of legal age; c)  have completed secondary education; d)  have not been convicted of any premeditated felony, notwithstanding any subsequent rehabilitation; e)  not be the subject of any pre-trial or trial proceedings for premeditated felony; f)  be reliable for the purposes of security; g)  not be suffering from any mental disorder (and be duly certified as such); and h)  be considered reliable for the purposes of protecting a secret.
Section 57 § 1 stipulates that clearance for access to classified information shall be denied where it is established, in the course of a security check, that the person in question does not meet any one of the requirements under Section 40 § 1. Under sections 11 and 49, security checks of employees of the national security services (служби за сигурност) are conducted by those same national security services, which are also competent to grant or refuse security clearance.
Under Section 57 §§ 3 and 5, a refusal to grant clearance need not be accompanied by any explanation and shall only set out the legal reasons for such a refusal. A refusal to grant access to classified information shall not be appealable before courts of law. In a decision dated 25 September 2002 the Constitutional Court decided that the decision of the legislature not to allow such refusals to be submitted to judicial examination was justified by the need to protect national security and was not contrary to the Constitution (see реш. № 3 от 25.09.2002 г. на КС на РБ по конст. д. № 11/2002 г.).
By virtue of paragraph 10 of the transitional and final provisions of the Act, the access permits issued in pursuance of the provisions existing before the entry into force of this Act shall continue to be valid until the replacement thereof with clearance for access. The heads of organisational units employing persons who possess an access permit and whose positions or special assignments require access to classified information shall request the issuance of clearance for access, in accordance with the requirements of this Act and within three months of its entry into force. Non-compliance with this provision shall result in the invalidation of the respective existing access permits.
Article 328 § 1 (2) of the Labour Code provides that an employer may terminate an employment contract by giving notice to an employee when such employee is unable to perform his or her duties for objective reasons.
Under Article 344, where an employee considers that he or she had been unfairly dismissed, he or she can bring an action challenging the lawfulness of the dismissal before the civil courts.
The above provisions are applicable to the termination of the employment contracts of civil servants.