The case concerns a complaint, under Articles 3 and 8 of the Convention, about an ineffective investigation and prosecution following the applicant’s allegation that she had been raped, and about an inadequate punishment of the offender.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant, Ms Z, was born in 2001 and lives in a small village in Yambol region.
On 25 February 2015 the applicant, aged 13 years and 4 months, accepted an invitation from a friend, S., a British girl, to spend the night at the latter’s family home. At the time S. was 16 years old and lived with her family in a nearby village. Her 23-year-old boyfriend, G.S., was also invited to spend the night at the house. In addition, S.’s parents would be sleeping in the house that night too. The applicant knew both S. and G.S. well, having often spent time with them as a couple.
On the evening of 25 February 2015, discussing the sleeping arrangements, S. suggested that the applicant take the single bed in her bedroom and that she and G.S. sleep on the floor in the same room. G.S. refused to sleep on the floor and instead went into a room next door; S. refused to follow him. The applicant and S. remained in the same bedroom, where the applicant went to sleep in the bed and S. slept on the floor.
At about 4 a.m. in the morning of 26 February 2015 the applicant felt someone climb into her bed. She saw it was G.S. and turned to face the wall, intending to go back to sleep. G.S. then held her and started to grope her body with his hands. The applicant moved away from him and closer to the wall, and pushed his hands away from her, but he did not stop. She thought that if she pretended to be asleep, he would leave her alone. Instead, G.S. pulled her underwear to her ankles. The applicant was shocked and scared. She was unable to react and did not know what to do.
G.S. climbed on top of her and separated her legs, which she held tight together, by pushing a knee between them. He then penetrated her and continued with the intercourse. The applicant felt pain and revulsion. She told him to get off her. He did that but before she could pull her underwear back on, he got on top of her again. The applicant repeated that he should leave her alone. He asked if she would tell anyone about it. When she said that she would not, he joined his girlfriend on the floor.
On the morning of 26 February 2015, when the applicant went to school, a friend noticed that she was distraught and asked her for the reason. The applicant remained silent at first but soon afterwards confided in her friend that a man had had sexual intercourse with her against her will. The friend advised the applicant to report it. The applicant first told S., the friend in whose house the incident had taken place, about what had happened. The two of them decided to tell the school’s principal. On their way to the principal, they came across the school’s porter and told him and a teacher why they were looking for the principal. Another teacher who happened to be nearby also heard the applicant’s story.
Later that day the applicant reported the incident to the police and a criminal investigation was immediately opened by the local district prosecution service. Both she and G.S. were interviewed the same day and informed of their rights in the criminal process. In his statement G.S. claimed that the applicant had not objected to his holding her and that when he had suggested that she take off her underwear, she had done so willingly. He then stated that he had penetrated her “for two minutes” and had interrupted the intercourse as she had told him that it hurt. He added that the motivation for his actions was that he had heard that she was not a virgin.
G.S. was charged the next day with having sexual intercourse with a person under the age of fourteen, a statutory offence under Article 151 § 1 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 38 below). The police interviewed G.S. again a day later, this time in his capacity as an accused, at the police station and in the presence of his lawyer. He then stated that at around 5 a.m. on the night in question the applicant had woken him by stroking his stomach and penis. He had been very surprised and had told her to stop as his girlfriend was in the room. The applicant had replied that she did not care and had told him that if he did not agree to have intercourse with her she would accuse him of rape. He had refused but she had undressed herself saying “Let’s have sex”. He had then refused again and had not had intercourse with the applicant.
On 6 March 2015 G.S. was placed in detention by decision of the relevant District Court. On 11 March 2015 the Higher Court placed him under house arrest.
On 11 April 2015 the applicant’s mother informed the investigating authorities in writing that the applicant was self-harming by cutting her arms and legs. In a subsequent letter of 21 August 2015 the mother reported that she had found a note among her daughter’s belongings which read “Shall I kill myself, yes or no. Yes, because it’s not worth it”. The applicant’s mother also expressed her own concern about her daughter’s wellbeing and the effects of the incident on her mental state.
A number of investigative steps were carried out in the course of the investigation. Those included witness questioning (on the day after the events and shortly thereafter), inspection of the crime scene (on 26 February 2015), a psychological-psychiatric examination of the applicant (on 28 April 2015) and a forensic medical examination of the applicant and G.S. (on 26 February 2015). In particular, the following witnesses were questioned: the mother of Z; S. in whose house Z had spent the night of 25 to 26 February 2015; the mother of S. and her husband; the friend in whom Z had confided on the morning of 26 February 2015 at school; Bulgarian and British acquaintances of the families of Z and S.; a police officer who, following an oral complaint by Z’s mother on 27 February 2015, had gone the same day to G.S.’s home to warn him against approaching the victim.
The psychological-psychiatric examination found that the applicant had been conscious during the offence and remembered it well. She had experienced intense fear and dread, which were capable of temporarily blocking her reactions, yet, thereafter she had been capable of opposing what had been happening to her. She could have made a choice but had had insufficient discernment. She had chosen to be silent as her feelings of fright and shame had been dominant at the time of the events.
The forensic medical examination established that it was fully possible that the applicant had been subjected to the treatment she had described, despite the absence of traumatic damage to her genitals at the time of examination. Furthermore, the report concluded that she did not yet have a full grasp of the issues related to sex and its manifestation.
On 26 August 2015 the district prosecutor concluded that the evidence collected in the case showed that the offence of rape had been committed, punishable under Article 152 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 39 below). He sent the file to the competent higher authority, the Yambol regional prosecution service, in order for it to proceed with the investigation.
On 4 September 2015 the Yambol regional prosecutor assigned to the case refused to take over the case and follow the recommendation to prosecute for rape. He found that the investigation materials, including in particular the victim’s own statement, did not contain any evidence meeting the legal requirements for the crime of rape. In particular, the prosecutor observed that none of the three hypotheses listed in Article 152 of the Criminal Code had been observed: the victim had not been deprived of a possibility to protect herself; no force or threats had been used against her; and she had not been “brought to a helpless state” before the incident.
The case was returned to the district prosecution service and proceeded on a charge for the crime of sexual intercourse with a person under the age of fourteen, under Article 151 of the Criminal Code.
The investigation was completed and all the materials collected were presented to the applicant’s mother and her lawyer on 12 October 2015. Having acquainted themselves with the materials, they asked that additional investigative steps be carried out, including an examination of the applicant’s right arm for traces of frequent and intense self-harming, and the collection of witness statements referring to the character of the accused and the state of the applicant on the morning after the incident when she had gone to school.
The applicant’s mother and lawyer also explicitly requested that the case be prosecuted on charges of rape under Article 152 § 1 of the Criminal Code. The applicant’s lawyer emphasised the circumstances in which the incident had taken place and the audacity of G.S.’s actions, which had shocked the applicant. As a result, she had felt helpless, betrayed and ashamed, all of which had rendered her temporarily incapable of sufficiently protecting herself.
On 27 October 2015 the above-mentioned requests were refused by the prosecution. The investigation file was presented to the applicant for a second time on 21 December 2015 and the investigation was thus finalised.
The indictment was completed on 29 January 2016. It contained the following facts accepted by the prosecution. The applicant had fallen asleep alone in a bed in her friend’s bedroom. In the early hours of the morning she had awoken and seen G.S. in the bed next to her. Given that G.S. was the boyfriend of her friend S. and the three of them had frequently spent time together, the applicant had not thought that he would do anything to her and had turned back towards the wall. Then G.S. had held her in his arms. The applicant had pulled herself away but G.S. had moved closer to her and had started groping her body. Despite her attempts to obstruct his actions, first by pretending to be asleep and then by pushing his hands away from her body, he had not stopped but instead had carried on sexually touching her. He had then pulled down her underwear, had climbed on top of her, had separated with one of his legs her legs which she had been clutching together and had penetrated her. The intercourse had been interrupted by the applicant, who had felt pain. G.S. had tried to resume it but the applicant had refused, following which G.S. had joined his girlfriend on the floor. When questioned after the incident, the applicant had stated that she had not called for her friend S. as she had been afraid of G.S.
The indictment further stated that, according to the psychologicalpsychiatric examination of the applicant, she had been capable of realising her actions at the time of the incident, and of judging the situation correctly. It concluded that, on the basis of the facts as established above, G.S. had committed the offence of having sexual intercourse with a minor, under Article 151 of the Criminal Code. G.S., who had been sentenced in the past for a criminal offence, had acted with intent, conscious of the serious antisocial character of his actions. Although he had denied his guilt during the investigation, the evidence collected – witness statements, inspection of the crime scene, forensic medical and psychological-psychiatric expert reports, and other material – pointed to his guilt.
In February 2016 the police turned up at the applicant’s family house, looking for drugs in the context of another case unrelated to the assault on the applicant of the previous year. In the absence of a warrant, the applicant’s mother refused to let the police in. They remained outside the house until the prosecutor instructed them to leave some time later. The applicant and her eight-year-old sister were both at home at the time.
The next day the applicant was called to the local police station where she was asked whether she sold or bought drugs from the suspect, a third party, both of which she denied.
Shortly thereafter the applicant showed her mother excerpts from social media in which a 26-year-old man, a friend of the accused by his own admission, had abused her verbally and threatened her in connection with her having reported the incident of February 2015 and, finally, asked if she used marijuana.
After the institution of proceedings before the Yambol District Court, on 23 March 2016 the judge decided to examine the case in camera and set a hearing date for 16 May 2016.
On 8 April 2016 the applicant’s lawyer asked the court to have the applicant interviewed for the purposes of the court proceedings in a “blue room” – a special facility where child victims of or witnesses to abuse can be interviewed in a protected environment by specifically trained professionals out of sight of the suspected perpetrator.
On 13 April 2016 the judge ordered that the applicant’s lawyer be informed of the examination of the case in camera. By the same order the judge adjourned the examination of the applicant’s request of 8 April 2016 until the hearing on the merits.
On 9 May 2016 the applicant’s lawyer asked the court to allow the applicant not to attend the court hearing until her request to be interviewed in a “blue room” had been examined, as she wished to avoid any contact with G.S. On 11 May 2016 the court granted that request.
Оn 16 May 2016 the court held a hearing in the case. The applicant did not attend it but was represented by a lawyer. The applicant’s mother was also present, in her capacity as a witness. At the beginning of the hearing the lawyer submitted an application, signed by the applicant’s mother, asking the court to allow the applicant to take part in the proceedings as a civil claimant. The application was made by the mother in her capacity as the applicant’s legal representative. According to the record of the hearing, the court found that the applicant’s mother did not have legal standing to lodge a civil claim on behalf of her daughter, because at the time of the hearing the applicant had reached fourteen years of age. Accordingly, any civil claim had to be lodged by the applicant, with the consent of her mother.
The applicant did not seek to participate in the proceedings as a private prosecutor. Since she was no longer a party to the proceedings, as her mother’s request for her to participate as a civil claimant had been refused, her lawyer was dismissed from the court hearing.
During the same hearing and following a request to that effect by the accused, the court decided to conduct a summary judicial investigation (съкратено съдебно следствие) under Articles 370 to 374 of the Criminal Procedure Code (“the CPC”). Under that procedure, no evidence is collected during the judicial phase and the court relies only on evidence gathered at the pre-trial stage.
G.S. confessed entirely to the facts as presented in the indictment. The court concluded that the statement of the accused was supported by the evidence gathered at the pre-trial stage and decided not to collect further evidence. For that reason, the court considered that it was no longer necessary to examine the applicant’s request to be interviewed in a “blue room” (see paragraph 28 above).
On the same day, 16 May 2016, the court found G.S. guilty of having had sexual intercourse with a minor, under Article 151 § 1 of the Criminal Code. In terms of sentencing, the court observed that the offence carried a sentence of between two and six years’ imprisonment. However, given that the case had followed a summary judicial investigation, the court reduced the sentence by one third (see paragraph 44 below) and sentenced him to one year and four months’ imprisonment. The court further suspended that sentence for a period of three years (see paragraph 45 below). The reasoning of the judgment was announced on 27 May 2016. The court also ordered that the material evidence – a black tracksuit and underwear – be returned to its owner, the applicant.
Notwithstanding his confession during the first-instance judicial proceedings, G.S. appealed against that judgment. On 6 July 2016 the Yambol Regional Court upheld the sentence imposed by the lower court. Irrespective of the absence of legal standing in the judicial proceedings, the applicant submitted a victim’s statement before the second-instance court, in which she described her experience as a victim of rape. She also expressed her disappointment with the inadequacy of the prosecution of the crime against her and the sentencing, and asked the court to take her statement into account when making a decision. The judgment was not amenable to appeal and became final on the same day.
As the applicant was not a party to the judicial proceedings, the authorities were not under any duty to inform her of the final judgment. As a result, the court did not notify her lawyer of the final verdict. However, in execution of the court order for the return of her belongings, the court sent five notifications to the applicant informing her that a final judgment had been rendered and inviting her to the Registry to collect her belongings. On 21 November 2016 she was apprised of one of those notifications, apparently by the mayor’s office, a representative of which telephoned her family and informed them about it. Since she did not appear before the court to recover her belongings, the court ordered their destruction in August 2017.
Under Article 151 § 1 of the Criminal Code (“the CC”), sexual intercourse with a person under 14 years of age is an offence punishable by between two and six years’ imprisonment. Consent is not a valid defence in such cases.
Article 152 § 1 of the CC defines rape as:
“sexual intercourse with a woman
(1) incapable of defending herself, where she did not consent;
(2) who was compelled by the use of force or threats;
(3) who was brought to a state of helplessness by the perpetrator.”
Although lack of consent is mentioned explicitly only in the first sub-paragraph, the Supreme Court has held that it is an element inherent in the whole provision.
Under Article 152 § 4(1) of the CC, the punishment for rape ranges between ten and twenty years’ imprisonment if the victim is under fourteen years of age. Attempted suicide by the victim following the rape, irrespective of the victim’s age, is considered an aggravating circumstance and the offence is punishable by between five and fifteen years of imprisonment.
The relevant District Court is competent to hear cases for offences under Article 151 § 1 of the CC (Article 35 § 1, CPC), and the relevant Regional Court at first instance is competent to hear cases for offences under Article 152 § 4(1) of the CC (Article 35 § 2, CPC).
Once a case has been brought before the first-instance court, the judge rapporteur should check, among other things, whether there have been at the pre-trial stage breaches of procedural rules leading to a restriction of the procedural rights of the accused or the victim (Article 248, CPC, as worded at the relevant time). If so, the judge should discontinue the judicial proceedings before the court and send the case back to the prosecutor to eliminate the breaches identified (Article 249, CPC, as worded at the relevant time).
The first-instance court returns a case to the respective prosecutor, in accordance with Article 288, CPC, if a breach of procedural rules at the pretrial stage resulted in limitation of the procedural rights of the accused, or if it is established during the court hearing that the incriminated act corresponds to an offence for which competent is a higher court (see опр. № 2330 от 17.11.2014 г. на РС-Варна по н.ч.х.д. № 2500/ 2014г. and опр. № 164 от 2.02.2018 г. на РС-Пловдив по н.о.х.д. № 3502/ 2017г.). The courts apply this provision when they find that the factual description of the offence does not correspond to the legal qualification given, considering that this negatively affected the procedural rights of the accused (опр. 137 от 28.04.2010 г. на РС-Велинград по н.о.х.д. № 176/ 2010г.).
It is a principle of criminal procedural law that during the trial the court collects evidence anew. A summary judicial investigation, as provided for by Articles 370 to 374 of the CPC, constitutes an exception to that rule. It can be initiated by the accused at the first court hearing or by the court of its own motion, and it may unfold as follows. All parties to the court proceedings can agree that the court need not question certain witnesses or experts. This means that the court must use the records of their interviews from the pretrial stage (Article 371 § 1 and Article 373 § 1, CPC). The accused may confess to all facts as described in the indictment and agree that no additional evidence be collected (Article 371 § 2, CPC). In this latter scenario, the court must verify that the confession is supported by the evidence collected at the pre-trial stage and accept the facts in the indictment as proven, without conducting any interviews (Article 373 §§ 2 and 3, CPC). Pursuant to Article 373 § 2 of the CPC, in that situation the court reduces the punishment by one third, in accordance with Article 58a of the CC.
When the court hands down a prison sentence of up to three years, it can suspend its implementation for a period of between three and five years if the person has no prior convictions and if the court considers that his or her actual serving of the sentence is not mandatory in order for the convicted individual to reform (Article 66, CC).
Where during the judicial proceedings before the first-instance court the prosecutor finds grounds for amending the circumstances relevant for the indictment, or for applying a law for an offence that carries a more severe punishment, he or she must change the charge accordingly (Article  287 § 1, CPC). The court must discontinue the judicial proceedings and send the case back to the respective prosecutor if the new charge is for an offence falling within the jurisdiction of a higher court, a military court, or the specialised criminal court (Article 287 § 2, CPC). Otherwise, the court must adjourn the hearing if the parties require more time to prepare for the new charge.
The second-instance court carries out a thorough review of the firstinstance court verdict, irrespective of the grounds of appeal (Article 314 § 1, CCP). The second-instance court can establish new factual circumstances (Article 316, CPC) and collect all types of evidence (Article 315, CPC). It can use all available means for the collection of evidence (Article 332, CPC). That court can also hear the witnesses heard at first instance if it considers it necessary, or allow new witnesses if it finds their testimony essential for the proper examination of the case (Article 327, CPC). The second-instance court can: quash the sentence and return the case to the prosecution or to the first-instance court for a new examination; quash the sentence and deliver a new one (when it applies a law in respect of an offence carrying a harsher punishment, if an indictment for that offence had been made at first-instance and if the public or private prosecutors had requested it); amend the sentence; or uphold the sentence imposed by the first-instance court (Article 334, CPC as worded at the relevant time; and Article 336, CPC).
According to Article 335 § 4 of the CPC, in the absence of an appeal by the public prosecutor or by the private prosecutor, the second-instance court cannot (1) quash a verdict delivered in proceedings brought by a private party for a publicly-prosecutable offence, or (2) quash an acquittal delivered by a first-instance court.
The relevant international legal provisions have been set out in the recent case of A and B v. Croatia, no. 7144/15, §§ 76-83, 20 June 2019.