The case originated in an application (no. 16974/15) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a company incorporated under Moldovan law, Construct Confort SRL (“the applicant company”), on 4 April 2015.
The applicant company was represented by Ms I. Țirulinic, a lawyer practising in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Mr M. Gurin and Ms R. Revencu.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that its rights guaranteed under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention had been breached as a result of an abusive quashing of a final judicial decision issued in its favour.
On 2 December 2015 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant company is a limited liability company incorporated under Moldovan Law.
On 24 December 2012 and 21 June 2013 respectively the applicant company initiated two sets of civil proceedings challenging two decisions issued by the State Tax Inspectorate of Străşeni (Inspectoratul Fiscal de Stat Străşeni – “the Inspectorate”) under which it had been fined for noncompliance with the VAT reporting regulations. On 5 September 2013 these two sets of proceedings were joined.
On 26 December 2013 the Străşeni District Court upheld the applicant company’s claims and overturned the impugned decisions. The representative of the Inspectorate was not present when the judgment was delivered, despite having been duly informed of the date and the time of the hearing.
On 5 February 2014 the Inspectorate lodged an appeal against the judgment of the Străşeni District Court. No request for an extension of the legal time-limit for lodging an appeal was made. The applicant company objected to the appeal and argued that it had been lodged outside the thirtyday time-limit and that the Inspectorate had not requested an extension of the legal time-limit for lodging it.
In a decision of 3 September 2014 the Chişinău Court of Appeal calculated the applicable time-limit and found that it had expired on 27 January 2014 and, accordingly, that the Inspectorate had been late in lodging its appeal. It therefore decided to strike the appeal out of its list of cases as time-barred. The Inspectorate lodged an appeal on points of law against that decision. It argued that the Chişinău Court of Appeal could not strike out the appeal after having commenced its examination of the merits of the case.
On 8 October 2014 the Supreme Court of Justice quashed the Chişinău Court of Appeal’s strike-out decision of 3 September 2014. Without contesting the Court of Appeal’s calculation of the time-limit for lodging the appeal, the Supreme Court of Justice accepted the argument put forward by the Inspectorate and found that the Court of Appeal had breached the rules of procedure by adopting a strike-out decision after having started an examination of the merits of the case. Ultimately, the case was referred back to the Chişinău Court of Appeal for re-examination.
On 28 January 2015, after rehearing the case, the Chişinău Court of Appeal upheld the Inspectorate’s appeal, quashed the judgment of the Străşeni District Court of 26 December 2013 and rendered a new judgment whereby the applicant company’s action was rejected as ill-founded.
On 10 June 2015 the Supreme Court of Justice declared an appeal on points of law lodged by the applicant company inadmissible.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure read as follows:
“...
(2)  Irrevocable judgments are:
“(1)  The time-limit for lodging an appeal is thirty days from the date of the delivery of the operative part of the judgment, unless the law provides otherwise.”
“...
(11)  The elements of an application for appeal provided under paragraph (1) subparagraphs (d), (e) and (h) [concerning the factual and legal reasoning of the appeal] may be included in a further appeal lodged after the fully reasoned judgment has been provided.”
“(1)  The appellate court shall dismiss an appeal, by means of an interlocutory judgment, if:
...
“...
In accordance with Article 362 of the [Code of Civil Procedure], the time-limit for lodging an appeal is thirty days from the date of the delivery of the judgment, unless the law provides otherwise, regardless of whether or not the party was present at the time of the pronouncement of the judgment.
...
For persons who have omitted to lodge an appeal within the time-limit for good reasons, the time-limit may be reinstated, upon request, by the appellate court.”