The case originated in an application (no. 48149/09) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Ms Rayna Nikolaeva Valkova (“the applicant”), on 28 July 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr B. Mihaylov, a lawyer practising in Sofia. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Radkova, of the Ministry of Justice.
On 23 March 2017 the President of the Section to which the case has been allocated decided, under Rule 54 § 2 (b) of the Rules of Court, that notice of the application should be given to the Government of Bulgaria. The application was communicated to the Government on 5 April 2017.
On 23 February 2018 the Government submitted a unilateral declaration in which they acknowledged a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention as a result of the applicant not having had access to a court in connection with her civil claim. They also offered to pay a lump sum covering any and all damage sustained by the applicant and invited the Court to strike the case out of its list of cases.
On 7 May 2018 the Government’s unilateral declaration was examined by the Court, which decided not to accept it. The applicant was thereafter invited to submit a claim for just satisfaction. The Government were given an opportunity to comment on it. On 17 August 2018 the Government filed observations on the case after their related request had been allowed by the President of the Section. The applicant commented on those observations on 10 October 2018.
The applicant was born in 1979 and lives in Sofia.
The applicant’s grandfather owned part of a real estate. He donated his part to the applicant’s cousins in 1997. The applicant’s grandfather died on 16 January 2003.
On 13 February 2004 the applicant brought proceedings under section 30 of the Inheritance Act 1949 before the Sofia District Court. She claimed that, by donating his part in the immovable property in 1997, her grandfather had infringed her right to a “reserved share” in his inheritance, given that the immovable property in question represented his entire estate. In a decision of 2 March 2005 the court upheld her claim by diminishing the part of the estate donated to the applicant’s cousins and restoring the applicant’s “reserved share” in her grandfather’s inheritance.
Following an appeal by the other party, on 20 September 2007 the Sofia City Court quashed the first instance court’s judgment and rejected the applicant’s claim for restoration of her “reserved share” in her grandfather’s estate. In particular, referring to Interpretative Decision No. 1 of 4 February 2005 by the Supreme Court of Cassation (“SCC”), the court found that the applicant had not complied with the statutory requirements for claiming her reserved share. The court held that, given that her cousins to whom the real estate had been donated could not be considered “heirs-at-law”, the applicant should have claimed the reserved share of the inheritance by means of an “inventory”.
Following a cassation appeal brought by the applicant, on 24 March 2009 the SCC upheld the Sofia City Court’s findings in full in a final decision.
The statutory conditions for claiming a “reserved share” in an inheritance and their interpretation by the domestic courts, including Interpretative Decision No. 1 adopted by the SCC on 4 February 2005, have been set out in the case of Petko Petkov v. Bulgaria (no. 2834/06, §§ 14-19, 19 February 2013). In particular, since the adoption of the said domestic interpretative decision, claiming an inheritance through an “inventory” has been considered a pre-requisite for bringing a claim against all successors by deed or will, save for those with immediate priority of succession. That decision did not envisage any interim rules or transition period for its application to pending proceedings.
Pursuant to Article 303 § 1 (7) of the Code of Civil Procedure of 2007 (“the CCP”), civil proceedings may be reopened when a judgment of the European Court of Human Rights establishes that the Convention has been violated and when a fresh examination of the case is necessary in order to eliminate the consequences of the violation. The interested party may make the request no later than six months after the judgment has become final (Article 305 § 2 of the CCP). The request is examined by the SCC (Article 307 of the CCP). Following the final judgment of the Court in the case of Petko Petkov, cited above, the proceedings at the national level were reopened.