The case originated in an application (no. 55520/07) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Mirko Rogošić (“the applicant”), on 19 November 2007.
The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs Š. Stažnik.
On 1 July 2009 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant, was born in 1932 and lives in .
On 31 May 2000 the applicant brought a civil action in the Zadar Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Zadru), seeking payment for a house he had sold to a private individual, M.G.
The first hearing scheduled for 6 November 2000 was adjourned owing to the failure of the applicant's representative to submit a proper authority form. Further hearings were held on 16 January, 15 February, 19 March, 10 and 22 May, 13 June and 9 August 2002.
At the hearing held on 29 August 2002 the applicant's representative asked that the applicant give his evidence before a court in  by means of legal assistance between the two States. On the same day the Zadar Municipal Court requested the competent Municipal Court in  for legal assistance in that respect.
On 19 March 2003 the Zadar Municipal Court received the record of the applicant's evidence given before the First Municipal Court in .
The Zadar Municipal Court held further hearings on 8 June, 9 September, 18 October, 4 November and 2 December 2004 and 5 April 2006.
Meanwhile, on 24 October 2005, the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint under section 63 of the Constitutional Court Act complaining about the length of the above civil proceedings.
In the period between March and September 2006 the Zadar Municipal Court and the Zadar County Court (Županijski sud u Zadru) were deciding on the applicant's requests for transfer of jurisdiction to another court and withdrawal of the presiding judge.
On 12 December 2006 the Municipal Court delivered a judgment ruling for the applicant in part. Both parties appealed to the Zadar County Court.
On 12 February 2007, the applicant sought an interim measure (privremena mjera) from the Zadar Municipal Court so as to prohibit M.G. from disposing of the house in question. On 24 April 2007 the  returned the case to the Municipal Court in order to decide on the applicant's request for an interim measure.
On 24 May 2007 the  dismissed the applicant's complaint about the length of the proceedings finding that the delays in the proceedings had been attributable to the applicant. The 's decision was served on the applicant on 8 September 2007.
On 1 June 2007 the Municipal Court dismissed the applicant's request for the interim measure and forwarded the case to the Zadar County Court. On 19 September 2006 the latter quashed the first-instance judgment of 12 December 2006 and remitted the case. In the resumed proceedings the Municipal Court invited the applicant to specify his claim according to the instructions given by the County Court.
On 30 October 2007 the applicant lodged a request for the protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time (zahtjev za zaštitu prava na suđenje u razumnom roku) with the Zadar County Court complaining about the length of the proceedings upon his request for the interim measure.
On 8 November 2007 the County Court declared the applicant's request inadmissible because the applicant, who resided abroad, had not appointed a special representative in Croatia who would receive the courts' summons on behalf of the applicant (punomoćnik za primanje pismena), as required by the relevant legislation. On 21 April 2008 the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske) upheld the County Court's decision.
In the resumed civil proceedings, on 11 February 2008 the Municipal Court gave a judgment for the applicant. Both parties lodged their appeals. The appeal proceedings are currently pending before the Zadar County Court.
The relevant part of section 63 of the Constitutional Act on the  (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 49/2002 of 3 May 2002 – “the Constitutional Court Act”) reads as follows:
“(1) The Constitutional Court shall examine a constitutional complaint whether or not all legal remedies have been exhausted if the competent court fails to decide a claim concerning the individual's rights and obligations or a criminal charge against him or her within a reasonable time ...
(2) If a constitutional complaint ... under sub-section 1 of this section is upheld, the  shall set a time-limit within which the competent court must decide the case on the merits...
(3) In a decision issued under sub-section 2 of this section, the  shall assess appropriate compensation for the applicant for the violation of his or her constitutional rights ... The compensation shall be paid out of the State budget within three months from the date on which a request for payment is lodged.”
The relevant part of the Courts Act (Zakon o sudovima, Official Gazette nos. 150/05, 16/07, 113/08 and 153/09), as in force at the material time, reads as follows:
PROTECTION  OF THE RIGHT TO A HEARING WITHIN A REASONABLE TIME
Section 27
“(1) A party to court proceedings who considers that the competent court failed to decide within a reasonable time on his or her rights or obligations or a criminal charge against him or her, may lodge a request for the protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time with the immediately higher court.
(2) If the request concerns proceedings pending before the High Commercial Court of the Republic of Croatia, the High Court for Administrative Offences of the Republic of Croatia or the Administrative Court of the Republic of Croatia, the request shall be decided by the Supreme Court of the .
(3) The proceedings for deciding the request referred to in sub-section 1 of this section shall be urgent. The rules of non-contentious procedure shall apply mutatis mutandis in those proceedings and, in principle, no hearing shall be held.
Section 28
(1) If the court referred to in section 27 of this Act finds the request well founded, it shall set a time-limit within which the court before which the proceedings are pending must decide on a right or obligation of, or a criminal charge against, the person who lodged the request, and shall award him or her appropriate compensation for the violation of his or her right to a hearing within a reasonable time.
(2) The compensation shall be paid out of the State budget within three months of the date on which the party's request for payment is lodged.
(3) An appeal, to be lodged with the Supreme Court within fifteen days, lies against a decision on the request for the protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time. No appeal lies against a Supreme Court decision, but a constitutional complaint may be lodged.”
The relevant part of section 146 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Zakon o parničnom postupku, Official Gazette 53/91, 91/92, 58/93, 112/99, 117/03, 84/08) reads as follows:
Representative for receiving the courts' summons
Section 146
“(1) Where a plaintiff ... residing abroad and not having a representative in Croatia, does not appoint a representative for receiving the courts' summons in Croatia at the time of lodging a civil action, the court [conducting the proceedings] shall declare the action inadmissible.
...”