The case concerns the imposition of reprimands on the applicant on account of his misconduct in prison – namely, two acts of worship at nighttime, when “sleep without interruption” was prescribed for all detainees – and the alleged lack of effective remedies to complain about the disciplinary sanction.
The applicant was born in 1987 and is detained in penal colony no. IK18 in the settlement of Kharp, Yamalo-Nenetskiy Region, Russia (“IK18”).
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr A. Laptev, a lawyer practising in Moscow.
The Government were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 17 June 2009 the applicant was convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment in penal colony no. IK56 in Lozvinskiy settlement, Sverdlovsk Region.
In late 2011 he was temporarily transferred to remand prison no. 1 in the town of Syktyvkar, Republic of Komi (“IZ1”) and placed in solitary confinement.
Later, on an unspecified date, the applicant was transferred to IK18.
The applicant is a practising Muslim. He believes that it is his religious duty to perform acts of worship (“Salah”) at least five times a day at set times, including at night-time. The act of worship must be carried out in a specific pose and on a prayer rug.
According to the applicant, it was of a particular importance for him to perform Salah during Ramadan (the ninth month of the Islamic calendar, observed by Muslims as a month of fasting, prayer and reflection).
At 1 a.m. on 30 July 2012 (11th day of Ramadan) and at 2.53 a.m. on 30 May 2013, the prison guards, while observing the applicant in his cell in IZ1 by means of a closed-circuit television camera, noticed he was performing Salah. They immediately ordered him to return to his sleeping place, but the applicant did not follow orders.
On the same dates – 30 July 2012 and 30 May 2013 – the prison guards reported those incidents to the governor of IZ1. They stated that the applicant had not adhered to the prison’s daily schedule, which prescribed that a prisoner should sleep at night between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m., and that the applicant had disregarded their subsequent orders. They alleged that his conduct had breached the Federal Law on the Detention of Suspects and Persons Accused of Criminal Offences (no. 103-FZ dated 15 July 1995) (Федеральный закон от 15 июля 1995 N 103-ФЗ «О содержании под стражей подозреваемых и обвиняемых в совершении преступлений» – “the Pre-trial Detention Act”), which provided that each prisoner must follow a prison’s daily schedule and orders given by prison guards.
In reply to the above allegations, the applicant prepared written “explanations” dated 7 August 2012 and 31 May 2013 respectively. He stated that night-time sleep was a right, not a duty. Therefore he could spend the night-time as he wished. He also submitted that night-time worship was an important ritual prescribed by his religious belief. In addition, in the explanations of 7 August 2012 he mentioned that it was particularly important for him to comply with his religious duty during “the holy month of Ramadan”. In the explanations of 31 May 2013, the applicant underlined that his conduct had not disturbed anyone, because he had been detained in solitary confinement.
On 8 August 2012 and 31 May 2013, having examined the abovementioned submissions by the prison guards and the applicant, the prison governor formally reprimanded the latter for a breach of the Pre-trial Detention Act, specifically for a breach of the prison schedule and for disregarding the prison guards’ orders to return to his sleeping place. The disciplinary punishment was imposed on him in accordance with Section 36 (1) and (2) of the Pre-trial Detention Act, which required all detainees to comply with prison rules and lawful orders of the detention authority (see paragraph 29 below).
On 15 August 2012 the applicant appealed against the prison governor’s decision of 8 August 2012 to the Syktyvkar Town Court. He relied on his freedom of religion and his right to spend the night-time as he wished.
On 7 November 2012 the Syktyvkar Town Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal. It held that prisoners could exercise their rights in so far as this did not run counter to prison regulations. Prisoners could worship or participate in religious ceremonies only if such practice did not breach legislative rules. The court noted that pursuant to the daily prison schedule in IZ1 (which had been enacted by the prison governor in line with the requirements of domestic law), prisoners had to sleep between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. without interruption. Accordingly, the applicant’s conduct – his absence from his sleeping place at the time prescribed for the uninterrupted night-time sleep – had been in breach of the daily prison schedule and the legislative rules on prison discipline. In the light of the above, the court concluded that the applicant had been lawfully prosecuted for his misconduct.
On 6 December 2012 the applicant challenged the above-mentioned judgment in an appeal to the Supreme Court of the Republic of Komi.
On 11 February 2013 the Supreme Court of the Republic of Komi dismissed the applicant’s appeal, endorsing the lower court’s reasoning. It held that the disciplinary sanction had been lawfully imposed on the applicant because the breach of prison discipline had been duly established. The court noted that the applicant had erroneously interpreted domestic law. It was a prisoner’s duty (not a right) to be present at his or her sleeping place at the time prescribed for night-time sleep.
According to the Government, the applicant challenged that decision before the Supreme Court of the Republic of Komi, which dismissed the challenge on 29 July 2013.
The applicant submitted that a reprimand had been imposed on him in IK18 on 5 March 2018 for an act of worship performed during the daytime on 28 February 2018.
Article 28 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation guarantees freedom of religion, including the right to profess, either alone or in community with others, any religion or to profess no religion at all, to freely choose, have and share religious and other beliefs, and to manifest them in practice.
Article 10 § 2 (“Fundamental principles relating to the legal status of convicted persons”) of the Code of Execution of Criminal Sentences provides that while serving their sentences, prisoners enjoy all rights and freedoms save for those exceptions listed in domestic legislation, including the criminal law and the law on execution of criminal sentences.
In accordance with Article 11 §§ 2 and 3 (“The prisoners’ basic duties”), prisoners must abide by the rules and procedures relating to the serving of criminal sentences as set out in the federal legislation and other instruments adopted in conformity with it. Prisoners must also follow lawful orders given by the detention authorities.
Under Article 115 § 1 (“Disciplinary measures for detainees”), a prisoner may be subjected to any of the following for a breach of the prison regime: a reprimand, a disciplinary fine, placement in a disciplinary cell, solitary confinement or confinement in a special cell.
Article 127 § 4 provides that to be eligible for a transfer from a strict regime of detention, under which all life prisoners are placed on arrival at a special-regime correctional colony, to a more lenient regime of detention, a life prisoner must have no disciplinary record.
Pursuant to Article 114 § 4 (“Procedure for granting a reward to a detainee”), the only reward that can be granted to a detainee with a disciplinary record is the early removal of the relevant record. No other types of reward are applicable to such detainees.
Article 79 § 5 (“Early release”) of the Criminal Code provides that a life prisoner may be released early if he or she has served at least twentyfive years of his or her sentence and if the court considers that the serving of the entire sentence is not necessary.
Article 79 § 4.1 (in force from 16 May 2014) of the Criminal Code provides that when deciding on an application for early release, the court must take into account the prisoner’s conduct and any disciplinary sanctions imposed on him or her in detention.
Section 17 (10) (“The rights of suspects and accused persons”) of the Pre-trial Detention Act provides that detainees are entitled to eight hours of sleep at night-time. The investigating authorities may interfere with that right only in exceptional circumstances, as listed in the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Section 36 (1) and (2) (“The basic duties of suspects and accused persons”) provides that detainees must respect the rules set out in the Pretrial Detention Act and in the internal documents of their detention facilities. The detainees must also follow lawful orders given by the detention authorities.
Rule 100 of the Internal Rules of pre-trial detention facilities provides that detainees in remand prisons can carry out their religious practices only inside their cells or in a specially designated space within the perimeter of their detention facility.
Rule 101 proscribes religious practices which run counter to the Internal Rules of pre-trial detention facilities or the rights of other detainees.
Annex 4 to the Internal Rules of pre-trial detention facilities contains a suggested daily schedule for a remand prison. It provides detainees with time for “sleep without interruption” between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m.
On 23 March 2011 the governor of IZ1 enacted the remand prison’s daily schedule, which reads as follows:
“Early morning reveille – 6 a.m.
Wash and rearranging of bedding – 6 to 6.30 a.m.
Breakfast – 6.30 to 7.30 a.m.
Morning inspection – 8 to 9 a.m.
Time set aside for any investigative actions and court hearings – 9 a.m. to 12.30 p.m.
Outdoor exercise – 9 a.m. to 12.30 p.m.
Lunch break – 12.30 to 2 p.m.
Time set aside for any investigative actions and court hearings – 2 to 6 p.m. (until 5 p.m. on Fridays).
Outdoor exercise – 2 to 5 p.m.
Supper – 6 to 7 p.m.
Evening inspection – 8 to 9 p.m.
Preparing for bed – 9.30 to 10 p.m.
Sleep (without interruption) – 10 p.m. to 6 a.m.”
On 11 January 2006 the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted Recommendation Rec(2006)2 to member States on the European Prison Rules, which reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“29.1  Prisoners’ freedom of thought, conscience and religion shall be respected.
2  The prison regime shall be organised so far as is practicable to allow prisoners to practise their religion and follow their beliefs, to attend services or meetings led by approved representatives of such religion or beliefs, to receive visits in private from such representatives of their religion or beliefs and to have in their possession books or literature relating to their religion or beliefs.”