The case originated in an application (no. 2742/12) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Josip Matanović (“the applicant”), on 22 December 2011.
The applicant was represented by Ms I. Bojić, a lawyer practising in Zagreb. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant complained, in particular, that the domestic authorities’ recourse to special investigative measures, in particular secret surveillance in respect of him, had been in violation of the guarantees of Article 8 of the Convention. He further alleged entrapment by an agent provocateur and that the non-disclosure and use of evidence obtained by the use of special investigative measures in the criminal proceedings against him had run counter to Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (b) of the Convention. The applicant also alleged that the domestic courts’ interpretation of the relevant provisions of the Criminal Code had not been in compliance with the requirements of Article 7 of the Convention.
On 29 April 2013 these complaints were communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1949 and is currently serving a prison sentence in Lepoglava.
The applicant was a vice-president of the Croatian Privatisation Fund (Hrvatski fond za privatizaciju – hereinafter “the Fund”), a legal entity established by the State and tasked with carrying out the privatisation of publicly owned property.
In August and October 2006 M.M., a businessman from Russia, approached the State Attorney’s Office for the Suppression of Corruption and Organised Crime (Ured za suzbijanje korupcije i organiziranog kriminaliteta – hereinafter: “the State Attorney’s Office”) alleging that he had been trying to make various business investments in Croatia and that he had been introduced to a certain A.P., allegedly an official of the Fund, who had offered his assistance in pursuing the project in the State. In return, A.P. had asked M.M. to deposit 2,250,000 euros (EUR) in various bank accounts.
In March 2007 an investigating judge of the Zagreb County Court (Županijski sud u Zagrebu) authorised the secret surveillance of a number of individuals, including A.P., in connection with suspicions of bribe-taking and abuse of power and authority. M.M. was granted informant status.
In the course of further investigation using secret surveillance, several meetings were recorded in which M.M., assisted by a consultant, J.K., discussed with a lawyer, A.Pi., the measures that needed to be taken in order to carry out a business project in the Zadar region. On that occasion A.Pi. mentioned the applicant as her contact in the Fund. She also stated that everybody should make out well in this business undertaking. J.K. also explained that he knew the applicant from before and that very soon they would have a meeting concerning the investment at issue.
 10.  On 3 April 2007 J.K. approached the State Attorney’s Office claiming that he was the representative of M.M. and that he had already had a number of contacts with various officials concerning M.M.’s investment in Croatia. In this connection, the day before he had also contacted the applicant, in his capacity as vice-president of the Fund, who had allegedly requested a provision of 5% of the total investment value, which was approximately between EUR 23,000,000 and 25,000,000, to help with the realisation of the project. The applicant had explained to J.K. that that amount would have to be distributed to the bank accounts of three (out of five) vice-presidents of the Fund who would take part in the decision-making process. J.K. consented to act as an informant under the further guidance of the prosecuting authorities.
On 3 April 2007 the State Attorney’s Office asked an investigating judge of the Zagreb County Court to authorise the use of special investigative measures in respect of the applicant, specifically the tapping of his telephone, covert surveillance of him, the use of J.K. as an informant, and conducting a simulated purchase operation.
On the same day the application was allowed and the investigating judge ordered the use of special investigative measures in respect of the applicant. The relevant part of the order reads:
“The application is accompanied by the submission of the Ministry of the Interior’s Criminal Police Department, and the relevant official notes, statements and other material.
The application is well-founded since the case at issue concerns the offences under Article 181 § 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, and the investigation into these offences by other means would either not be possible or would be extremely difficult.
Therefore, all the necessary requirements under Articles 180 and 181 of the Code of Criminal Procedure have been met and the order should be issued with a view to securing the information and evidence necessary for the criminal case.”
In the course of the investigation, the investigating judge issued several further orders to the same effect. Various meetings between the applicant and J.K. took place. At a meeting on 11 April 2007 J.K. gave to the applicant EUR 50,000 in connection with his investment project.
On 16 June 2007, on the basis of an application by the State Attorney’s Office, the investigating judge ordered the termination of the special investigative measures, indicating that their use had produced the results sought.
On 16 June 2007 the applicant was arrested and detained in connection with a suspicion that he had taken bribes and abused his power and authority in several privatisation cases.
On 18 June 2007 the State Attorney’s Office forwarded to the investigating judge 288 CD recordings of the secret surveillance operation, and on 19 June 2007 it forwarded a further thirty-six CD and twenty DVD recordings.
On 19 June 2007 the State Attorney’s Office asked an investigating judge of the Zagreb County Court to open an investigation in respect of the applicant and seven other individuals in connection with a suspicion of bribe-taking and offering bribes related to several investment projects in Croatia, including the one in the Zadar region (see paragraphs 9 and 10 above).
In its request for investigation the State Attorney’s Office relied on the results of the special investigative measures suggesting that the applicant, in his capacity as vice-president of the Fund, had requested bribes in order to support M.M.’s investment project in the Zadar region. In particular, it was alleged that he had requested bribes amounting to EUR 220,000 and 5% of the total investment, which amounted to EUR 1,700,000. The secret recordings showed that the sealing of this agreement had taken place first on 11 April 2007 when J.K., acting as M.M.’s representative, had paid the applicant EUR 50,000, and then on 24 April 2007 when J.K. had deposited a further EUR 150,000 in a notary public’s safe in the applicant’s favour. The State Attorney’s Office also alleged that the applicant had organised the bribery of the President of the Fund in respect of the investment in the Zadar region, and had agreed to further bribe-taking with J.K. concerning another investment project related to the privatisation of the hotels Ž. and P.
When questioned with regard to the charges against him, the applicant decided to remain silent and not to give evidence. On the basis of the available evidence, the investigating judge accepted the request of the State Attorney’s Office and opened an investigation.
Meanwhile, on 20 June 2007 the State Attorney’s Office forwarded 191 CD recordings to the investigating judge. It also forwarded an additional ninety-eight CD recordings to the investigating judge containing secret surveillance of individuals in respect of whom an investigation had not been opened at that time.
On 21 June 2007 the investigating judge in charge of the supervision of the special investigative measures forwarded to the investigating judge conducting the investigation 191 CD recordings and the relevant reports concerning the secret surveillance of the suspects and the informants M.M. and J.K.
On 26 July 2007 the applicant asked to have access to and to have copies of the secret surveillance CD and DVD recordings.
The investigating judge conducting the investigation commissioned a telecommunications expert report including transcripts of the relevant secret surveillance recordings. These were produced by M.Đ., a telecommunications expert. By a letter of 30 November 2007 M.Đ. returned ninety-eight secret surveillance CD recordings in the case at issue that did not contain the communications of the suspects in respect of whom the investigation had been opened.
In the course of the investigation the investigating judge authorised numerous search and seizure operations and questioned a number of witnesses in connection with the offences for which the applicant and the other suspects had been charged.
When questioned as a witness by the investigating judge, M.M. explained that J.K. had offered him the services of his company to help with a business investment in Croatia. In particular, J.K. had explained that he knew how to contact the competent State institutions and how these things could be done in a legal way. Soon afterwards they had sent a letter of intent to the Fund concerning M.M.’s investment but they had not received a reply. J.K. had then contacted the applicant, who had been his colleague at university, and arranged a meeting with him at the Fund. M.M. also explained that it was J.K. who had been in contact again with the applicant concerning the investment in the Zadar region.
The investigating judge also questioned J.K. but he was unable to give evidence owing to his medical condition and hospitalisation.
On the basis of the results of the investigation, the investigating judge twice extended the scope of the investigation to other alleged instances of bribe-taking and abuse of power and authority by the applicant.
Following the completion of the investigation, the investigating judge forwarded the case file to the State Attorney’s Office for further assessment and a decision.
On 12 February 2008 the State Attorney’s Office indicted the applicant and nine other individuals and brought them before the Zagreb County Court on charges of bribe-taking, offering bribes and abuse of power and authority. The applicant was indicted in his capacity as a public official on two counts of bribe-taking and bribery of the President of the Fund related to M.M.’s investment project in the Zadar region, two counts of bribe-taking related to the privatisation of the hotels Ž. and P. and the company P.O., and one count of abuse of power and authority related to the privatisation of the company B.
The indictment was based on voluminous evidence obtained during the investigation and the recordings of the applicant’s telephone communications and secret surveillance of him obtained by the use of special investigative measures. In particular, the State Attorney’s Office indicated the particular sequence of the relevant recordings which it intended to submit as evidence at the trial. The State Attorney’s Office also asked that the case file concerning the special investigative measures be examined.
On 6 March 2008 the applicant lodged an objection against the indictment, arguing that it was confusing and incomplete. He pointed out that his position in the Fund did not fall within the scope of the definition of “public official” under Article 89(3) of the Criminal Code. He further stressed that J.K., a central figure in the case, had not been questioned during the investigation. The applicant also contended that his defence rights had been breached since the defence had “neither seen nor heard” the audio and video recordings on which the indictment had been based.
On 30 April 2008 a three-judge panel of the Zagreb County Court returned the indictment to the State Attorney’s Office on the grounds that one count of the indictment, concerning the applicant’s alleged participation in the bribery of the President of the Fund, had been confusing. It accordingly instructed the State Attorney’s Office to submit an amended indictment consonant with that finding. The State Attorney’s Office complied with the order and submitted an amended indictment on 9 May 2008, following which the Zagreb County Court confirmed it.
On 15 October 2008 the president of the trial panel examined the case file of the special investigative operation. On the same day she commissioned a further expert report from the telecommunications expert M.Đ. ordering him to produce transcripts of the relevant recordings relating to two meetings between the applicant and J.K.
An order for further transcription of the recordings was made on 24 October 2008. This concerned the recordings of three meetings between the applicant, J.K. and several other individuals, and the sequences of the telephone conversations and text messages concerned.
On 7 November 2008 M.Đ. produced transcripts of the recordings indicated in the Zagreb County Court’s order of 15 October 2008 (see paragraph 33 above).
On 10 November 2008 the first hearing was held before the Zagreb County Court. At the hearing the trial bench forwarded the expert report of 7 November 2008 (see paragraph 35 above) to the defence. The applicant pleaded not guilty to the charges against him, contending that he had been entrapped by J.K., who was an agent provocateur. The defence lawyer of one of the co-accused contended that the defence had not been provided with the surveillance recordings and that those measures had been ordered contrary to the requirements of the relevant domestic law. The trial bench dismissed these arguments as unfounded and scheduled the examination of evidence.
On 17 November 2008 M.Đ. produced further transcripts of the secret surveillance recordings related to the Zagreb County Court’s order of 24 October 2008 (see paragraph 34 above).
At the hearings on 27 and 28 November 2008 the Zagreb County Court heard evidence from J.K., who explained that he had represented Russian investors in Croatia regarding their interest in the construction of luxury villas on the site of a former brick factory in the Zadar region. He had therefore contacted the Fund and the local authorities in Zadar in order to complete all the relevant administrative matters for the investment. J.K. stated that he had had several meetings with the applicant and that at one point the applicant had requested a bribe in order to ensure the realisation of the project. J.K. had reported that to the State Attorney’s Office and then he had consented to act as an informant. He further explained that he had given EUR 50,000 in cash to the applicant and that, at the applicant’s request, he had deposited a further EUR 150,000 in a notary public’s safe. It had been also agreed that J.K. would pay EUR 1,500,000 on completion of the project.
On 2 December 2008 the Zagreb County Court commissioned another expert report from M.Đ. concerning several particular sequences of the secret surveillance recordings.
On 9 December 2008 M.Đ. produced further transcripts of the secret surveillance recordings related to the Zagreb County Court’s order of 2 December 2008 (see paragraph 39 above).
The expert report was served on the defence at a hearing on 10 December 2008. At the same hearing the trial bench heard evidence from M.M. He explained that the relevant contacts with the applicant had been arranged and directed by J.K., and that he had not personally participated in any illegal transactions in the applicant’s favour.
At the same hearing the defence counsel reiterated their application for access to the secret surveillance recordings (see paragraphs 31 and 36 above). They argued that according to the available information there were in total 515 CD and 160 DVD recordings which had never been provided to the defence. In these circumstances, the defence counsel contended that they had not had an effective opportunity to prepare for the case. They also asked for access to all the recordings since it was possible that some of them contained exonerating information, which the defence could then submit as evidence.
The trial bench dismissed the application by the defence on the grounds that the recordings which were to be examined at the trial as evidence had been duly transcribed by an expert and that the relevant transcripts had been served on the defence. In the trial bench’s view, this allowed the defence sufficient time and facilities to prepare for the case as they would be able to raise all objections concerning the recordings after their examination at the trial. Moreover, the trial bench stressed that the sole purpose of the recordings was to examine them during the trial and that Article 155 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, although providing for the possibility of access to and copying of the case file, did not envisage the copying of CD and DVD material. The trial bench also stressed that the defence could have examined the relevant material in the court-house in the same manner as they had generally examined the case files.
On 10 December 2008 the defence counsel sent a joint statement to the Croatian Bar Association (Hrvatska odvjetnička komora) complaining that they had been unable to effectively carry out their tasks as defence lawyers since they had been denied access to the secret surveillance recordings. They also contended that the evidence had been hidden from the defence and that it had been impossible for them to identify whether certain recordings could exonerate their clients or whether there had been suggestions of unlawfulness in some of them.
At a hearing on 11 December 2008 the trial bench found that there were in total 212 CD and twenty-seven DVD recordings which had been provided to the court with the indictment of the accused. There were also ninety-eight CD recordings from the same secret surveillance operation but which concerned different persons and not the accused.
On 12 December 2008 another hearing was held before the Zagreb County Court at which the defence asked for an adjournment in order to examine the case file concerning the secret surveillance operation. The defence argued that they wanted to examine all the circumstances in which the secret surveillance had been ordered and conducted. The trial bench dismissed the request by the defence on the grounds that the case file concerning the secret surveillance order had been incorporated into the case file concerning the criminal proceedings at issue and could therefore have been consulted by the defence. The trial bench also reiterated its previous arguments concerning the reason for the dismissal of the application by the defence to obtain the copies of the CD and DVD material.
On 12 December 2008 the defence counsel sent a letter to the Zagreb County Court asking for access to and the possibility to examine the secret surveillance recordings. They stressed that the CD and DVD material had never been made available to the defence and that there were no technical means available in the court-house which would allow for the examination of the recordings by the defence. They also pointed out that because of the technical impossibility of examining the recordings in the court-house, the practice of the Zagreb County Court in several other cases had been to make copies of the CD and DVD recordings and to send them to the defence. In these circumstances, the defence argued that the Convention rights of the accused to effectively prepare their defence had been breached.
On 12 December 2008 the president of the trial panel commissioned another expert report from M.Đ. concerning several further secret surveillance recordings.
On 14 December 2008 defence counsel for one of the co-accused sent a letter to the President of the Zagreb County Court indicating that it had been impossible for the defence to obtain access to and to examine the secret surveillance recordings by any means whatsoever.
Further hearings before the Zagreb County Court were held on 15 and between 17 and 19 December 2008 at which the secret surveillance recordings were played back. The applicant argued that the recordings were incomplete and confusing and that there were discrepancies between the transcripts and the recordings. He contended that it was impossible for his counsel to work thoroughly since they had not had access to the recordings. The lead prosecutor also indicated that there were certain discrepancies between the transcripts and the recordings, which she then tried to clarify at the hearing. The trial court ordered the State Attorney’s Office to provide the relevant clarifications and it also commissioned a report from the expert M.Đ. in order to provide explanations concerning his particular findings.
Meanwhile, on 18 December 2008 M.Đ. produced further transcripts of the secret surveillance recordings related to the Zagreb County Court’s order of 12 December 2008 (see paragraph 48 above).
On 22 December 2008 the president of the trial panel commissioned another expert report from M.Đ. concerning several other secret surveillance recordings. The expert produced his additional report on 2 January 2009.
At the hearings between 12 and 14 January 2009 additional secret surveillance recordings were examined. The applicant argued that he had been entrapped and that the recordings were unlawful evidence.
Further hearings before the Zagreb County Court were held between 26 and 29 January; 11-13 and 16-17 February; 4-6 and 9-10 March 2009 at which the trial court heard witnesses and examined further secret surveillance recordings.
On 9 March 2009 the applicant asked the Zagreb County Court to again question the informant J.K. and to take further evidence concerning his activities in the Fund.
A hearing was held on 12 March 2009 where the trial bench heard further witnesses.
At a hearing on 16 March 2009 the State Attorney’s Office asked that further secret surveillance recordings be admitted into evidence and examined. The applicant contended that the recordings had been unlawfully obtained as the use of secret surveillance measures had been ordered contrary to the requirements of the relevant domestic law. The trial bench accepted the request of the State Attorney’s Office and commissioned an expert report from M.Đ., instructing him to provide transcripts of the recordings.
Further hearings were held on 17, 23-26 and 30 March 2009 at which the trial bench heard evidence from several witnesses.
On 30 March 2009 M.Đ. produced transcripts of the secret surveillance recordings related to the Zagreb County Court’s order of 16 March 2009 (see paragraph 57 above).
Further hearings were held on 15-17 and 20 April 2009 at which the trial bench heard further witnesses. The applicant contended that the initial contacts of J.K. and M.M. with the State Attorney’s Office showed that they had been prepared to act as agents provocateurs and that he had been entrapped into engaging in illegal activities. He therefore asked that the evidence obtained by the use of informants be excluded as unlawfully obtained. The trial bench dismissed the applicant’s arguments on the grounds that nothing suggested that he had been entrapped.
At the hearings between 22-24 and 27-28 April 2009 the trial bench questioned the accused. The applicant stated that he had been incited to engage in illegal activities by J.K. but he refused to answer any further questions on the matter.
On 29 April 2009 the State Attorney’s Office submitted an amended indictment specifying the charges against the accused on the basis of the evidence adduced at the trial. At a hearing on 5 May 2009 the applicant pleaded not guilty to the amended indictment. He reiterated his arguments that he had been entrapped by J.K. and that he had not taken any actions which he had not been entitled to take as vice-president of the Fund.
Further hearings were held between 8 and 12 May 2009 at which the trial bench heard the parties’ closing arguments.
On 15 May 2009 the Zagreb County Court delivered a judgment finding that the applicant, in his capacity as a public official as defined under Article 89(3) of the Criminal Code, had taken bribes (Article 347 § 1 of the Criminal Code), facilitated bribe-taking (Article 348 § 1 of the Criminal Code) and abused his power and authority (Article 337 §§ 1, 3 and 4 of the Criminal Code) in connection with M.M.’s investment project in the Zadar region, the privatisation of the hotels Ž. and P. and the privatisation of the company B. The court sentenced him to eleven years’ imprisonment. At the same time, it acquitted the applicant on charges of bribe-taking related to the privatisation of the company P.O. (see paragraph 29 above).
The Zagreb County Court explained that all the relevant facts concerning the circumstances of the case had been duly established and that therefore there was no reason for the examination of further evidence requested by the applicant.
As regards the application by the defence to obtain the secret surveillance recordings and a complaint of non-disclosure of certain recordings, the Zagreb County Court noted:
 “With regard to the recordings which [the State Attorney’s Office] asked to be examined at the trial, an expert report was commissioned, that is to say, transcripts were prepared which were served on all the parties, the accused and their lawyers, who were thereby fully informed of the substance of the recordings submitted into evidence. In addition, this panel finds, that, with regard to the recordings which were to be examined at the trial, there was no obstacle to the defence lawyers examining [those recordings] in the court-house before the commencement of the trial.
With regard to the other conversations of the accused, these [recordings] were not submitted into evidence but the defence could have examined their substance by the examination of the written reports filed in the [special investigation case file] after the submission of the indictment.
This panel also considers that the recordings at issue were made solely for their examination at the trial and had they been provided to the parties, the court would not have had any legal basis at its disposal to prevent and prohibit the parties from reproducing [them] outside of the court[-house] before their examination at trial, and [the court would not have had any legal means] to prevent possible misuse of the recorded material.
This in particular concerns the recordings which were not submitted into evidence; that is to say [the recordings] which concern other individuals and not the accused. Since these recordings were not submitted into evidence, the application by the defence to obtain them is completely unfounded.
 Furthermore, this panel has found that ... 212 CD and twenty-seven DVD recordings were given [to the court] whereas the remaining ninety-eight CD recordings concern individuals who had been under secret surveillance ... but were not [subsequently indicted].
...
Moreover, as was noted above, the defence had knowledge of the substance of the material submitted into evidence and they had no right to examine material which does not concern these proceedings; that is to say [material which concerns] individuals who were not indicted in these criminal proceedings ...
This is because section 42(7) of the Office for the Suppression of Corruption and Organised Crime Act provides that if within six months following the termination of a secret surveillance operation criminal proceedings have not been instituted against the [individual under surveillance], all the material collected [during the operation] must be destroyed.
It is clear that, since criminal proceedings were not instituted against these individuals, the recordings at issue are still confidential and should have been destroyed; they could not be and were not evidence in these criminal proceedings ...
If these recordings were put at the disposal of the defence, that would amount to a breach of the above-cited provisions of law, particularly because [the recordings constitute] confidential material concerning individuals who are not under indictment.
Moreover, Article 35 of the Constitution guarantees respect for the private life of every individual, and the court is obliged to act under the Constitution ..., so if it provided the defence with the recordings concerning other individuals ... that would amount to breach of the above-cited provision of the Constitution ...”
As to the applicant’s plea of entrapment, the Zagreb County Court noted:
“... This panel finds that [the evidence obtained by the use of informants] is not unlawful evidence because it was obtained on the basis of an investigating judge’s orders. The substance of the adduced evidence and the examined recordings do not show that there was incitement by the informant ... as was further demonstrated.”
With regard to the charges against the applicant and the evidence obtained by the use of informants, the Zagreb County Court extensively examined the secret surveillance recordings. It in particular analysed the recordings concerning a meeting on 3 April 2007 where the applicant had indicated to J.K. that a deposit should be made with regard to the investment and where he had also assured J.K. that the project would pass the procedure. During the conversation the applicant had explained to J.K. that it was usual to remunerate for lobbying and he had further stated the following:
“However, for [the investor], these [things], this information, this access and the [action] which will be taken while the project is [in the pipeline] – for this lobbying ... that is worth ... what I told you the last time. And he can do it, that is fifty thousand euros ... for them that is for a drink, for this company ... That is three or four [glasses of] wine compared to [our other possibilities]. So that’s that and then, then we can make a deposit as you said. After that, if the decision goes through something ... is to be given to me, that is, for him... let’s say one hundred thousand euros more or less when the whole thing goes through. Because on an investment of twenty-two million euros to give one hundred thousand ... for him that would not be even 2% ... I would be overly modest if that would be so, you understand [sic].”
The applicant challenged the first-instance judgment by lodging an appeal with the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske). He contended that he had been entrapped and unlawfully and unjustifiably placed under secret surveillance. He pointed out in particular that the secret surveillance orders had not been properly reasoned and had been issued under the Code of Criminal Procedure and not the Office for the Suppression of Corruption and Organised Crime Act (hereinafter “the OSCOC Act”). He also complained that the relevant evidence had not been disclosed to the defence, and that the first-instance court had erred in the legal qualification of his position as falling under the term “public official” under Article 89 § 3 of the Criminal Code.
On 17 February 2010 the Supreme Court quashed the first-instance judgment in respect of the charges of bribery of the President of the Fund related to M.M.’s investment project in the Zadar region and ordered a retrial. At the same time, it upheld the applicant’s conviction on charges of bribe-taking under Article 347 § 1 of the Criminal Code and abuse of power and authority under Article 337 § 4 of the Criminal Code.
As to the applicant’s complaint concerning the unlawfulness of the secret surveillance measures, the Supreme Court noted:
“The first complaint to the effect that the results of the special investigative measures are unlawfully obtained evidence because the investigating judge’s orders were made under the Code of Criminal Procedure and not the [OSCOC Act] is ill-founded.
It is true that the [OSCOC Act] is lex specialis, but the appellants failed to observe that section 41(1) of that Act provides that the investigating judge may order, ‘save for the measures under Article 180 of the Code of Criminal Procedure’, two additional measures which are not provided under the Code of Criminal Procedure, namely the use of simulated business services and simulated business contracts. The special investigative measures ... applied in the case at issue are not provided for under the [OSCOC Act] and therefore the [investigating judge’s] orders could have been based only on the Code of Criminal Procedure. Had the investigating judge authorised any of the measures provided for in section 41(1) of the [OSCOC Act], he would have been obliged to rely on that Act.
...
The further arguments that the results of the special investigative measures are unlawfully obtained evidence because the investigating judge, when making the orders, around thirty of them, failed to comply with the requirements set out in the case-law of the Constitutional Court [no. U-III-857/2008] to the effect that the orders must be sufficiently reasoned, are also ill-founded ...
...
This court considers that mere flaws in the reasoning of the secret surveillance orders do not make the results of such measures unlawfully obtained evidence. This is because Article 9 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that unlawfully obtained evidence is evidence which has been obtained in breach of the Code of Criminal Procedure, and is expressly provided for by the [Code of Criminal Procedure].
Article 182 § 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that evidence obtained by the use of secret surveillance, under Article 180 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, cannot be used as evidence in criminal proceedings only [in a case where] it is unlawful. That is to say, evidence which is obtained without a warrant issued by the investigating judge, or if the [police] acted contrary to Articles 180 and 182 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, but [this does not concern] the evidence obtained contrary to Article 182 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which provides that the order [authorising special investigative measures] should, inter alia, refer to the facts which warrant the application of such measures, specifically that there is a reasonable suspicion that an individual has committed a criminal offence and that the investigation could not have been carried out by other means or that [to do so] would have been extremely difficult.
Article 182 § 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is compatible with the legal nature of [special investigation] orders. Such orders [made by the investigating judge] are transmitted to the State Attorney, who is authorised to request them, and they are executed by the police. There is no legal avenue [to challenge] such orders since the [State Attorney] has no legal interest in challenging them. The police were therefore, moreover, not allowed to challenge the orders. If the argument of the appellants that secret surveillance orders would be unlawful when they are not sufficiently reasoned were to be accepted, it would call into doubt the [use of] secret surveillance measures, particularly in situations where all other legal conditions had been met but the order was merely not sufficiently reasoned, which would be absolutely unacceptable.”
As to the applicant’s plea of entrapment, the Supreme Court held:
“The complaints ... that the informants J.K. and M.M. had incited the accused were raised by all the accused during the first-instance proceedings, and the [first-instance] court correctly found that [this claim] was not clear from the reviewed material. The same complaints are now raised by the accused, Matanović, P. and Pa., and this court considers that their complaints are ill-founded.
The witnesses M.M. and J.K. testified that they had become informants after certain accused asked them for bribes [for carrying out the investment]. [M.]M. consented to act as an informant on 2 March and J.K. on 3 April 2007. After that the activity of gathering evidence commenced.
...
The offence of bribe-taking, which is the subject matter of these proceedings, is committed [just] by making a request for a gift or benefit, and since the witnesses contacted the State Attorney after they had been asked to make a payment to the accused ... the plea of incitement cannot be accepted.”
With respect to the complaint about the non-disclosure of evidence, the Supreme Court noted:
“The argument that the rights of the defence were violated by the non-disclosure of 515 CD and 177 DVD recordings, which were the result of the secret surveillance operation, cannot be accepted ...
...
It is undisputed that at the hearing held on 11 December 2008 the trial court established the exact number of recordings and found that 212 CD and twenty-seven DVD recordings had been submitted with the indictment, while it was found that the [special investigation] case file contained a further ninety-eight CD recordings concerning the secret surveillance of other persons who are not accused in the proceedings at issue. It is also not disputed that the State Attorney asked that eighteen CD and twenty-three DVD recordings be examined as evidence, and that the telecommunications expert made transcripts of these recordings, which were then forwarded to the parties. It is further undisputed that the recordings were reviewed at a hearing, that the accused and their lawyers were present, and that they made their objections concerning the transcripts and not concerning the recordings. It is to be noted that the transcripts are not evidence on which a conviction can be based but are only of auxiliary technical assistance. The only evidence on which a conviction can be based is the recordings, in respect of which no objections were made.
Therefore, the defence had access to all the evidence from the secret surveillance, and the trial court allowed them to comment on the evidence adduced and they exercised that right.
The trial court rightly held that, given that the defence had been informed of the substance of the evidence adduced, they had no right to have the other material which did not concern the accused in the proceedings at issue disclosed. The trial court also rightly pointed to the provision of section 42(7) of the OSCOC Act, which provides that the material obtained by the use of secret surveillance shall be destroyed if, within the six-month time-limit, criminal proceedings have not been instituted against the persons under surveillance ...
Whether the State Attorney, when he was making his selection of the secret surveillance material [to be submitted to the court], excluded certain evidence in favour of the accused ... is of no relevance to the lawfulness of the proceedings at issue. Under the relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure the State Attorney adduces only relevant evidence concerning the substance of the charges, and therefore he is in a position to make a selection of the evidence.”
As regards the applicant’s complaint of the erroneous legal qualification of his position, the Supreme Court noted that the applicant’s position in the Fund had not been one of a “public official” but rather of a “responsible person” under Article 89 §§ 6 and 7 of the Criminal Code. However, in the Supreme Court’s view, this did not render the conviction unlawful. In this connection the Supreme Court explained:
“... [T]he omission at issue had no bearing on the legal qualification of the offence because the criminal offence under Articles 347 § 1 and 337 § 4 of the Criminal Code can be committed by public officials and responsible persons when they take the actions for which the court found ... Matanović guilty ...”
On 20 April 2010 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske) reiterating his arguments of entrapment, the unlawfulness of the secret surveillance orders, the lack of access to evidence and the erroneous legal qualification of his conviction. He relied, inter alia, on Articles 29 § 1, 31, 35 and 36 of the Constitution and Articles 6 §§ 1 and 3 (b) and 8 of the Convention. The applicant also complained that the statements of various public officials breached of his right to the presumption of innocence.
On 30 June 2011 the Constitutional Court, relying on the Court’s case-law in Peša v. Croatia (no. 40523/08, 8 April 2010) found a violation of the applicant’s right to the presumption of innocence but dismissed his other complaints, endorsing the findings and reasoning of the Supreme Court.
Meanwhile, on 19 September 2011, following a retrial in respect of the charges of bribery of the President of the Fund related to M.M.’s investment project in the Zadar region (see paragraph 70 above), the Zagreb County Court acquitted the applicant, and this judgment was confirmed by the Supreme Court on 18 January 2012.
On 1 June 2012 the applicant, represented by I.F., a lawyer, lodged an application for the reopening of the proceedings before the Zagreb County Court. He relied, in particular, on a document allegedly issued by the Ministry of the Interior (Ministarstvo unutarnjih poslova Republike Hrvatske) on 3 March 1993 indicating that J.K. had worked as a police officer in the period between 1974 and 1993. Together with the document in question the applicant submitted a written statement by A.P., a lawyer, indicating that the document had been “accidently” left in her office by M.M. some time in May 2007. The applicant contended that this shed light on the actions of J.K., who had acted as an agent provocateur in his case.
On 24 January 2014 the Zagreb County Court dismissed the applicant’s application for the reopening of the proceedings on the grounds that, even if the document submitted by the applicant suggested that J.K. had worked as a police officer, there was no doubt that he had not been a police officer at the moment when he had acted as an informant in the applicant’s case. The Zagreb County Court also considered that there were no new relevant facts warranting the reopening of the proceedings.
The applicant appealed against the above decision to the Supreme Court on 13 February 2014; it appears that the proceedings are still pending.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 56/1990, 135/1997, 8/1998, 113/2000, 124/2000, 28/2001, 41/2001, 55/2001, 76/2010, 85/2010 and 5/2014) read as follows:
“In the determination of his or her rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him or her, everyone is entitled to a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law.”
“(1) No one shall be punished for an act which, before it was committed, was not defined as a criminal offence by a statute or international law ...”
“Everyone has a right to respect for and legal protection of his private and family life, dignity, reputation and honour.”
“Freedom and confidentiality of correspondence and all other forms of communication are guaranteed and inviolable.
Only the law may provide for restrictions necessary for the protection of national security or the conduct of criminal proceedings.”
The relevant provisions of the Criminal Code (Kazneni zakon, Official Gazette nos. 110/1997, 129/2000, 51/2001 and 105/2004) read as follows:
“...
(3) A public official, when referred to as the perpetrator of a criminal offence, is an official elected or nominated to a representative body, a civil servant or a person performing official duties in bodies of the state administration, local self-government and administration, a unit of local self-government, the judiciary, ... the Ombudsman’s Office ... the Office of the President of the Republic, or a body, an office or an expert agency of the Government of the Republic of Croatia and the Parliament, a judicial official, a judge of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Croatia, the State Attorney of the Republic of Croatia and his or her deputies, the ombudsman of the Republic of Croatia and his or her deputies ... or a notary public. ...
(7) A responsible person, as referred to in this Code, is a person who is entrusted with particular tasks from the field of activities of a legal entity, a government body, a body of local self-government and administration or a local self-government body.”
“(1) A public official or responsible person who, in order to acquire for himself or herself or another any non-pecuniary gain, or who, in order to cause damage to another, uses his or her position of power, oversteps his or her authority or fails in his or her duties, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment of up to three years.
...
(4) If considerable pecuniary gain is acquired as a result of the criminal offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article and the perpetrator acted with intent to acquire such gain, or if [the offence] resulted in large-scale damage, he or she shall be punished by a term of imprisonment of one to ten years.”
(1) A public official or responsible person who solicits or accepts a gift or some other gain for himself or for another natural person or legal entity, or who accepts a promise to be given a gift or some other gain in order to perform within the scope of his or her authority an official or other act which he or she should not perform, or to omit an official or other act which he or she should perform, shall be punished by a prison term of six months to five years.”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Zakon o kaznenom postupku, Official Gazette nos. 110/1997, 27/1998, 58/1999, 112/1999, 58/2002, 143/2002 and 62/2003), as applicable at the relevant time, concerning the use of special investigative measures in criminal proceedings in general and with regard to secret surveillance in particular are set out in the case of Dragojević v. Croatia (no. 68955/11, § 55, 15 January 2015).
Article 180 § 1(4) and (5) of the Code of Criminal Procedure provided for the use of undercover agents and informants and simulated purchase as special investigative measures. Paragraph 5 of the same Article further provided that the use of undercover agents and informants and simulated purchase should not lead to incitement to commit an offence. Acting contrary to this provision would render unlawful and lead to the exclusion of evidence under Articles 9 and 182 § 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Under Article 181 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure the use of special investigative measures was allowed with regard to the offences of abuse of power and authority, bribe-taking and offering bribes.
The Code of Criminal Procedure also provided in its Article 182 § 2 that the results of special investigative measures must be destroyed under the supervision of an investigating judge if the prosecutor dropped the charges against a defendant, or if the results were otherwise not relevant for the criminal proceedings.
Articles 8 and 68 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provided:
“(1) The court and other State bodies participating in the criminal proceedings shall examine and establish with equal care the facts against the accused and those in his or her favour ...”
“Following the request of the competent prosecutor for the institution of criminal proceedings or after the investigating judge, before the adoption of the decision on the opening of an investigation, has taken certain investigative actions, the defence lawyer has the right to examine the case file and the obtained material which serves for the establishment of facts [in the proceedings].”
The relevant part of Article 155 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provided:
“(1) Anyone, in whose justified interest it is, can be allowed to inspect, transcribe or copy the relevant criminal case files.
...
(5) The accused has the right to inspect, transcribe and copy files and objects which serve for the establishment of facts in the proceedings.”
On 18 December 2008 a new Code of Criminal Procedure was enacted (Official Gazette, nos. 152/2008, with further amendments). Part of it came into force in July 2009 and it was fully applicable on 1 September 2011. However, it did not apply to criminal proceedings instituted under the 1997 Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraphs 83-88 above), for which that Code remained applicable.
Article 338 of the 2008 Code of Criminal Procedure provides that the original recordings and the relevant documentation concerning the use of special investigative measures shall be kept by the State Attorney’s Office. Upon a request of the State Attorney’s Office, the investigating judge, with the assistance of an expert, shall examine and identify the part of the original recordings relevant for the case at issue. Upon the request of a defendant, the investigating judge shall allow him or her to inspect the recordings or the documentation and the defendant then has the right to ask during the trial that certain parts of the recordings or documentation be examined.
The Office for the Suppression of Corruption and Organised Crime Act (the “OSCOC Act”, Official Gazette nos. 88/2001, 12/2002, 33/2005, 48/2005 and 76/2007), as applicable at the relevant time, in its section 41 referred back to the relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure and provided for two additional special investigative measures: simulation of business services and simulation of business contracts. The OSCOC Act also provided for a somewhat different procedure for the supervision of execution of secret surveillance orders. In particular, the police were required to submit daily reports to the investigating judge concerning the course of the investigation.
Section 42(7) of the OSCOC Act provided that if within six months of the termination of the secret surveillance operation criminal proceedings had not been instituted against the individual under surveillance, all the material gathered must be destroyed.
The relevant practice concerning the use of special investigative measures in criminal proceedings in general and with regard to secret surveillance in particular is set out in the Dragojević case (cited above, §§ 57-60).
In its decision no. I Kž-529/04-3 of 24 June 2004 the Supreme Court explained the scope of the admissibility of evidence obtained by the use of undercover agents in the investigation of crime. The relevant part of the decision reads:
“... The results of the use of [special investigative] measures have evidentiary value only if that is expressly provided under the law, and even then, just like any other evidence, they must be compatible with the rules [on the admissibility of evidence set out in] Article 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.”
The Supreme Court’s case-law on entrapment, set out, for instance, in the judgment I Kž-429/03-7 of 2 September 2003, was further elaborated upon in a case concerning a repeated application of simulated purchase operations (see judgment I Kž 37/02-7, 23 November 2005). The relevant part of the judgment reads:
“The first-instance court correctly found that the undercover agent, owing to the specificity of his assignment, had needed to gain the confidence of G.S., the accused, and for that he had needed some time. This is obvious from the fact that from the moment the use of special investigative measures commenced until their termination, the communications and meetings between ... G.S. and the undercover agent intensified.
Simulated purchase requires that an undercover agent first declare himself or herself a buyer of a particular type and quantity of drugs; it also requires an agreement on the price. This can never be understood as an incitement to an offence ...
Incitement, within the meaning of Article 180 § 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, would have occurred only if the undercover agent, before ... G.S. had made a decision to procure and sell the drugs together with other co-perpetrators of the offence, had repeatedly encouraged [the accused] to commit an offence (or bolstered such an initial decision [which the accused] had made), which was not the situation in the present case ...”
The relevant case-law of the Constitutional Court on pleas of entrapment (U-III-1393/2007, 2 June 2010) reads as follows:
“... [T]he Constitutional Court points out that the legitimate power and duty of the State, particularly in the early stages of the proceedings, is to use different investigative methods related to the nature of the particular criminal offence that is being investigated. This in particular concerns serious criminal offences which are difficult to detect such as the abuse of drugs, money laundering, illicit trafficking in arms or human beings, property crime, corruption, economic crime and other forms of organised crime. One such investigative method is the use of undercover agents under Article 180 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The precondition for their use, the competency for their authorisation and supervision, as well as the duration [of their use], and the assessment of the results for the purpose of their use [in the proceedings] is set out in detail in that law ...
[In the case at issue] the evidence clearly shows, as the lower courts correctly established, that the statement of the undercover agent, according to which the appellant would be paid a certain sum of money for the delivered drugs, could not be considered – either objectively or subjectively – as incitement under Article 37 of the Criminal Code because [such an] invitatio ad offerendum was only a general, abstract expression of the readiness of the undercover agent to pay a certain sum of money for the delivered drugs, after which the appellant voluntarily continued communicating with him so as to draw personal benefit from the abstract readiness of the “buyer” [to buy the drugs].
The statement of the undercover agent in the case at issue was not therefore a conditio sine qua non for the appellant’s criminal activity, that is to say an action which otherwise he would not have undertaken. On the contrary, the first-instance court and the Supreme Court found that, even without [the undercover agent’s statement] he had been predisposed to commit the offence for which he had been convicted (‘... predisposed to commit offence ...’, the ECHR judgment of 9 April 1998 in the case of Teixeira de Castro v. Portugal, § 38). ...”
On 28 January 2009, in case no. U-III-5423/2008, the Constitutional Court examined a constitutional complaint by one of the applicant’s co-accused, R.P., concerning the lack of impartiality of a Supreme Court judge who had previously participated in the proceedings at issue by taking certain actions as a judge of the Zagreb County Court. When finding a violation of the appellant’s right to a fair trial in this respect, the Constitutional Court noted the following:
“6.2 ... In addition, [Z.K.] has examined a written application by the appellant’s defence lawyer to allow her access to and to copy the [material] gathered by the use of special investigative measures in order for her to be able to prepare the defence. However, contrary to Article 68 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which guarantees to a defence lawyer the right to have access to and [the possibility] to obtain the evidence immediately at the beginning of the criminal proceedings, he did not allow that application but rather [archived until further notice], that is to say, he adjourned his decision for a future undetermined moment in the proceedings ...”
The relevant international material on special investigative measures is set out in the case of Ramanauskas v. Lithuania [GC], no. 74420/01, §§ 35-37, ECHR 2008. See also Dragojević, cited above, §§ 62-66.
A comparative law study on the use of undercover agents in covert operations in the Council of Europe Member States is outlined in the case of Veselov and Others v. Russia, nos. 23200/10, 24009/07 and 556/10, §§ 50-63, 2 October 2012).