The case originated in an application (no. 28847/08) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Nebojša Gladović (“the applicant”), on 8 April 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr Z. Novaković, a lawyer practising in . The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
On 12 March 2010 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1957 and is currently serving a prison term in Lepoglava State Prison.
On 26 January 2007 the applicant was placed in pre-trial detention in Split Prison in connection with an investigation into suspected drug possession.
A psychiatric report of 15 February 2007, commissioned for the purposes of the criminal proceedings against the applicant before the Split County Court, indicates that the applicant was a long-term drug addict and that this, together with his long stays in prison, his way of life and behavioural patterns, manifested in inappropriate responses to various personal and social circumstances. He showed signs of a personality disorder with emotional distance, paranoid elements and histrionic disorder. Long-term drug abuse had caused some organic changes together with altered perception, concentration, thought processes and behaviour. Intense therapy was recommended.
After the investigation was complete, a bill of indictment was filed by the Split County State Attorney’s Office on 2 March 2007 and the criminal trial began before the Split County Court.
The Government submitted that the applicant had been identified as a difficult prisoner and had caused several incidents such as disturbing mass in the prison chapel on 11 March 2007; shouting through the window of his cell during the night of 26 March 2007; and kicking the door of his cell on 28 March 2007.
On 29 March 2007 two prison guards, Z.V. and F.K., each drew up a report on the use of force on the applicant.
The report drawn up by Z.V. reads:
“On 29 March 2007 at 8.20 a.m. when I was doing my round of the prisoners’ cell no. 29 I heard four or five strong blows of a bench against the door of cell no. 44. After that the Head of the Second Ward, F.K., in the presence of J.Č. and me, opened the cell door. The detainee Nebojša Gladović was shouting and threw himself at F.K. F.K. attempted to resist him with physical force but [the detainee] ignored his order to stop resisting, after which I used a rubber truncheon twice on his left arm. The detainee stopped resisting and I stopped using force. F.K. put him in an elbow lock and took him to the isolation cell no. 14. After a detailed search of him we tied him up to ensure order and security.”
The report drawn up by F.K. reads:
“On 29 March 2007 at 8.20 a.m. detainee Nebojša Gladović threw a metal bench against the cell door four or five times while shouting: ‘I want to make a telephone call’. I opened the cell door in the presence of Z.V. and apprentice J.Č. and the detainee started to walk towards me while shouting and moving his hands. I tried to calm him by using physical force and ordering him to stop resisting. He ignored my order and [F.]V. used a rubber truncheon twice on his left arm. The detainee then stopped resisting and the use of force also stopped. I put him in an elbow lock and took him to the isolation cell no. 14 where, together with [F.]V., I carried out a detailed search of the detainee and then tied him up to ensure order and security. The Head of the Ward, Ž.R., was informed of everything.”
On 30 March 2007 the Head of the Security Ward, Z.R., drew up a report for the prison governor, the relevant part of which reads:
“... During his time in detention, detainee Nebojša Gladović ... has consistently behaved improperly towards the prison personnel, and in the past few days he has regularly breached prison rules by shouting during the night and day in his cell and through the cell window, and even verbally insulting the officers. Warnings and conversations with the detainee have not led to any lasting results.
On 29 March 2007 at 8.20 a.m. detainee Nebojša Gladović, in cell no. 44, where he was together with three other detainees, started to shout: ‘I want to make a telephone call’. Immediately after that he threw a wooden bench four or five times hard against the cell door. The officers on duty, F.K. and Z.V., together with apprentice J.Č., opened the cell [door]. Detainee Gladović then threw himself at the officers who firstly tried to calm him by physical force, but without success, and then, with the others holding him, Z.V. correctly used a rubber truncheon to hit the detainee twice on his arm, after which the active resistance of the detainee stopped. Then F.K. put him in an elbow lock, which was justified, and took him to the isolation cell, where he was handcuffed to ensure order and security until 5.40 p.m. ... when the detainee was returned to his cell.
After this event the detainee was seen by the prison doctor.
Detainee Nebojša Gladović refused to give his statement about this incident and said that he would complain to a court about the way the officers had treated him.”
The applicant was seen by the prison doctor on 29 and 30 March 2007. The medical report of 29 March 2007 indicates that the applicant complained of pain in his shoulder. No sign of injury was found. The medical report of 30 March 2007 shows that the applicant had a violet-coloured haematoma on his left arm measuring 10 x 20 centimetres.
On 30 March 2007 the prison governor filed a report with the Head Prison Administration in  about the use of force against the applicant on 29 March 2007. She stated that that day at 8.20 a.m. the applicant, placed in cell no. 44, had started to shout, protesting against a decision refusing his request to use the telephone that day. Then he had thrown a metal bench against the cell door several times. When three guards, F.K, Z.V. and J.Č., had entered the cell the applicant had thrown himself at them. The attempt of F.K. to gain control over the applicant by physical force had failed and Z.V. used a rubber truncheon to hit the applicant twice on his left arm. When the applicant had stopped resisting, the guards had put him in an elbow lock and handcuffed him. He had remained handcuffed until 5.40 p.m. the same day when he had been returned to his cell.
In view of the prison governor, the force used against the applicant had been justified.
This report relied on the above-cited reports by the prison guards concerned.
In his complaint submitted on 2 April 2007 to the judge conducting the criminal trial against him in the , the applicant alleged, inter alia, that on the previous morning six to seven prison guards had hit him with rubber truncheons when he had been lying on the floor.
On the same day a request for the institution of disciplinary proceedings against the applicant was lodged by the governor of Split Prison with the judge conducting the criminal trial against the applicant in the Split County Court. The request was in connection with several incidents, including the one of 29 March 2007. It was alleged that that day at 8.20 a.m. the applicant had shouted and hit the cell door with a metal bench. When the guards had entered the cell the applicant had attempted to attack them and even after they had gained control over him by using force, he had continued to verbally insult them. The request was accompanied by the reports mentioned in the previous paragraph.
On 13 April 2007 the judge found the applicant guilty of, inter alia, “disturbing the House order on 29 March 2007 at about 8.20 a.m. in cell no. 44 where he had been placed by shouting and hitting the metal bench against the cell door and, after the prison guards had entered the cell, by attempting to attack them, and after physical force and security measures had been used against him, by continuing to verbally insult the prison guards” which amounted to “improper behaviour towards State officials, attempting to physically attack State officials and insulting State officials”. This decision was based on the reports by the prison personnel and the applicant’s written statement of 2 April 2007. The relevant part of the reasoning reads:
“... the reports by the officials ... F.K. and Z.V. and the written statement of the defendant Nebojša Gladović were submitted.
On the basis of the case file and the said statements ... this court finds that the defendant Nebojša Gladović acted exactly as stated in the operative part of this decision.
This court has accepted the above-cited reports of the officials as the truth because they describe the events in detail and logically, and on the assessment of these, [this court] finds that the defendant, on ... 29 March [2007], disturbed House order by shouting and hitting a metal bench against the cell door and then also verbally insulting the prison guards ...
As to the statements of the defendant Nebojša Gladović, this court does not find them truthful and considers that in his written submissions he, at least in the part where he describes the events in question, is trying to avoid his disciplinary liability while the remaining part of his statement is illogical and unconvincing, making allegations which have no connection with the case in issue.
...”
The relevant part of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Official Gazette nos. 62/2003 – Zakon o kaznenom postupku) provides as follows:
Article 2
“...
(3) Where not otherwise provided by law, the State Attorney shall bring a criminal prosecution where there is a founded suspicion that an identified individual has committed a criminal offence liable to official prosecution and where there are no statutory obstacles for prosecution of that person.”
Article 171
“(1) All State bodies and all legal entities are obliged to report criminal offences liable to official prosecution, whether they have been informed thereof or have learned about such offences on their own.
...”
Article 173
“(1) A criminal complaint shall be lodged with a competent State Attorney in writing or orally.
...
(3) Where a criminal complaint has been lodged with a court, a police force or a State Attorney lacking competence, they shall receive the complaint and immediately forward it to the competent State Attorney.”