The case originated in an application (no. 40559/12) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Italian national, Mr Giuseppe Tilocca (“the applicant”), on 25 May 2012.
The applicant was represented before the Court by Mr D.S. Janković and Mr H. Grenac of Abel & Grenac Law Firm, advocates practising in Zagreb. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
On 19 May 2015 the complaint concerning the right of property was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government of Italy did not make use of their right to intervene in the proceedings (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention).
The applicant was born in 1963 and currently lives in Alexandria (Egypt).
On 15 February 2010, while crossing the border between Serbia and Croatia with his wife, the applicant was caught by the Croatian customs authorities carrying the sum of 563,300 euros (EUR) which he had failed to declare, contrary to the law. The customs authorities immediately seized the EUR 560,000.
On the same day the customs authorities instituted administrativeoffence proceedings (prekršajni postupak) against the applicant before the Financial Inspectorate of the Ministry of Finance (Ministarstvo financija, Financijski inspektorat – “the Ministry”) for failing to declare EUR 560,000 – a sum exceeding EUR 10,000 – an administrative offence defined in section 40(1) of the Foreign Currency Act and section 74 of the Prevention of Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism Act.
In his defence, the applicant explained that he and his wife had been visiting her daughter in Serbia who had recently had a serious attack of epilepsy, and submitted documentary evidence suggesting that his wife’s daughter did indeed suffer from epilepsy. The money he had been carrying originated from: (a) a company called SCI (société civile immobilière) M. registered in France, of which he was the director and the only member, from whose account he had withdrawn EUR 326,008.03 with a view to starting another business; and (b) the sale of their house in France (the remaining amount). The applicant submitted relevant documents as evidence of those transactions. He also explained that he had not wished to deposit the money in a bank account because, in the wake of the global financial crisis of 2007-2008, he had been afraid that his bank would go bankrupt and that he would lose most of that money, given that the French State only guaranteed up to EUR 50,000 of bank deposits.
During the proceedings the Ministry requested information from the relevant authorities in Serbia, France and Italy. While the Italian authorities did not reply at all, the Serbian authorities informed the Ministry that neither the applicant nor his wife had been recorded in their register of suspicious transactions, and the French authorities only confirmed the authenticity of the transactions on which the applicant relied to prove the origin of the money he had been carrying.
By a decision of 9 July 2010 the Ministry found the applicant guilty of having committed the administrative offence in question and fined him 5,000 Croatian kunas (HRK). At the same time, the Ministry imposed a protective measure (zaštitna mjera) confiscating EUR 318,500 under section 69(2) of the Foreign Currency Act.
On the basis of the documentary evidence, the Ministry established that: (a)  the company SCI M. had been founded in 2002 and recorded in the business and companies register in Strasbourg, and under French law its members were liable for its debts in proportion with their share in the company, that is, the applicant in respect of 99.75% and his wife in respect of 0.25%; (b)  on 6 July 2009 the applicant had indeed sold his house in France, and EUR 243,091.82 from the proceeds of sale had been paid into his bank account on 29 July 2009, from which he had first transferred EUR 30,000 to his company’s account on the same day and then withdrawn EUR 211,500; and (c)  on 21 December 2009 the applicant, acting as the company’s director, had sold its real estate, and EUR 326,008.03 from the proceeds of sale had been paid into the company’s bank account on 19 January 2010, a sum which had been withdrawn by the applicant the next day.
The Ministry held that the origin of the money which the applicant had failed to declare was irrelevant in relation to the commission of the offence of which he had been convicted or the imposition of the fine. However, that consideration was relevant in relation to the imposition of the protective measure of confiscation.
In particular, the Ministry decided not to confiscate EUR 241,500 of the money which the applicant had not declared, because it found that this sum did indeed originate from the sale of his house in France.
As regards the remaining EUR 318,500 (of the EUR 560,000 which had been seized), the Ministry held that this sum was part of the funds which the applicant had withdrawn from his company’s bank account (EUR 326,008.03) on 20 January 2010 (see paragraph 11 above). The Ministry further held that: (a)  since there was no evidence that the applicant had borrowed that money from his company, by carrying it across border he had disposed of it as if it had belonged to him, which amounted to misappropriation of the company’s funds, an offence punishable in every country; and (b)  he had failed to pay the relevant taxes in France on that amount. It therefore decided to confiscate that sum.
The applicant appealed by arguing that: (a)  the evidence collected indicated that the French authorities had been aware of the transaction from which the confiscated sum originated, but had done nothing about it, which suggested that they considered that it originated from a legitimate source, (b)  the Ministry correctly assumed that he had not borrowed the confiscated sum from his company, as he had actually lent EUR 358,600.81 to his company in 2008 and 2009, for which he had submitted documentary evidence; (c)  under French law, he was fully liable for the debts of his company, the payment of which, including taxes, he therefore could not have avoided by misappropriating the company’s funds as the Ministry implied; (d)  the Ministry had attempted to interpret foreign (French) law, and in such a complex area as tax and commercial law, about which it had known very little; and (e)  it was peculiar that the Ministry had confiscated for the benefit of the Croatian State budget the amount on which he had, in the Ministry’s own view, not paid the relevant taxes in France.
By a decision of 17 September 2010 the High Court for Administrative Offences (Visoki prekršajni sud Republike Hrvatske) dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the Ministry’s decision, endorsing the reasons given therein.
The applicant then, on 17 December 2010, lodged a constitutional complaint, alleging, inter alia, a violation of his constitutionally protected right of ownership.
By a decision of 17 November 2011 the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske) declared the applicant’s constitutional complaint inadmissible and served its decision on his representative on 2 December 2012. It found that, even though the applicant had relied on the relevant Articles of the Constitution in his constitutional complaint, he had not substantiated his complaint by any constitutional-law arguments, but had merely repeated the arguments raised in the proceedings before the Ministry and the High Court for Administrative Offences. Therefore, the Constitutional Court had been unable to examine the merits of his constitutional complaint.
The relevant domestic and international law and practice is summarised in the case of Boljević v. Croatia, no. 43492/11, §§ 16-21, 31 January 2017.
Under French law, a société civile immobilière (SCI) is a civil (noncommercial) company constituted for the ownership and management of real estate (Articles 1845 to 1870-1 of the French Civil Code). It is a legal entity, meaning it has a legal personality distinct from that of its members. The members are, however, liable for the debts of the company without limitation, meaning that they may be liable in relation to their personal assets (Article 1857 of the French Civil Code).