The fourth applicant, Mr Clarke, died in or around June 2003. His fiancée, Ms A. Unwin, has continued the application.
“I have considered the case for legal [representation]. I do not feel there is an issue of seriousness or potential penalty. You are able to conduct your defence. You have access to check original with the prisoners you may call as witness. I do not consider you have been unfairly treated in comparison with the other prisoner so charged. No points of law are in question”.
Mr Pewter
“I write to advise that the victim of the alleged assault will not co-operate with the police investigation and wishes for the matter to be dealt with internally.
In view of the foregoing it is our intention to complete the hearing forthwith. As your client pleaded guilty at the initial hearing I am not prepared to allow him to be legally represented. I have applied the ‘Tarrant’ criteria and am satisfied that he can adequately conduct his own defence and, if necessary, mitigate his actions.”
“I have a letter from your solicitor requesting that you be allowed legal advice. I have considered your request and refuse it on the following grounds.
No points of law are likely to arise.
You can present your own case.
Although the charge is serious it does not require a solicitor to mitigate it.
There are no procedural difficulties.
There is a need for reasonable speed. There has already been a delay.”
“The adjudication detailed above has been reviewed and it has now been decided that the finding of guilt should be quashed on the grounds that the adjudicator should have offered Mr. Clarke a limited opportunity to consult with his solicitors. Although Mr. Clarke did not apply for legal advice or assistance at the original hearing on 6 September he should have been given the opportunity to discuss matters with his solicitor, possibly by telephone to arrange for a meeting the next day, and given a deadline for obtaining the advice he sought. A time limit could have been set to ensure that the prisoner did not delay the hearing unnecessarily. In view of the urgency of this case, please arrange for Mr. Clarke to be released immediately as this decision means that he is serving added days now.”
RELEVANT DOMESTIC LAW AND PRACTICE