The case originated in an application (no. 10109/14) against the Swiss Confederation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Swiss national, Mr Beat Meier (“the applicant”), on 26 January 2014.
The applicant was represented by Mr B. Rambert, a lawyer practising in Zürich. The Swiss Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr F. Schürmann.
In the proceedings before the Court, the applicant alleged, in particular, that the requirement for him to work in prison after he had reached retirement age was in breach of Articles 4 and 14 of the Convention.
On 10 July 2014 the Government were given notice of the application.
The applicant was born in 1946 and is currently in detention in Regensdorf.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
By a judgment of 4 July 2003, the Court of Appeal (Obergericht) of the Canton of Zürich sentenced the applicant to four years and four months’ imprisonment for multiple sexual acts with minors and multiple acts of sexual coercion.
On 1 March 2010 the Court of Appeal suspended the execution of the custodial sentence, replacing it with preventive detention (Verwahrung) designed to prevent the applicant from reoffending.
On 6 December 2011 the applicant requested exemption from the requirement to work in the context of custodial sentences and measures. On 19 March 2012 the Judicial Enforcements Office of the Canton of Zürich refused his request.
By a decision of 29 May 2012, the competent authority of Pöschwies Prison placed the applicant under a stricter prison regime, confining him to his cell, and confiscated his television and computer for fourteen days on account of his refusal to work. That decision was revoked on 31 July 2012 by the Directorate of Justice and Internal Affairs following an appeal by the applicant.
By a decision of 20 June 2012, the Directorate of Justice and Internal Affairs of the Canton of Zürich dismissed an appeal by the applicant against the decision of 19 March 2012.
On 10 January 2013 the Administrative Court of the Canton of Zürich dismissed an appeal by the applicant against the decision of 20 June 2012.
On 15 February 2013 the applicant appealed to the Federal Court, arguing in particular that Articles 74, 75 and 81 of the Criminal Code had been wrongly applied, and alleging a violation of his human dignity and personal freedom within the meaning of Articles 7 and 10 respectively of the Federal Constitution (see paragraphs 15-17 below).
In judgment 6B_182/2013 of 18 July 2013 (ATF 139 I 180), which was notified to the applicant on 31 July 2013, the Federal Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal.
The Federal Court found that the requirement for prisoners to work was not in itself in breach of human rights, and specifically of Article 4 of the Convention (point 1.5 of the reasoning).
Hence, the purpose of compulsory work in the context of the execution of custodial sentences and measures was to develop, maintain or promote prisoners’ capacity to resume working life after their release. In the Federal Court’s view, the requirement to work contributed to the execution of sentences and fostered appropriate social behaviour and the capacity to avoid reoffending. It was also designed to occupy prisoners, give structure to their daily lives and maintain order in the institution (point 1.6).
The Federal Court added that, as prisoners got older, greater emphasis was placed on the obligation to provide them with the necessary support (necessary-support principle) and on reducing the negative impact of detention (principle of least possible harm). In the case of prisoners over the age of 65, the requirement to work served the purpose of avoiding the harmful effects of detention, for instance the isolation of persons who had reached retirement age, and preventing mental and physical deterioration. The work had to be tailored to the prisoner’s abilities, training and interests, and it was therefore necessary to avoid placing an excessive burden on prisoners over the age of 65. Lastly, in the case of persons who were less physically and mentally able, the occupation could take the form of therapeutic activity (point 1.6).
The Federal Court further held that the Old-Age and Survivors’ Insurance Act was designed to guarantee a living income to persons who were no longer able to work because of their age. However, work performed in connection with the execution of a custodial sentence or measure was not comparable to an employment contract on the competitive labour market, but rather should be regarded as an occupation within a closed system. The Federal Court therefore held that the rules governing persons of pensionable age did not apply to prisoners (point 1.8).
The Federal Court also found that an occupation carried out on a voluntary basis was not apt to fulfil the aims pursued by the requirement to work in prison (point 2.6.2).
Article 7 of the Federal Constitution guarantees human dignity in the following terms.
“Human dignity must be respected and protected.”
Article 10 of the Constitution enshrines the right to life and to individual freedom.
“Every human being shall have the right to life. The death penalty shall be prohibited.
Every human being shall have the right to individual freedom, and in particular the right to physical and mental integrity and freedom of movement.
Torture and all other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment shall be prohibited.”
The Swiss Criminal Code of 21 December 1937 defines as follows the principles governing the execution of custodial sentences and measures.
“Prisoners and persons subject to custodial measures shall be entitled to respect for their dignity. The exercise of their rights may be restricted only to the extent required by detention and by the requirements of collective living in the institution.”
“1.  The execution of the custodial sentence should improve the prisoner’s social skills, and in particular his or her ability to live in a law-abiding manner. It must correspond as closely as possible to the conditions of normal life, provide the prisoner with the necessary support, combat the adverse effects of detention and make proper allowance for the need to protect the community, the staff and other inmates.
...
The rules of the institution shall provide for a sentence plan to be drawn up with each prisoner. This shall cover, among other elements, the support provided, the possibility of working and receiving training or further training, redress for the damage caused, relationships with the outside world and preparations for release.
Prisoners must participate actively in efforts to promote resocialisation and in preparations for their release.
The specific concerns and needs of each prisoner must be taken into consideration, regard being had to the prisoner’s gender.”
“1.  Prisoners shall be required to work. The work must be matched as closely as possible to prisoners’ abilities, training and interests.
Prisoners who consent to such an arrangement may work for a private employer.”
“...
If the person concerned is fit to work he or she must be prompted to do so, provided that his or her treatment or care within the institution requires or permits it. In such cases, Articles 81 to 83 shall apply by analogy.”
Article 103 of the Order of 6 December 2006 issued by the Canton of Zürich concerning the execution of sentences (Justizvollzugsverordnung) defines the requirement to work as follows:
“Requirement to work ...
1  In the context of the execution of custodial sentences and measures, whether in a closed setting or on conditional release, convicted persons shall be required to perform the work assigned to them. In assigning work account shall be taken, in so far as possible and reasonable, of individuals’ abilities.
...”
A delegation of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) made its most recent visit to Switzerland in October 2011. Among other institutions, the delegation visited Pöschwies, Bochuz and Bostadel Prisons. In its report to the Swiss Federal Council following the visit to those prisons, the CPT found as follows.
In its reply of 10 October 2012, the Swiss Federal Council stated as follows.
The relevant provisions of the International Labour Organization Convention concerning Forced or Compulsory Labour 1930 (no. 29), to which Switzerland is a Party, read as follows.
“1.  Each Member of the International Labour Organisation which ratifies this Convention undertakes to suppress the use of forced or compulsory labour in all its forms within the shortest possible period.
...”
“1.  For the purposes of this Convention the term forced or compulsory labour shall mean all work or service which is exacted from any person under the menace of any penalty and for which the said person has not offered himself voluntarily.
Nevertheless, for the purposes of this Convention, the term forced or compulsory labour shall not include
...
(c)  any work or service exacted from any person as a consequence of a conviction in a court of law, provided that the said work or service is carried out under the supervision and control of a public authority and that the said person is not hired to or placed at the disposal of private individuals, companies or associations;
...”
Recommendation No. R (87) 3 of the Committee of Ministers to the member States on the European Prison Rules is a set of guidelines as to the minimum standards to be applied in prisons. States are encouraged to be guided in legislation and policies by the Rules and to ensure wide dissemination of them to their judicial authorities as well as to prison staff and inmates. They were adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 12 February 1987.
On 11 January 2006 the Committee of Ministers adopted a new version of the European Prison Rules (Recommendation Rec(2006)2 – “the 2006 Rules”), noting that the 1987 European Prison Rules needed to be substantively revised and updated in order to reflect developments in penal policy, sentencing practice and the overall management of prisons in Europe.
Part I of the 2006 Rules enshrines the following basic principles.
Basic principles
“1.  All persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated with respect for their human rights.
Persons deprived of their liberty retain all rights that are not lawfully taken away by the decision sentencing them or remanding them in custody.
Restrictions placed on persons deprived of their liberty shall be the minimum necessary and proportionate to the legitimate objective for which they are imposed.
Prison conditions that infringe prisoners’ human rights are not justified by lack of resources.
Life in prison shall approximate as closely as possible the positive aspects of life in the community.
All detention shall be managed so as to facilitate the reintegration into free society of persons who have been deprived of their liberty.
Co-operation with outside social services and as far as possible the involvement of civil society in prison life shall be encouraged.
Prison staff carry out an important public service and their recruitment, training and conditions of work shall enable them to maintain high standards in their care of prisoners.
All prisons shall be subject to regular government inspection and independent monitoring.
...”
The Commentary on the 2006 Rules makes clear that, in accordance with Rule 2, the loss of the right to liberty should not lead to the assumption that prisoners automatically lose their political, civil, social, economic and cultural rights as well, and that there should be as few restrictions as possible. Any further restrictions should be specified in law and should be instituted only when they are essential for maintaining order, safety and security in prison. The restrictions imposed should not derogate from the 2006 Rules.
The Commentary specifies that Rule 5 emphasises the positive aspects of “normalisation”. It adds that, while life in prison can never be the same as life in a free society, active steps should nevertheless be taken to make conditions in prison as close to normal life as possible and to ensure that this normalisation does not lead to inhumane prison conditions.
Rule 26 deals with prisoners’ work in general.
“Work
1  Prison work shall be approached as a positive element of the prison regime and shall never be used as a punishment.
2  Prison authorities shall strive to provide sufficient work of a useful nature.
3  As far as possible, the work provided shall be such as will maintain or increase prisoners’ ability to earn a living after release.
4  In conformity with Rule 13 there shall be no discrimination on the basis of gender in the type of work provided.
5  Work that encompasses vocational training shall be provided for prisoners able to benefit from it and especially for young prisoners.
6  Prisoners may choose the type of employment in which they wish to participate, within the limits of what is available, proper vocational selection and the requirements of good order and discipline.
7  The organisation and methods of work in the institutions shall resemble as closely as possible those of similar work in the community in order to prepare prisoners for the conditions of normal occupational life.
8  Although the pursuit of financial profit from industries in the institutions can be valuable in raising standards and improving the quality and relevance of training, the interests of the prisoners should not be subordinated to that purpose.
9  Work for prisoners shall be provided by the prison authorities, either on their own or in co-operation with private contractors, inside or outside prison.
10  In all instances there shall be equitable remuneration of the work of prisoners.
11  Prisoners shall be allowed to spend at least a part of their earnings on approved articles for their own use and to allocate a part of their earnings to their families.
12  Prisoners may be encouraged to save part of their earnings, which shall be handed over to them on release or be used for other approved purposes.
13  Health and safety precautions for prisoners shall protect them adequately and shall not be less rigorous than those that apply to workers outside.
14  Provision shall be made to indemnify prisoners against industrial injury, including occupational disease, on terms not less favourable than those extended by national law to workers outside.
15  The maximum daily and weekly working hours of the prisoners shall be fixed in conformity with local rules or custom regulating the employment of free workers.
16  Prisoners shall have at least one rest day a week and sufficient time for education and other activities.
17  As far as possible, prisoners who work shall be included in national social security systems.”
Rule 105 deals more specifically with work by sentenced prisoners:
“Work by sentenced prisoners
1  A systematic programme of work shall seek to contribute to meeting the objective of the regime for sentenced prisoners.
The Commentary points out that Rule 105 reflects the important role that work plays in the regime for sentenced prisoners, and emphasises that it should not in any circumstances be an additional form of punishment. Furthermore, Rule 105 is to be read in conjunction with Rule 26 laying down the general rules on work, and all the safeguards contained in Rule 26 apply to sentenced prisoners as well.
On 22 May 2015 the United Nations Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, meeting in Vienna, adopted a major revision of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, which had been in force for sixty years (UN Doc. E/CN.15/2015/L.6/Rev.1). The amendments were adopted by the General Assembly on 17 December 2015. Rules 96 to 103 concern work by prisoners. The relevant parts read as follows.
“Rule 96
Sentenced prisoners shall have the opportunity to work and/or to actively participate in their rehabilitation, subject to a determination of physical and mental fitness by a physician or other qualified health-care professional.
Sufficient work of a useful nature shall be provided to keep prisoners actively employed for a normal working day.”
“Rule 97
Prison labour must not be of an afflictive nature.
Prisoners shall not be held in slavery or servitude.
No prisoner shall be required to work for the personal or private benefit of any prison staff.”
“Rule 98
So far as possible the work provided shall be such as will maintain or increase the prisoners’ ability to earn an honest living after release.
Vocational training in useful trades shall be provided for prisoners able to profit thereby and especially for young prisoners.
Within the limits compatible with proper vocational selection and with the requirements of institutional administration and discipline, prisoners shall be able to choose the type of work they wish to perform.”
“Rule 99
The organization and methods of work in prisons shall resemble as closely as possible those of similar work outside of prisons, so as to prepare prisoners for the conditions of normal occupational life.
The interests of the prisoners and of their vocational training, however, must not be subordinated to the purpose of making a financial profit from an industry in the prison.”
Comparative law