The case originated in an application (no. 29683/16) against the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Macedonian national, X (“the applicant”), on 23 May 2016. The Vice-President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court). Respecting his self-identification, the Court will refer to his gender as male.
The applicant was represented by Ms N. Boshkova and Mr Cojocariu, lawyers practising in Skopje and Orpington, United Kingdom, respectively. The Macedonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr K. Bogdanov, who was succeeded by their current Agent, Ms D. Djonova.
The applicant, who is transgender, alleged the absence of a legislative framework and an effective remedy for legal gender recognition and the arbitrary and unjustified imposition of a requirement for genital surgery to be undertaken in order to have his sex/gender marker in the official records changed.
On 10 March 2017 the above complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. It was also decided that priority should be granted to the application under Rule 41 of the Rules of Court.
On 6 and 9 June 2015 the non-governmental organisations Alliance Defending Freedom International (ADF) and, jointly, Transgender Europe, the European Region of the International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association (ILGA-Europe), Trans Network Balkan (TNB) and Subversive Front were given leave to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1987 and lives in Skopje.
At birth the applicant was registered as a girl, with a clearly female name. The applicant submitted that from an early age he became aware that he was male rather than female. Not being able to obtain appropriate medical treatment in the respondent State, in 2010 the applicant went to a specialist clinic in Belgrade, where a psychologist and sexologist diagnosed him with “transsexuality”. A medical certificate dated 20 September 2010 included a recommendation that the applicant pursue hormone treatment with a view to eventual genital reassignment surgery. The applicant started taking hormones to increase his testosterone levels.
On 1 June 2011 the applicant applied for a change of his first and family name. In a decision of 7 June 2011 the Ministry of the Interior allowed that application, registering the applicant under a clearly male forename (the applicant also changed his surname). Soon after, it issued the applicant with a new identity card bearing his new name. However, the sex/gender marker and numerical personal code (composed of ten digits, some of which indicate the person’s sex) remained the same, identifying the applicant as a female.
On 5 July 2011 the applicant lodged an application to have the sex/gender marker and the numerical personal code on his birth certificate corrected (корекција) to indicate that he was male. In support of his application he submitted copies of a medical report by a surgeon at the specialist clinic in Belgrade (see paragraph 7 above) and referred to the paper entitled “Human rights and gender identity” of October 2009 issued by the Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe (see paragraph 34 below) and the Yogyakarta Principles on the Application of International Human Rights Law in Relation to Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity.
In a decision of the same date, the Civil Status Registry (“the Registry”) – a body within the Ministry of Justice (“the Ministry”)  dismissed the applicant’s application, stating that “no certificate [has been] issued by a competent authority [attesting to the fact] that [the applicant’s] sex [had] been changed, the application having been corroborated only with a certificate that gender reassignment surgery [was] in preparation, which cannot be regarded as proof that it [would] take place.”
The applicant appealed to the Ministry, alleging that there was no statutory provision that regulated the matter in hand. Sex reassignment surgery was unavailable in the respondent State and unjustified in his case. Furthermore, such a requirement would subject him to unwanted medical treatment and sterilisation, in breach of his rights. He argued that he had already been diagnosed as transsexual, which was sufficient to obtain legal gender recognition. In a decision of 17 October 2011 the Ministry dismissed the appeal, finding that the impugned decision had been based on section 23 of the Civil Status Registration Act (Закон за матичната евиденција) (“the Act”; under the 2016 amendment this provision became section 22(2) – see paragraph 25 below) and that the evidence produced had not been “sufficient and relevant” in respect of the alteration (промена) sought.
In November 2011 the applicant challenged the refusal of the lower administrative authorities to modify his sex/gender marker on the birth certificate before the Administrative Court. He argued that there was no statutory provision proscribing or specifying any conditions for the alteration of a person’s sex/gender marker and personal code.
On 28 February 2013 the Administrative Court quashed the Ministry’s decision. Since the applicant’s request had not been in the case file, the court could not ascertain whether the applicant had sought the rectification or alteration of the sex/gender marker only or also of the personal code, the latter having not been addressed in the impugned decision. It also held that the Ministry should have specified the appropriate evidence required and set a time-limit for the applicant to provide it. Lastly, the court found that the Ministry had neither established the relevant facts nor provided adequate reasons for its decision. In this connection it held that section 23 of the Civil Status Registration Act did not specify any requirement to have the sex/gender marker changed; it only contained an instruction to administrative authorities regarding the evidence to be adduced and assessed in such proceedings.
On 11 June 2013 the applicant underwent a double mastectomy (breast removal) in Belgrade and continued his hormonal therapy.
In the resumed proceedings, the Registry instructed the Forensic Institute (Институт за судска медицина) to examine the applicant. As reported in the Registry’s decision (see paragraph 17 below), on 20 June 2014 the Forensic Institute drew up a report, which stated: “[O]wing to his mastectomy and on-going hormonal therapy, [the applicant] displays male sexual characteristics which affect his everyday life. Although there is no statutory regulation ... and the second genital surgery has not been carried out, [the experts] consider that [the applicant] should be provided with a document attesting to his new sex ...”
The Registry also requested that the Ministry of Health specify the nature of the certificate and the authority competent to attest to the change of the applicant’s sex. In reply, the Ministry of Health stated that the sex alteration procedure was not specified in health-related regulations and suggested that evidence regarding prior medical intervention in respect of the applicant should be taken into consideration.
On 29 December 2014 the Registry, referring to section 23 of the Act, dismissed the applicant’s request for the alteration of the sex/gender marker on the birth register, holding that despite its requests to competent authorities it had not obtained “evidence of an actual change of sex (не прибави доказ со кој ќе утврди фактичка состојба која укажува на промена на полот)”.
The applicant appealed against that decision. On 16 October 2015 the Ministry dismissed the appeal and upheld the decision of the Registry.
On 11 November 2015 the applicant challenged the latter decision before the Administrative Court, arguing that section 23 of the Act did not specify any requirement for an alteration of the sex/gender marker in civil  status documents. He furthermore submitted that the Registry had authority to administer civil-status records and accordingly to decide on the matter. The applicant also referred to the Court’s case-law on the matter.
On 28 April 2017 the Administrative Court set aside the Ministry’s decision since it had failed to forward the case file.
On 28 February 2018 the Registry rejected (отфрла) the applicant’s application for lack of jurisdiction (ненадлежност), holding that it did not concern the rectification of an error in an entry, but the alteration of the sex/gender marker in the civil status register. On 13 July 2018 the State Commission, which had become competent to decide such issues in second instance, upheld that decision. The proceedings before the Administrative Court are underway.
The applicant submitted several reports from 2012 and 2016 in which psychologists had found that the protracted procedure in respect of seeking legal recognition of the applicant’s gender identity was having negative consequences on his psychosocial and mental health and everyday life.
Under Article 8(2) of the Constitution, everything that is not prohibited by the Constitution and laws is permitted.
Under section 2 of the Act, the Registry has jurisdiction to administer the civil status register.
Section 22(2) of the Act provides that the registrar (матичар) rectifies errors in an entry in the civil status register until registration is completed and after it is completed – errors are to be rectified by means of a decision.
Under section 5 of the Personal Name Act, a person can apply to have his or her forename and family name changed.
Section 6 of the Act provides that a change of a personal name will not be allowed in respect of a person who is prosecuted or convicted for an offence subject to State prosecution and who has not yet served his or her sentence. Such a request will also not be granted in respect of a person who has not fulfilled property-related or other marital- and parental-related obligations prescribed by law. The Ministry of the Interior is responsible for obtaining relevant evidence and information in this respect.
Section 7 provides that a request to have one’s personal name changed is to be submitted to the Ministry of the Interior, which shall decide on it within thirty days.
Section 8(2) of the Courts Act provides that a court cannot reject a civil claim owing to a lacuna in the law; rather, it shall decide on it on the basis of general principles of law unless it is explicitly prohibited from doing so by law.
In two judgments of 25 September and 2 October 2017 (U6.no.909/2015 and Ui.no.16/2017), the Administrative Court recognised the new gender identity of two post-operative transgender people who had undergone “male-to-female transgenderism” medical surgery and ordered the relevant administrative authorities to register the claimants’ new gender in the civil status register and to amend their numerical personal codes appropriately. According to the Government, the Registry was obliged to change the sex/gender markers in their birth certificates on the basis of those judgments.
The relevant parts of the Recommendation read as follows:
“IV  Right to respect for private and family life
...
Member States should take appropriate measures to guarantee the full legal recognition of a person’s gender reassignment in all areas of life, in particular by making possible the change of name and gender in official documents in a quick, transparent and accessible way; member states should also ensure, where appropriate, the corresponding recognition and changes by non-state actors with respect to key documents, such as educational or work certificates.”
The relevant parts of the Resolution read as follows:
“6.  ... the Assembly calls on member States to:
...
2.  as concerns legal gender recognition:
2.1.  develop quick, transparent and accessible procedures, based on self-determination, for changing the name and registered sex of transgender people on birth certificates, identity cards, passports, educational certificates and other similar documents [and] make these procedures available for all people who seek to use them, irrespective of age, medical status, financial situation or police record;
...”
The relevant parts of the Resolution read as follows:
“16.  Consequently, the Assembly calls on member States to address these issues and in particular to:
...
11.  address the specific discrimination and human rights violations faced by transgender persons and, in particular, ensure in legislation and in practice their right to:
...
11.2.  official documents that reflect an individual’s preferred gender identity, without any prior obligation to undergo sterilisation or other medical procedures such as sex reassignment surgery and hormonal therapy;
...”
The relevant parts of the above report read as follows:
“G.  Gender recognition and related issues
In many countries, transgender persons are unable to obtain legal recognition of their preferred gender, including a change in recorded sex and first name on State-issued identity documents. As a result, they encounter many practical difficulties, including when applying for employment, housing, bank credit or State benefits, or when travelling abroad.
...
The Human Rights Committee has expressed concern regarding lack of arrangements for granting legal recognition of transgender people’s identities. It has urged States to recognize the right of transgender persons to change their gender by permitting the issuance of new birth certificates and has noted with approval legislation facilitating legal recognition of a change of gender.
...
Conclusions and recommendations
...
The High Commissioner recommends that Member States:
...
(h)  Facilitate legal recognition of the preferred gender of transgender persons and establish arrangements to permit relevant identity documents to be reissued reflecting preferred gender and name, without infringements of other human rights.
...”
It can be seen from a document entitled “Trans Rights Europe Map 2018”, published by the non-governmental organisation Transgender Europe, that legal recognition of the gender identity of transgender people is not possible in seven Council of Europe member States (Albania, Andorra, Cyprus, Liechtenstein, Monaco, San Marino and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia). The document also makes clear that such recognition, even where it is possible, is subject to different legal requirements, such as sterilisation, compulsory medical intervention or mental health assessment, divorce or age restrictions.