The case originated in an application (no. 36407/12) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian company, S.C. Continental Hotels S.A. (“the applicant company”), on 5 June 2012.
The applicant company was represented by S.C.A. Popovici Nițu Stoica & Asociații, a law office located in Bucharest. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs C. Brumar, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
On 9 March 2016 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant, SC Continental Hotels SA, is a company set up in 1990 under Law no. 15/1990 as a State company. The applicant company’s property comprised a hotel and the plot of land on which the hotel was situated. The Ministry of Tourism issued a title of property in this regard.
In 1995 the State Property Fund (the “FPS”) sold the company’s shares. The company was transformed from a State company into a private company.
On 16 May 1996 the State Construction Inspectorate noted that the hotel was at an advanced degree of degradation because the works needed to render it safe for use as a hotel had not been carried out for some time. The report drafted on that occasion stated that “the building did not satisfy the security standards in respect of its commercial exploitation and structural stability” and therefore “its owner should immediately stop using it.”
On 17 September 1996 the authorities granted the applicant company a permit for the demolition of the building. On an unspecified date in the same year the building was demolished.
According to the Government the demolition permit was revoked after the demolition had been carried out on account of the pending restitution proceedings between the applicant company and the successors of the former owner. However, none of the parties submitted a copy of the cancellation order or any other documents relating to it.
In 1994 the legal successors of the former owner of the land and of the hotel, who had been deprived by the State of his property during the communist regime, brought an action against the applicant company for the restitution of the land and of the hotel.
By a judgment delivered on 16 November 1995 the Bucharest District Court granted their civil action and ordered the restitution of the hotel and of the appurtenant land to the plaintiffs.
The applicant company lodged an appeal on points of law. On 18 December 1996 the Bucharest Court of Appeal allowed the applicant company’s appeal. The case was remitted to the Buzău County Court.
The applicant company asked the court to introduce as a party to the proceedings the FPS which had sold the company’s shares in the privatisation process and which, in its opinion, should guarantee payment of compensation for the hotel and the appurtenant land in the event that the plaintiffs’ claims was allowed. The applicant company based its request on (i) the relevant provisions of the Civil Code concerning the liability of the seller for the quiet possession of the sold assets and the seller’s obligation to compensate the buyer in event of the buyer’s eviction and (ii) the liability clauses in the privatisation contract.
On 15 June 1998 the Buzău County Court dismissed the plaintiffs’ action on the grounds that the hotel and the land had been legally included in the applicant company’s assets.
The plaintiffs lodged an appeal with the Ploieşti Court of Appeal.
The appeal court suspended the trial between 10 May 1999 and 22 December 2006 as there were civil proceedings pending between the legal successors of the former owner.
On 20 March 2009 the Ploieşti Court of Appeal allowed the plaintiffs’ action. By the same decision, the Authority for the Recovery of State Assets (Autoritatea pentru Valorificarea Activelor Statului – AVAS), the successor to the FPS, was identified as the State authority responsible for compensating the applicant company for the damage caused to it.
The applicant company lodged an appeal on points of law claiming that it had not received any compensation for the lost land. AVAS and the plaintiffs also lodged appeals on points of law.
By a decision of 2 December 2009 the High Court of Cassation and Justice allowed all the appeals on points of law, quashed the decision and remitted the case to the Ploieşti Court of Appeal.
During the fresh appeal proceedings, the applicant company lodged a request for the Ministry of Finance to be introduced as party to the proceedings.
By a decision of 16 December 2010 the Ploieşti Court of Appeal allowed the civil action lodged by the plaintiffs and dismissed the request lodged by the applicant company for the Ministry of Finance to be named as guarantor. The applicant company was obliged to restore the title to the land and to pay the plaintiffs compensation of 11,138,275 Romanian lei (RON – approximately 2,600,000 euros (EUR)) for the demolished hotel. The Court of Appeal also ordered AVAS to pay to the applicant company the amount it had to pay for the demolished hotel and RON 2,209,200 (approximately EUR 515,000) for the land it had lost, as well as all court expenses that it had incurred.
All the parties lodged appeals on points of law.
By a decision of 6 December 2011 the High Court of Cassation and Justice dismissed the applicant company’s appeal. It allowed the appeal lodged by AVAS and rejected the applicant company’s request to be compensated by AVAS as having been lodged by a person not having locus standi. In this respect, the court held that the applicant company hadn’t been party to the transaction concerning the sale of its shares.
After lodging its application with the Court, the applicant company brought new civil proceedings for compensation against (i) the Authority for the Administration of the State’s Assets (Autoritatea pentru Administrarea Activelor Statului – AAAS) (the successor to AVAS) and (ii) the Romanian State (through the Ministry of Public Finance). Relying on Article 324 of Emergency Government Ordinance no. 88/1997 (see paragraph 34 below) the applicant company claimed RON 16,141,398 (approximately EUR 3,766,000 EUR) as compensation for the damage caused as a result of (i) the restitution of the land, whose book value amounted to RON 5,003,123 (approximately EUR 1,166,000 EUR), and (ii) the payment to the former owners the sum of RON 11,138,275 (approximately EUR 2,600,000), representing the monetary equivalent of the demolished hotel building.
By a judgment of 7 June 2013 the Bucharest District Court allowed the applicant company’s claim in part. It ordered AAAS to pay the applicant company RON 5,003,123 as compensation for the restitution of the land, but declined to order AAAS to pay it compensation for its payment of the monetary equivalent of the demolished hotel to the former owners.
The applicant company appealed against that judgment. On 16 April 2014 the Bucharest Court of Appeal allowed the appeal. It quashed the judgment of the first-instance court and allowed the applicant company’s claims.
On 27 January 2015 the High Court of Cassation and Justice allowed the appeal on points of law lodged by AAAS. It quashed the decision given on appeal and upheld the judgment of the first-instance court.
The High Court of Cassation ruled that under Article 324 §§ 1 and 2 of Emergency Government Ordinance no. 88/1997 (see paragraph 34 below), on which the applicant relied by way of legal grounds, a privatised company was entitled to compensation only in the event that the damage incurred was the result of the restitution of its real estate to the former owners. In this respect, the court held that compelling the applicant company to pay the monetary equivalent of the building (instead of restoring title to the actual building) was the result of the fact that the building had been demolished, which had placed the applicant company “through its own fault, outside the legal framework stipulated by Article 324 §§ 1 and 2 of Emergency Government Ordinance no. 88/1997”.
Secondly, the High Court held that Article 324 § 5 of Emergency Government Ordinance no. 88/1997, on which the applicant relied by way of subsidiary legal grounds, was also not applicable because it did “not provide an obligation on the part of the public institution involved to pay compensation for the demolished building”.
Thirdly, the High Court held that the applicant company was not entitled to lodge a claim for compensation relying on unjust enrichment on the part of the State (actio de in rem verso) either, since by demolishing the building it “had distanced itself from the benefit of the legal provisions”.
Lastly, the High Court dismissed the applicant company’s claim to compel the Romanian State, through the Ministry of Finance to pay the compensation. It held that the obligation to compensate privatised companies for losses caused by the restitution to their former owners of assets taken over by the State applied only to public institutions involved in the privatisation process and not to the State.
The applicant company initiated enforcement proceedings against AAAS for the recovery of the amount awarded to it by the judgment of 7 June 2013 (see paragraph 24 below), upheld on appeal by the High Court of Cassation.
On 27 May 2014 the Bucharest District Court agreed that enforcement proceedings could be initiated. The applicant company informed the Court that the enforcement agent had managed to recover only RON 69,747 (approximately EUR 15,661), representing just 1.39% of RON 5,003,123, the amount granted by the final judgment of the High Court.
By a letter of 19 August 2014 the Bucharest Municipality Treasury informed the applicant company that AAAS was insolvent. It also informed the applicant company that it was registered as occupying position 3,462 in the list of AAAS’s creditors.
“(1)  The designated public institutions shall ensure that compensation [is paid] for damage caused to privatised companies or companies undergoing privatisation by the restitution to former owners of property taken over by the State;
(2)  The designated public institutions shall pay to the companies referred to in paragraph (1) compensation representing the monetary equivalent of the damage caused by the restitution to former owners, under a final and irrevocable court judgment, of the real estate owned by the company.
(3)  The compensation provided under paragraph (2) shall be mutually agreed upon with the companies, and in case of disagreement, it shall be decided by the courts.
...
(5)  In case that the companies are ordered, by final and irrevocable court judgment to pay the monetary equivalent of the property, the designated public institutions shall directly pay the amount established by the judgment to the former owner.
(6)  The State shall guarantee the fulfilment by the public institutions of the obligations set forth herein.”
Article 324 of the ordinance was repealed by Article 56 of Law no. 137/2002 on Measures for the Acceleration of the Privatisation Process. Article 30 § 3 of the law expressly stipulated that Article 324 of the ordinance remained applicable to all sale-purchase agreements of shares already concluded when the law entered into force in 2002.
“A person, who, through no fault of his own, has unjustly enriched himself/herself to the detriment of a third party, is obliged to make restitution for the loss of assets incurred by that third party, but without being held liable beyond the limits of his/her own enrichment.”
“Enrichment is justified when it derives from:
a)  the performance of a valid obligation;
b)  the injured party’s failure to exercise a right against the enriched party;
c)  a deed undertaken by the injured party in his/her personal interest and at its own exclusive risk or, as the case may be, with the intention to gratify.”
In a decision delivered on 17 October 2011 and published in the Official Gazette on 16 December 2011, the High Court of Cassation and Justice confirmed that Article 324 of the Emergency Government Ordinance continued to apply (even after the repeal of the Emergency Government Ordinance) to sale-purchase agreements concluded before the entry into force of Law no. 137/2002 (see paragraph 35 above).