The case originated in an application (no. 26118/10) against the French Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a French national, Mr Hervé Eon (“the applicant”), on 12 April 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr D. Nogueres, a lawyer practising in Paris. The French Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms E. Belliard, Director of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, a violation of Article 10 of the Convention.
On 15 April 2011 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1952 and lives in Laval.
On 28 August 2008, during a visit to Laval by the President of France, the applicant waved a small placard reading “Casse toi pov’con” (“Get lost, you sad prick”) as the President’s party was about to pass by.
The applicant was making an allusion to a much publicised phrase which the President himself had uttered on 23 February 2008 at the International Agricultural Show in response to a farmer who had refused to shake his hand. The phrase had given rise to extensive comment and media coverage and had been widely circulated on the Internet and used as a slogan at demonstrations.
The applicant was immediately stopped by the police and taken to the police station. He was prosecuted by the public prosecutor for insulting the President, an offence under section 26 of the Act of 29 July 1881 (see paragraph 16 below). A summons to appear before the criminal court was handed to him later that day.
In a judgment of 6 November 2008 the Laval tribunal de grande instance found the applicant guilty of insulting the President and fined him 30 euros (EUR), a penalty which was suspended. The court held as follows:
“... On the day of the President’s visit ... the defendant ... saw fit to wave a small placard containing an exact copy, served cold, of a famous retort prompted by a direct affront.
If the defendant had not intended to cause offence, but solely to give an incongruous lesson in manners, he would surely have preceded the phrase ‘casse toi pov’con’ with words to the effect ‘you shouldn’t say’.
Having adopted the phrase strictly as his own, he cannot reasonably maintain that he had no intention of causing offence. The apparently underlying issue of double standards does not even arise, since the purpose of the law is to protect the office of President, and Mr Eon, as an ordinary citizen, cannot claim the right to be treated on an equal footing.
The offence of insulting the President of the French Republic has therefore been fully made out ...”
As to the sentence, the court noted that in view of the applicant’s circumstances and modest income (EUR 450 per month), it was appropriate to give him a simple warning in the form of a fine described by the judges as “a matter of principle”.
The applicant and the public prosecutor both appealed.
In a judgment of 24 March 2009 the Angers Court of Appeal upheld the lower court’s judgment in its entirety. On the issue of the applicant’s guilt, it set out its reasoning as follows:
“As to the question of guilt:
Actus reus of the offence
The definition in the 1959, 2002 and 2006 editions of Le Petit Larousse is almost unchanged: ‘insult [offense] is a concept defined as a remark or action which undermines a person’s dignity or honour; in law, it specifically denotes an affront to a head of State (1959) or a public affront to the President of France ... constituting a criminal offence’ (2006).
It is accepted in the case-law that the actus reus of the offence is any insulting or disparaging expression or any defamatory insinuation that is liable to undermine the President’s honour, dignity or reputation, either in the performance of his official duties or in his private life. There is no need for lengthy discussion of the fact that describing the President as a ‘sad prick’ [‘pauvre con’] amounts to insulting him.
The small placard containing the phrase in question is indisputably a form of publicly conveying a message, which can take place by means of placards or posters on public display (section 23 of the 1881 Act). Accordingly, the actus reus of the offence has been made out.
Mens rea of the offence
The expression ‘casse toi pov’con’, which the first-instance judges described as a ‘famous retort’, does not obviate the need for an examination of the insulting nature of the phrase, which has not passed into the public domain and hence has not entered general usage or lost any insulting connotations it might have had. In other words, the accused cannot maintain that he was acting in good faith. In this connection, the court observes that Mr Hervé Eon is an activist and a former Socialist elected representative in the département of Mayenne, who had recently fought a long-running campaign actively supporting a Turkish family residing unlawfully in national territory; several days before the head of State’s visit to Laval, this political battle had ended in a resounding failure for the support committee as the family had been deported. Mr Eon explained to the court that at the time of the events he had been feeling bitter, to say the least. Accordingly, his political involvement (as corroborated by the fact that the accused called a senator as a witness) and the very nature of the phrase used, which was wholly premeditated, conclusively rule out any notion of good faith. The court will therefore endorse the reasoning of the first-instance judges, who found that the accused could not reasonably maintain that he had no intention of causing offence.
The offence is therefore established in terms of both actus reus and mens rea as outlined above. The first-instance judges were thus correct in concluding from all these factors that the accused should be found guilty. ...”
The Court of Appeal further noted that the applicant had declined to apologise, which meant that he could not be given a discharge. It observed that the first-instance court had found that a simple warning was required and had given him a suspended fine of EUR 30 as a matter of principle. It noted that the applicant had a previous conviction for destroying genetically modified crops. Accordingly, it concluded that the penalty imposed was entirely appropriate in view of the nature of the offence and the applicant’s character.
The applicant appealed on points of law to the Court of Cassation. He applied to the Court of Cassation’s Legal Aid Board for legal aid. In a decision of 14 May 2009 the Legal Aid Board observed that the applicant’s resources were below the statutory limit but refused his application, holding that no arguable ground of appeal could be made out. The applicant appealed to the judge delegated by the President of the Court of Cassation, challenging the decision to refuse legal aid in the absence of an arguable ground of appeal. He submitted as follows:
“In the case between myself and the public prosecutor’s office, the reason for my appeal on points of law was obviously not the amount of the penalty but the question of the fundamental principle of freedom of expression and the concept of insulting the head of State. By not granting me legal aid, you are preventing me from lawfully exercising my rights in relation to a fundamental freedom.”
In an order of 15 June 2009 the President of the Court of Cassation upheld the refusal to grant legal aid in the absence of any arguable grounds of appeal.
The applicant nevertheless pursued his appeal on points of law to its conclusion. The Government stated that on 15 September 2009 the law firm instructed to represent him had sent the Court of Cassation a letter indicating that it did not intend to file further pleadings in support of the appeal; nor had the applicant filed any pleadings himself. The applicant submitted that in view of his inability to pay the fees charged by the law firm, the firm had informed him that it would not file any pleadings.
In a judgment of 27 October 2009 the Court of Cassation declared the appeal inadmissible, finding that there were no grounds to warrant its examination.
The offence of insulting the President of France (offense) is provided for in section 26 of the Freedom of the Press Act of 29 July 1881, which reads as follows:
“Insulting the President of the Republic by one of the means set out in section 23 shall be punishable by a fine of 45,000 euros.
The penalties provided for in the preceding subsection shall be applicable to insults to a person exercising all or part of the powers of the President.”
As in the case of the offence of insulting the head of State, the penalties provided for in sections 30 and 31 of the 1881 Act, which respectively concern damage to the honour and reputation of public authorities (State institutions and administrative authorities) and persons vested with public authority (such as ministry officials), are more severe than those applicable to defamation of private individuals. However, the penalty for the ordinary offence of proffering insults (injure) is the same irrespective of whether the insult was directed at a private individual or a public authority: section 33 of the 1881 Act provides that “insults proffered in the same manner to private individuals, without prior provocation, shall be punishable by a fine of 12,000 euros”. In a decision of 16 July 2010 the Court of Cassation (Criminal Division, no. 10-90.081), which had been asked for a preliminary ruling on constitutionality in the context of proceedings brought under section 31 of the Act of 29 July 1881, held as follows in response to the question whether section 31 infringed the principle of equality in that it entailed a more severe penalty for defamation of a civil servant than for defamation of a private individual:
“... The question raised has no serious merit, seeing that firstly, the principle of equality does not prevent the law from being applied differently in different situations; secondly, although the fine applicable for public defamation of a civil servant is higher than that applicable for public defamation of a private individual, it serves as punishment, without being manifestly disproportionate, for the attack not only on the person at whom the offending remarks are directed but also on the function embodied by that person; and lastly, anyone prosecuted under section 31 of the Act of 29 July 1881 has the opportunity to prove that he or she acted in good faith.
It follows that it is unnecessary to refer the question to the Constitutional Council ...”
The rationale behind making it a criminal offence to insult the head of State is to protect the latter from certain forms of attack on his or her honour or dignity. The power to bring a prosecution for the offence is vested solely in the public prosecutor’s office, acting of its own motion (section 47 of the Act of 29 July 1881). According to the Government’s explanations, the offence of insulting the head of State, unlike that of criminal defamation and the ordinary offence of proffering insults, is aimed more at protecting the function than the person. It is described in the Act as an “offence against the public good” and is thus set apart from offences against persons, which explains why a prosecution can be initiated only by the public prosecutor’s office and not by the aggrieved party.
The notion of insulting the head of State is not defined in the 1881 Act. The following elements are required for the offence to be made out: an insult directed at the President personally, its commission by one of the means and in the public manner referred to in section 23 of the Act, and the intention to commit the offence.
As regards the public element, it is accepted that the insult may result from a piece of writing, and also from a photomontage, a caricature or a combination of a drawing and text (Court of Cassation, Criminal Division, 5 April 1965). Gestures are covered by the offence of abusing a person in authority (outrage) and may give rise to a prosecution under Article 433-5 of the Criminal Code.
The courts have defined insulting the head of State as “any insulting or disparaging expression or any defamatory insinuation which is liable to undermine the President’s honour or dignity either in the performance of his presidential duties or in his private life, or in his public life prior to being elected” (Court of Cassation, Criminal Division, 21 December 1966, Bull. crim. no. 302). The insult must in principle be directed at the President personally and not his or her policies or the actions of his or her government. However, insults proffered at political events necessarily affect the person concerned. In a judgment of 12 April 1967 the Court of Cassation held as follows:
“It appears from this examination that the passages in issue go beyond objective criticism of General de Gaulle’s political activities before and during the Occupation, and during and after the Liberation, and do indeed constitute, as Court of Appeal found, a ‘diatribe’ which ‘is not simply, as the accused maintain, a commentary on the events witnessed by the author of the book but a deliberate, violent and insulting personal attack on the President, to whom vile and base sentiments and motives are ascribed’.
In particular, the head of State is described in these passages as an ambitious soul incapable of order, bent on domination to a dizzying, hallucinatory degree, having abandoned his post when faced with the enemy, sought to exploit the country’s defeat and misfortune to his own advantage, stirred up discord among French citizens, practised a form of abusive despotism, trampled on the justice system, making it the instrument of his rage, rancour and hatred, and been the sole cause, through his own fault, of ‘the infections gradually contaminating the nation’s body and soul’.
That being so, the judgment appealed against rightly held that the acts of which the appellant was accused fell within the scope of sections 26 and 61 of the Act of 29 July 1881, having been committed by one of the means listed in section 23 of the same Act.
While all citizens have the right to open discussion by virtue of the general principles of law as enshrined in the Constitution of 4 October 1958, and while the Constitution allows the exercise of this fundamental freedom to extend to discussion of the President’s political activities, the freedom to exercise this right ends where it becomes an insult to the head of State.
Insults proffered at political events necessarily affect the person concerned.
Where the acts to which the charge relates have been committed by one of the means set out in sections 23 and 28 of the Act of 29 July 1881, and the intention to cause offence is established, the actus reus of the offence punishable under section 26 of the Press Act is constituted by any insulting or disparaging expression or any defamatory insinuation which is liable to undermine the President’s honour or dignity either in the performance of his presidential duties or in his private life, or in his public life prior to being elected.
Criticism of, or purporting to be of, a historical nature is no more exempt from these rules than political controversy. ...”
Unlike in the case of criminal defamation and the ordinary offence of proffering insults, the mens rea of the offence of insulting the head of State is not presumed and must be established. The prosecution must prove that the person responsible for the insult acted in bad faith. The defence of justification (exceptio veritatis) cannot be pleaded on a charge of insulting the head of State. The 1881 Act did not extend to the offence of insulting the head of State the provisions of section 35, by which defamatory allegations against public officials are permissible if they can be proved true, because the offence defined in section 26 is separate from the offence of criminal defamation (Court of Cassation, Criminal Division, 21 December 1966, Bull. crim. no. 300).
The offence of insulting the President of France had become virtually obsolete. A significant number of prosecutions were brought while General de Gaulle was President. Under President Pompidou, only one prosecution was brought on this basis and none were brought under Presidents Giscard d’Estaing, Mitterrand and Chirac between 1974 and 2007. A number of private members’ bills to abolish the offence were tabled by members of the Senate or the National Assembly after the events in issue in the present case (for instance, the Bill introduced by Senator Mélenchon in November 2008, or the Bill registered with the Presidency of the National Assembly on 20 May 2010 and tabled by several of its members), the most recent one being registered with the Presidency of the Senate on 20 March 2012. In the explanatory memorandum the sponsor of the Bill (Mr Masson) stated: “... in so far as all citizens can use the provisions of ordinary law concerning the offences of proffering insults or defamation, the offence of insulting the President has no purpose. Moreover, the offence is abnormally extensive in that it may apply to a mere political slur or rather harsh criticism. For these reasons, nearly all modern democracies have removed the notion of insulting the head of State from their criminal codes. Luxembourg, for example, abolished the criminal offence of ‘malicious attacks against the Grand Duke’ in 2002, replacing it with the provisions of ordinary law.”
The Government submitted that the legislation in France was not an isolated example in Europe. By way of example, they referred to Spain, Italy, the Netherlands, Poland and Turkey.