The case originated in an application (no. 53080/13) against Hungary lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Hungarian national, Ms Béláné Nagy (“the applicant”), on 12 August 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Cech, a lawyer practising in Budapest. The Hungarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr Z. Tallódi, Agent, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice.
The applicant alleged that she had lost her livelihood, only guaranteed by a disability allowance, as a result of the changes in legislation applied by the authorities without equity, although her health had never improved. She relied on Article 6 of the Convention.
On 21 January 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
On 27 August 2014 legal aid was granted to the applicant.
The applicant was born in 1959 and lives in Baktalórántháza.
In 2001 the applicant’s loss of capacity to work was assessed to be 67 per cent as of 1 April 2001, and she was granted a disability pension (see paragraph 18 below). This assessment was maintained in 2003, 2006 and 2007.
Pursuant to a modification of the applicable methodology but apparently without any substantial change in her health, the level of the applicant’s disability was changed to 40 per cent on 1 December 2009. Without envisaging her rehabilitation, the assessment panel scheduled the next check-up of her medical status for November 2012.
As a consequence of her 40 per cent level of disability, her entitlement to the disability pension was withdrawn as of 1 February 2010.
The applicant challenged this decision in court, but the Nyíregyháza Labour Court dismissed her action on 1 April 2011, notwithstanding an expert opinion stating that the applicant’s condition had not improved since 2007. The applicant was obliged to reimburse the amounts received after 1 February 2010.
In 2011 the applicant requested another assessment of her disability. In September 2011 the first-instance authority assessed it at 45 per cent, scheduling the next assessment for September 2014. The second-instance authority changed this score to 50 per cent, with a reassessment due in March 2015. Such a level would have entitled her to disability pension, had her rehabilitation not been possible (see paragraph 19 below). However, this time the assessment envisaged the applicant’s rehabilitation in a time-frame of 36 months, during which time she was to receive rehabilitation allowance.
As of 1 January 2012, a new law on disability allowances (Act no. CXCI of 2011) entered into force. It introduced additional applicability criteria (see paragraph 20 below). Notably, instead of fulfilling the service period required by the former legislation, the disabled person must have at least 1,095 days covered by social security in the five years preceding the submission of his or her request. Persons who do not meet this requirement may nevertheless qualify if they had no interruption of social cover for more than 30 days throughout their career, or if they were in receipt of a disability pension on 31 December 2011.
In February 2012 the applicant submitted another request for disability allowance. Her condition was assessed in April 2012, leading to the finding of 50 per cent disability. On 5 June 2012 her request was dismissed because she did not have the requisite period of social cover. Rehabilitation was not envisaged. The next assessment was scheduled for April 2014.
On 2 August 2012 the applicant submitted a fresh request for disability pension under the new law on disability allowances and underwent another assessment in which the level of her disability was again established at 50 per cent. Rehabilitation was not envisaged.
In principle, such a level of disability would entitle the applicant to a disability pension under the new system. However, since her disability pension had been terminated in February 2010 (that is, she was not in receipt of a disability pension on 31 December 2011) and, moreover, she was not in a position to accumulate the requisite number of days covered by social security or to demonstrate an uninterrupted social cover, she was not eligible, under any title, for a disability allowance under the new system. Instead of the requisite 1,095 days covered by social security, the applicant had only 947.
Accordingly, the applicant’s disability pension request was refused both by the competent administrative authorities (on 23 November 2012 and 27 February 2013) and by the Nyíregyháza Administrative and Labour Court, on 20 June 2013.
As of 1 January 2014, the impugned legislative criteria have been amended with a view to extending the eligibility for disability allowance to those who have accumulated either 2,555 days covered by social security in ten years or 3,650 days in fifteen years. However, the applicant could not meet these criteria either.
It appears that currently the applicant lives on aid.
Since 2013 the Constitutional Court has examined a number of complaints attacking in essence the same new rules on disability entitlements (decision nos. 3227/2013, 3156/2013 and 3235/2014). The complainants in those procedures raised their constitutional concerns after the final and binding domestic judgments, without applying to the Kúria (Supreme Court) in review proceedings. Although these motions were eventually rejected as inadmissible for other reasons, the Constitutional Court did not consider that, for their constitutional complaints to be entertained, those complainants were required to have approached the Kúria beforehand.
The relevant provisions of Act no. LXXXI of 1997 on Social Security Pension, as in force until 31 December 2011, provided:
“[Under the terms of this law] disability pension [means]: pension to be disbursed in case of disability, on condition that the requisite service time has been accumulated.”
“Disability pension is due to a person who:
(a) has suffered 67 per cent loss of capacity to work due to health problems, physical or mental impairments, without any perspective of amelioration during the following year... [and]
(b) has accumulated the necessary service time [a function of the age, as outlined in the law] [and]
(c) does not work regularly or earns considerably less than before having become disabled.”
Concerning disability pensions to be granted after 31 December 2007, the same Act, as in force between 12 March and 31 December 2011, provided as follows:
“(1) Disability pension shall be due to a person who:
a) suffered [at least 79 per cent loss of capacity to work, or the same between 50 and 79 per cent if rehabilitation is not feasible], and
b) accumulated the service time required in respect of his age, and
c) [does not have an income or earns considerably less than before], and
d) does not receive sick pay or disability sick pay.”
Act no. CXCI of 2011 on the Benefits Granted to Persons with Reduced Work Capacity, in so far as relevant and as in force between 26 July 2012 and 31 December 2013, provided as follows:
“(1) A person whose health status has been found to be 60 per cent or less, in the rehabilitation authority’s complex reassessment (henceforth: persons with reduced work capacity) and who:
a) has been covered for a minimum 1,095 days by the social security under section 5 of [the Social Security Act] in the five years preceding the submission of their request, and
b) is not been engaged in any money-earning activities and
c) is not receiving any regular cash allowance
shall be eligible for allowances granted to persons with reduced work capacity.
(2) By derogation from subsection (1) (a), persons
a) who became covered by the social security within 180 days from the termination of their schooling and whose social security cover was not interrupted for any period exceeding 30 days before the submission of their request, or
b) who received on 31 December 2011 disability pension, accident disability pension, rehabilitation allowance or social allowance for persons with health impairment
shall be eligible for the benefits granted to persons with reduced work capacity irrespective of the duration of the period covered with social security.
(3) The 1,095-day-long insurance period shall include:
a) the period of sick pay, accident sick pay, pregnancy and confinement benefit, child care benefit and jobseeker benefit;
b) the period of disability pension, accident disability pension, rehabilitation allowance, social allowance for persons with health impairment;
c) the service time accumulated under an agreement concluded under section 34 of [the Social Security Act] with a view to accumulating service time and income that generate pension entitlement; provided that the agreement was concluded by 31 December 2011.”
“(1) Subject to the rehabilitation authority’s rehabilitation proposal made in the framework of the complex reassessment, the allowance to be granted for a person with reduced work capacity shall be either:
a) rehabilitation allowance, or
b) disability allowance.”
“(1) Persons with reduced work capacity shall be entitled to disability allowance where rehabilitation is not recommended.”
The Constitutional Court examined Act no. CXCI of 2011 in decision no. 40/2012. (XII.6.) AB. It recalled that its jurisprudence differentiated between allowances acquired by compulsory contribution to the social security scheme on the one hand, and social allowances not constituting “purchased rights” on the other hand. The former allowances (e.g. old-age pension or pension for surviving spouse) enjoyed property-like constitutional protection because of their inherent insurance element. As regards the latter, guarantees flowing from the requirements of the rule of law (i.e. protection of legitimate expectations, proper time for preparation) should be observed as criteria of constitutionality – instead of requirements related to the protection of property. In the case-law of the Constitutional Court, protection of legitimate expectations (or, in other words, protection of acquired rights) meant the application of the requirement of due time for preparation, ensuing also from the principle of legal security of already acquired titles. In the absence of an already acquired title, the Constitutional Court might only verify whether the time allowed by the legislation was sufficient for the individuals to become aware of its content. In fact, it was the difference in the solidity of the basis of expectation which was question in the respective situations.
The decision contains in particular the following passages:
“30.  ... The Constitutional Court has examined modifications to laws and regulations relating to disability pensions in several decisions. Decision no. 321/B/1996 AB categorises disability pensions partly as an allowance prompting protection of property and partly as a social service provision. As stated in the decision, the law ‘provides care under the constitutional principle of social security for individuals who before reaching the old age pension age have lost their ability to work by reason of disability or disability due to accident. ... Prior to reaching the official retirement age, the disability pension is a special benefit granted to individuals based on their disability. Upon reaching pensionable age, individuals who are ... incapable of work ... are not entitled to this special benefit, because on termination of their employment, they are eligible to receive an old age pension based on their age.’
Decision no. 1129/B/2008 AB states that disability pension falls under the category of personal retirement benefits, though their ‘purchased right’ element is only apparent inasmuch as ‘its sum is greater after a longer length of service, or is equal or close to the old age pension. Otherwise the principle of solidarity is predominant, as the disabled individual, who would not be eligible for an old age pension based on his age or length of service, is able to receive pension benefits from the point at which disability is determined.’ ...
In the Constitutional Court’s interpretation, laws giving title to disability pensions do not constitute subjective constitutional rights, but are mixed social security and social service benefits, available – subject to set conditions – to individuals under the retirement age suffering from ill health, who, due to their disability, have a reduced capacity to work and are in need of financial assistance because of the loss of income.”
The relevant provisions of Convention no. 102 of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) on Social Security (Minimum Standards), adopted on 28 June 1952, read as follows:
“Each Member for which this Part of this Convention is in force shall secure to the persons protected the provision of invalidity benefit in accordance with the following Articles of this Part.”
“The contingency covered shall include inability to engage in any gainful activity, to an extent prescribed, which inability is likely to be permanent or persists after the exhaustion of sickness benefit.”
“The persons protected shall comprise--
(a)  prescribed classes of employees, constituting not less than 50 per cent of all employees; or
(b)  prescribed classes of the economically active population, constituting not less than 20 per cent of all residents; or
(c)  all residents whose means during the contingency do not exceed limits prescribed in such a manner as to comply with the requirements of Article 67; or
(d)  where a declaration made in virtue of Article 3 is in force, prescribed classes of employees, constituting not less than 50 per cent of all employees in industrial workplaces employing 20 persons or more.”
“The benefit shall be a periodical payment calculated as follows:
(a)  where classes of employees or classes of the economically active population are protected, in such a manner as to comply either with the requirements of Article 65 or with the requirements of Article 66;
(b)  where all residents whose means during the contingency do not exceed prescribed limits are protected, in such a manner as to comply with the requirements of Article 67.”
“1.  The benefit specified in Article 56 shall, in a contingency covered, be secured at least--
(a)  to a person protected who has completed, prior to the contingency, in accordance with prescribed rules, a qualifying period which may be 15 years of contribution or employment, or 10 years of residence; or
(b)  where, in principle, all economically active persons are protected, to a person protected who has completed a qualifying period of three years of contribution and in respect of whom, while he was of working age, the prescribed yearly average number of contributions has been paid.
Where the benefit referred to in paragraph 1 is conditional upon a minimum period of contribution or employment, a reduced benefit shall be secured at least--
(a)  to a person protected who has completed, prior to the contingency, in accordance with prescribed rules, a qualifying period of five years of contribution or employment; or
(b)  where, in principle, all economically active persons are protected, to a person protected who has completed a qualifying period of three years of contribution and in respect of whom, while he was of working age, half the yearly average number of contributions prescribed in accordance with subparagraph (b) of paragraph 1 of this Article has been paid.
The requirements of paragraph 1 of this Article shall be deemed to be satisfied where a benefit calculated in conformity with the requirements of Part XI but at a percentage of ten points lower than shown in the Schedule appended to that Part for the standard beneficiary concerned is secured at least to a person protected who has completed, in accordance with prescribed rules, five years of contribution, employment or residence.
A proportional reduction of the percentage indicated in the Schedule appended to Part XI may be effected where the qualifying period for the pension corresponding to the reduced percentage exceeds five years of contribution or employment but is less than 15 years of contribution or employment; a reduced pension shall be payable in conformity with paragraph 2 of this Article.”
“The benefit specified in Articles 56 and 57 shall be granted throughout the contingency or until an old-age benefit becomes payable.”
The International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF), endorsed by the Member States of the World Health Organisation (WHO) in 2001, provides in its relevant part as follows:
“(10)  ICF, and all information derived from its use, should not be employed to deny established rights or otherwise restrict legitimate entitlements to benefits for individuals or groups.”