The case originated in four applications (nos. 48653/13, 52464/13, 65597/13 and 70019/13) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four Azerbaijani nationals, Mr Rashad Zeynalabdin oglu Hasanov (Rəşad Zeynalabdin oğlu Həsənov – “the first applicant”), Mr Zaur Araz oglu Gurbanli (Zaur Araz oğlu Qurbanlı – “the second applicant”), Uzeyir Mahammad oglu Mammadli (Üzeyir Məhəmməd oğlu Məmmədli – “the third applicant”) and Mr Rashadat Fikrat oglu Akhundov (Rəşadət Fikrət oğlu Axundov – “the fourth applicant”) (“the applicants”), on various dates in 2013 (see Appendix).
The applicants were represented by various lawyers practising in Azerbaijan (see Appendix). The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Asgarov.
The applicants alleged that their right to liberty had been breached because they had been unlawfully detained in the absence of a reasonable suspicion that they had committed a criminal offence. They also alleged that the domestic courts had failed to justify their pre-trial detention, and that there had been no relevant and sufficient reasons for their continued detention.
On 18 December 2015 (applications nos. 48653/13, 65597/13 and 70019/13) and 9 March 2016 (application no. 52464/13), the complaints concerning the alleged absence of a reasonable suspicion that the applicants had committed a criminal offence (Article 5 § 1 (c) of the Convention), the alleged lack of justification for the applicants’ pre-trial detention (Article 5 § 3 of the Convention) and, ex officio, an issue under Article 18 of the Convention were communicated to the Government. On 18 December 2015 the remainder of applications nos. 48653/13 and 65597/13 were declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants’ years of birth and home addresses are listed in the Appendix.
The applicants are civil society activists. They are board members of the civic movement NIDA, a non-governmental organisation established by a group of young people in February 2011. According to its manifesto, NIDA wants liberty, justice, truth and change in Azerbaijan and it rejects violence and uses only non-violent methods of struggle. NIDA is governed by a board of members composed of seven people. The first, second and fourth applicants are also co-founders.
In January and March 2013 a number of peaceful demonstrations were held in Baku in protest against the death of soldiers in the Azerbaijani army in non-combat situations. The demonstrations were organised through social media and the applicants and other members of NIDA actively participated in organising and conducting them. One of the demonstrations was scheduled for 10 March 2013 in the city centre.
On 7 March 2013 three members of NIDA (S.N., B.G. and M.A.) were arrested by agents of the Ministry of National Security (“the MNS”). Domestic proceedings concerning the arrest and pre-trial detention of S.N. and M.A. are the subject of other applications pending before the Court (see applications nos. 70106/13 and 65583/13).
On 8 March 2013 the Prosecutor General’s Office and the MNS made a joint public statement to the press, stating that “illegal attempts to undermine the social-political stability established in the country have recently been made by some radical destructive forces” (son dövrlər radikal yönümlü bəzi destruktiv qüvvələr tərəfindən ölkədə bərqərar olmuş ictimai-siyasi sabitliyin pozulmasına yönəlmiş qanunazidd cəhdlər göstərilir). The statement was also public confirmation that S.N., B.G. and M.A. had been arrested for planning to incite violence and civil unrest during the unlawful demonstration scheduled for 10 March 2013. It also said that criminal proceedings had been instituted against S.N., B.G. and M.A. as narcotic substances had been found in their flats. It further stated that nineteen Molotov cocktails had been found in B.G.’s flat, three Molotov cocktails had been found in S.N.’s flat and twenty-eight leaflets worded “Democracy urgently needed (təcili demokratiya tələb olunur), tel: + 994, address: Azerbaijan” had been found in M.A.’s flat. In that connection, the statement said that “it was established during the preliminary investigation that since mid-2012 all three individuals, being addicted to narcotic substances and becoming members of NIDA through the Internet, had actively participated in a number of illegal activities of the organisation and prepared a flammable liquid known as Molotov cocktails, found in their flats” (İlkin istintaqla müəyyən edilmişdir ki, hər üç şəxs 2012-ci ilin ortalarından etibarən internet vasitəsilə “Nida” vətəndaş hərəkatının üzvləri və narkotika aludəçisi olmaqla, təşkilatın bir sıra qanunsuz tədbirlərində fəal iştirak etmiş və yaşadıqları mənzillərdən aşkar edilmiş “Molotov kokteyli” adlanan tez alışan maye onlar tərəfindən hazırlanmışdır).
On the same day NIDA made a public statement, saying that the arrest of S.N., B.G. and M.A. had been politically motivated and had aimed to silence the protesters by creating a feeling of fear among them before the demonstration of 10 March 2013.
It appears from the documents in the case file that on the basis of the investigator’s decision of 8 March 2013 twenty-two Molotov cocktails found in the flats of S.N. and B.G. were submitted for an expert examination, which began on 12 March 2013. Expert report no. 4503/04, dated 10 April 2013 and signed by two experts, concluded that twenty of the Molotov cocktails “were only flammable (incendiary) tools which could not be considered explosive devices”. The report further stated that the two remaining Molotov cocktails could be considered explosive devices because there had been a syringe with gunpowder attached to the bottles.
On 14 March 2013 the first applicant, on 30 March 2013 the third and fourth applicants and on 1 April 2013 the second applicant were arrested and taken to the Serious Crimes Department of the Prosecutor General’s Office.
It appears from the documents in the case file that on the respective dates of their arrest the applicants were informed that they had been charged with an offence under Article 228.3 (illegal acquisition, transfer, sale, storage, transportation and carrying of arm, its accessories, supplies, explosive substances and devices by an organised group) of the Criminal Code. The decisions charging the applicants were made on various dates but by the same investigator. They were identical in their wording except for the name of the person charged. The description of the charges consisted of a single sentence half a page long. The relevant part of the decision concerning the first applicant stated:
“... Rashad Zeynalabdin oglu Hasanov has been charged on the basis of sufficient charging evidence because in early March 2013 in Baku, in an organised group with B.G., S.N. and others with whom he had close ties, [he] unlawfully obtained twentytwo glass bottles of explosive devices known as Molotov cocktails, which are prepared with flammable liquid petrol as an explosive substance by inserting a cotton rag preventing the liquid from dispersing and evaporating, as well as acting as a fuse, [and arranged storage] until 7 March 2013 by giving nineteen of them to B.G. who lives in ... and three of them to S.N. who lives in ...
Through these actions, Rashad Zeynalabdin oglu Hasanov committed a criminal offence under Article 228.3 of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
...”
On the respective dates of their arrest the First Deputy Prosecutor General of the Republic of Azerbaijan requested that the courts remand each applicant in custody (həbs qətimkan tədbiri). In each case, the prosecutor used the exact same wording as in the decisions charging the applicants.
On the same dates the applicants were brought before a judge of the Nasimi District Court. Referring to the official charges brought against them and the prosecutor’s requests to remand them in custody, the judges ordered their detention for a period of three months. It appears from the transcripts of the court hearings before the Nasimi District Court available in the case file that the applicants denied the charges against them, stating that their arrest was related to their social and political engagement. Although the Nasimi District Court’s decisions were delivered on various dates and by different judges, their wording was almost identical. Each time, the judges justified the applicants’ detention pending trial by the gravity of the charges and the likelihood that if released they might abscond or obstruct the investigation. Moreover, in respect of the first applicant, the judge also noted that the first applicant had avoided the investigation until his arrest on 14 March 2013 because he had been wanted by the police since 10 March 2013 on the basis of the investigator’s decision charging him with a criminal offence under Article 228.3 of the Criminal Code.
On various dates in March and April 2013 the applicants appealed against the decisions ordering their pre-trial detention. They complained that there was no evidence that they had committed a criminal offence and there had been no justification for their detention pending trial. The first applicant also submitted that he had never been informed of any decision of the investigator charging him with a criminal offence until his arrest on 14 March 2013. In that connection, he pointed out that between 10 and 14 March 2013 he had not gone into hiding and had actively participated in the political life of the country, giving an interview to a newspaper and participating in the gathering of a political movement.
On various dates in March and April 2013 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the applicants’ appeals, finding that the detention orders were justified. In that connection, the appellate court held that the Nasimi District Court had correctly taken into account the seriousness of the criminal offence attributed to the applicants and the likelihood that if released they might abscond or obstruct the normal functioning of the investigation.
On 26 April 2013 the first applicant lodged a request with the Nasimi District Court asking to be put under house arrest in place of pretrial detention. He claimed, in particular, that his detention was not justified and that there was no reason for it to continue. In support of his request, he pointed out that he had a permanent address, had never been convicted, and that there was no risk of his absconding or obstructing the investigation.
On 27 April 2013 the Nasimi District Court dismissed the request, finding it unfounded.
On 3 May 2013 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the first-instance court’s decision.
On 29 May 2013 the prosecutor in charge of the criminal case lodged a request with the court asking for an extension of the first applicant’s pre-trial detention of three months, submitting that more time was needed to complete the investigation.
On 30 May 2013 the Nasimi District Court extended the first applicant’s detention pending trial until 7 September 2013. The court substantiated the need for the extension by the complexity of the case, the gravity of the charges, and the likelihood that if released the first applicant might abscond or obstruct the investigation by influencing those participating in the criminal proceedings.
On 3 June 2013 the first applicant appealed against that decision. He complained, in particular, that there was no evidence that he had committed a criminal offence and that the first-instance court had failed to justify the extension of his detention pending trial.
On 6 June 2013 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal and upheld the Nasimi District Court’s decision of 30 May 2013.
No further extension decisions were included in the case file.
On 26 April 2013 the second applicant lodged a request with the Nasimi District Court asking to be put under house arrest in place of pretrial detention. He claimed, in particular, that there was no risk of his absconding or obstructing the investigation and that the courts had failed to take his personal situation into consideration.
On 30 April 2013 the Nasimi District Court dismissed the request, finding it unfounded.
On 6 May 2013 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the first-instance court’s decision.
On 20 June 2013 the prosecutor in charge of the criminal case lodged a request with the court asking for an extension of the second applicant’s pre-trial detention for a period of three months. In that connection, he submitted that more time was needed to complete the investigation.
On 24 June 2013 the Nasimi District Court extended the second applicant’s detention pending trial by three months, until 1 October 2013. The court substantiated the need for the extension by the complexity of the case, the gravity of the charges and the need for additional time to carry out further investigative measures.
On 27 June 2013 the second applicant appealed against that decision, reiterating that there was no evidence that he had committed a criminal offence and that the Nasimi District Court had failed to justify his continued detention.
On 1 July 2013 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal, finding that the extension of the second applicant’s detention pending trial was justified.
On 15 July 2013 the second applicant again lodged a request with the Nasimi District Court asking to be put under house arrest in place of pre-trial detention, reiterating his previous arguments.
On 17 July 2013 the Nasimi District Court dismissed the request, finding that the grounds for his pre-trial detention had not changed.
On 25 July 2013 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the first-instance court’s decision.
On 17 September 2013 the prosecutor lodged a request with the court asking for an extension of the second applicant’s pre-trial detention for a period of two months. The prosecutor gave as the reason for the need to extend the detention the complexity of the case and the need for more time for the accused and his lawyer to familiarise themselves with the material in the case file.
On 18 September 2013 the Nasimi District Court extended the second applicant’s detention pending trial by two months, until 1 December 2013. The court substantiated the need for the extension by the complexity of the case, the gravity of the charges, the need for additional time to carry out further investigative measures and the likelihood that if released the second applicant might abscond or obstruct the investigation by influencing those participating in the criminal proceedings.
On 27 September 2013 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the firstinstance court’s decision.
No further extension decisions were included in the case file.
It appears from the documents in the case file that on an unspecified date in May 2013 the third applicant lodged a request with the Nasimi District Court asking to be put under house arrest in place of pre-trial detention. In that regard the Court notes that it explicitly requested the Government to submit copies of all the documents relating to the applicants’ pre-trial detention; they failed to do so.
On 17 May 2013 the Nasimi District Court dismissed the request, finding that there was no need to use an alternative preventive measure to custody.
On 23 May 2013 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the first-instance court’s decision.
On 20 June 2013 the prosecutor in charge of the criminal case lodged a request with the court asking for an extension of the third applicant’s pre-trial detention for a period of three months, submitting that more time was needed to complete the investigation.
On 22 June 2013 the Nasimi District Court extended the third applicant’s remand in custody by three months, until 30 September 2013. The court substantiated the need for the extension by the gravity of the charges, the risk of his reoffending, and the likelihood that if released he might abscond or obstruct the investigation.
It appears from the documents in the case file that on an unspecified date in June 2013 the third applicant appealed against that decision. The Government did not make a copy of the appeal available to the Court.
On 27 June 2013 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal, finding that the extension of his detention pending trial was justified.
On 30 July 2013 the third applicant again lodged a request with the Nasimi District Court asking to be put under house arrest in place of pre-trial detention. He claimed that his continued detention was not justified and that no investigative measures had been carried out since the beginning of his pre-trial detention.
On 31 July 2013 the Nasimi District Court dismissed the request.
On 7 August 2013 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the firstinstance court’s decision.
No further extension decisions were included in the case file.
On 15 April 2013 the fourth applicant lodged a request with the Nasimi District Court asking to be put under house arrest in place of pretrial detention. He claimed, in particular, that there was no risk of his absconding or obstructing the investigation and that the courts had failed to take his personal situation into consideration.
On 17 April 2013 the Nasimi District Court dismissed the request.
On 22 April 2013 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the first-instance court’s decision.
On 20 June 2013 the prosecutor in charge of the criminal case lodged a request with the court asking for an extension of the fourth applicant’s pre-trial detention for a period of three months, submitting that more time was needed to complete the investigation.
On 24 June 2013 the Nasimi District Court extended the fourth applicant’s remand in custody by three months, until 30 September 2013. The court substantiated the need for the extension by the complexity of the case, the need for additional time to carry out further investigative measures and the possibility of the fourth applicant’s absconding or influencing persons participating in the criminal proceedings.
On 25 June 2013 the fourth applicant appealed against that decision, reiterating that there was no evidence that he had committed a criminal offence and that the first-instance court had failed to justify his continued detention.
On 4 July 2013 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal, finding that the extension of his detention pending trial was justified.
On 7 August 2013 the fourth applicant again lodged a request with the Nasimi District Court asking to be put under house arrest in place of pre-trial detention or to be released on bail. He submitted in support of his request that there was no reason justifying his continued detention and that the courts had failed to take into account his personal situation.
On 13 August 2013 the Nasimi District Court dismissed the request, finding that there was no need to use an alternative preventive measure to custody.
On 22 August 2013 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the firstinstance court’s decision.
It appears from the documents in the case file that on an unspecified date in September 2013 the prosecutor in charge of the criminal case lodged a request with the court asking for an extension of the fourth applicant’s pre-trial detention for a period of two months. The Government did not make a copy of the request available to the Court.
On 18 September 2013 the Nasimi District Court decided to extend the fourth applicant’s detention pending trial for a period of two months, until 30 November 2013.
On 19 September 2013 the fourth applicant appealed against that decision, complaining that there was no justification for his continued detention. He reiterated that there was no reasonable suspicion that he had committed a criminal offence and that the first-instance court had failed to justify its decision.
It appears from the documents in the case file that on 4 October 2013 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the Nasimi District Court’s decision of 18 September 2013. The Government did not make a copy of the appellate court’s decision available to the Court.
No further extension decisions were included in the case file.
It appears from the documents in the case file that in September 2013 the applicants were additionally charged with new criminal offences under Articles 28 (preparation of a crime) and 220.1 (mass disorder) of the Criminal Code. The Government did not make the investigator’s decisions in this respect available to the Court.
On 6 May 2014 the Baku Court of Serious Crimes found the applicants guilty on all counts and sentenced the first applicant to seven and a half years’ imprisonment, the second applicant to eight years’ imprisonment, the third applicant to seven years’ imprisonment and the fourth applicant to eight years’ imprisonment.
On 16 December 2014 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld that judgment.
On 2 June 2015 the Supreme Court upheld the appellate court’s judgment in respect of the first and third applicants.
On 15 October 2015 the Supreme Court upheld the appellate court’s judgment in respect of the second and fourth applicants.
In the meantime, on 29 December 2014 the second and third applicants were released from serving the remainder of their sentence after being pardoned by a presidential decree.
On 17 March 2016 the first and fourth applicants were also released from serving the remainder of their sentence after being pardoned by a presidential decree.
Article 28 of the Criminal Code provides as follows:
“28.1.  Preparation of a crime shall mean looking for, purchasing or manufacturing means or instruments for committing a crime, entering into contact with others to commit a crime, making arrangements or intentionally creating the conditions for committing a crime in another way, provided that for reasons beyond that person’s control the crime is not consummated.
2.  Criminal liability shall be established only for the preparation of serious and particularly serious crimes.”
The relevant part of Article 220 of the Criminal Code provides as follows:
“220.1.  Organisation of or participation in mass disorder accompanied by violence, plunder, arson, destruction of property, the use of firearm or explosive substances or devices, or by armed resistance to public officers –
is punishable by deprivation of liberty for a period of four to twelve years.
...”
The relevant part of Article 228 of the Criminal Code provides as follows:
“228.1  Illegal acquisition, transfer, sale, storage, transportation and carrying of arm, its accessories, supplies (except for smoothbore hunting firearm and its supplies), explosive substances and devices –
is punishable by corrective labour for a period of up to two years or deprivation of liberty for a period of up to three years.
2  The same acts, if committed:
2.1.  by a group of individuals on preliminary arrangement;
2.2.  repeatedly –
are punishable by deprivation of liberty for a period of three to five years.
3.  The acts provided for by Articles 228.1 or 228.2 of this Code, if committed by an organised group –
are punishable by deprivation of liberty for a period of five to eight years.
...”
A detailed description of the relevant provisions of the CCrP concerning pre-trial detention and proceedings concerning the application and review of detention pending trial can be found in the cases of Farhad Aliyev v. Azerbaijan (no. 37138/06, §§ 83-102, 9 November 2010), and Muradverdiyev v. Azerbaijan (no. 16966/06, §§ 35-49, 9 December 2010).
In accordance with Article 215 of the CCrP and a presidential decree on the approval, entry into force of the CCrP of the Republic of Azerbaijan and matters concerning related legal regulations in that respect, dated 25 August 2000, investigations instituted in connection with Articles 220 and 228 of the Criminal Code are carried out by the police.
A detailed description of the relevant parts of the decisions of the Plenum of the Supreme Court on the application of the provisions of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights in the administration of justice, dated 30 March 2006, and on the application of the legislation by the courts during the consideration of applications for the preventive measure of remand in custody in respect of an accused, dated 3 November 2009, can be found in Rasul Jafarov v. Azerbaijan (no. 69981/14, §§ 50-76 and §§ 79-80, 17 March 2016).
The relevant part of the decision of the Plenum of the Supreme Court on judicial practice concerning cases related to the illegal manufacture, circulation and plunder of arm, its accessories, supplies, explosive substances and devices, dated 27 May 2005, reads as follows:
“4. ...
Explosive substances shall be understood to mean substances composed of chemical compounds capable of having the characteristics of immediate chemical transformation - explosion.
That includes TNT, ammonites, plastics, elastics, white and smokeless gunpowder, solid rocket fuel, etc.
Explosive devices include items composed of explosive substances and special devices (for example detonator, fuse, etc.) which create a spark for an explosion according to their constructive purpose.
...”
In November 2015 the UN Committee Against Torture considered the fourth periodic report of Azerbaijan, which covered the period from 2009 to 2015, and adopted, inter alia, the following concluding observations (CAT/C/AZE/CO/4):
“Arbitrary imprisonment and ill-treatment of human rights defenders
The Committee is deeply concerned about consistent and numerous allegations that a number of human rights defenders have been arbitrarily deprived of their liberty, subjected to ill-treatment and, in some cases, denied adequate medical treatment in retaliation for their professional activities. Among those human rights defenders are ... Rashadat Akhundov and Rashad Hasanov. ... The Committee regrets the State party’s categorical position that all the above allegations are unfounded, despite the existence of reports of the United Nations, other international organisations and human rights mechanisms indicating otherwise (see, for example, the joint statement of the Special Rapporteurs on the situation of human rights defenders, on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association, on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, on the independence of judges and lawyers, on the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health and of the Chair-Rapporteur of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention of 20 August 2015 and the judgement dated 22 May 2014 of the European Court of Human Rights concerning Ilgar Mammadov v. Azerbaijan, application no. 15172/13) ...”
The United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention conducted its first official visit to Azerbaijan from 16 to 25 May 2016. On 26 May 2016 it published a statement containing conclusions on its visit. The relevant part of the statement reads as follows:
“IV.  Arbitrary detention in the context of the exercise of human rights or fundamental freedoms guaranteed by international norms
During its visit, the Working Group could observe the severe limitations placed on the work of human rights defenders, journalists, political opponents and religious leaders ...
In addition to the human rights defenders, journalists, political and religious leaders met in detention facilities, including prisons, the Working Group also met with persons who had served their sentence or were pardoned and received a list of some 70 human rights defenders, journalists, political and religious leaders currently detained on a broad range of charges (drugs and arms related offences, hooliganism, tax evasion, etc.).
...
While fully taking into account the pardon decree signed by the President of Azerbaijan on 17 March 2016 which resulted in the release of political prisoners and prisoners of conscience, the Working Group was unable to observe any significant change in the country with respect to this situation regarding other persons deprived of liberty for apparently the same reasons.  The Working Group holds the view that human rights defenders, journalists, political and religious leaders continue to be detained under criminal or administrative charges as a way to impair the exercise of their basic human rights and fundamental freedoms and to silence them. These practices constitute an abuse of authority and violate the rule of law that Azerbaijan has agreed to comply with.”
The United Nations Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders visited Azerbaijan from 14 to 22 September 2016. On 22 September 2016 he “called on Azerbaijan to rethink [its] punitive approach to civil society” and published the following end of mission statement:
“I have shared with the Government my preliminary conclusion that, over the last two-three years, the civil society in Azerbaijan has faced the worst situation since the independence of the country. Dozens of NGOs, their leaders, employees and their families have been subject to administrative and legal persecution, including the seizure of their assets and bank accounts, travel bans, enormous tax penalties and even imprisonment.
Civil society has been paralysed as a result of such intense pressure. Human rights defenders have been accused by public officials to be a fifth column of the Western governments, or foreign agents, which has led to misperception in the population of the truly valuable role played by civil society. Activists promoting fundamental freedoms and criticising violations have been accused of being political opponents, touting values that run counter to those of their society or culture. They were denounced as politically or financially motivated actors. They were attacked, threatened or brought to court and sentenced under such charges as “hooliganism”, “money-laundering”, “provocation”, “drug-trafficking” or incitement to overthrow the State ...”