The case originated in an application (no. 8589/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr M.S. (“the applicant”), on 25 December 2007. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by Ms I. Khrunova, a lawyer practising in Kazan. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the conditions in which he had been transported to and from the courthouse and from the remand prison to the correctional facility were incompatible with the standards set forth in the Convention, that he had not received proper medical assistance while in custody during the criminal proceedings against him and serving a prison sentence and that his right of individual petition had been hindered.
On 22 March 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1980 and is serving a prison sentence in the Mordoviya Republic.
According to the official version of the events, on 31 May 2007 K., a close friend of the applicant, was arrested by the police when he attempted to sell to P. the amphetamines he had earlier bought from the applicant. K. voluntarily agreed to participate in a fake drug deal organised by the police to help them arrest the applicant in order to stop his drug dealing. He made a written statement to that effect. K. called the applicant in the presence of two attesting witnesses and police officers and asked him to sell him ten ecstasy pills. The applicant met K. at 11 p.m. He gave him the drugs and K. paid him in cash. The police officers then arrested him. K. gave the police the drugs he had received from the applicant. The police took the marked banknotes K. had paid for the drugs from the applicant’s bag. Then they cut the applicant’s nails for forensic analysis. The attesting witnesses were present at the scene and could observe the whole operation.
According to the applicant, K. called him and asked for help because he had been arrested. He also asked for money. The applicant agreed to help him. When he met K., the latter put several banknotes in his bag, which was open. Then several plain-clothed police officers arrested him. They handcuffed him, took the banknotes which K. had planted in his bag, cut a section out of his bag and cut his nails, together with some adjacent skin. When the applicant refused to sign the arrest record, one of the police officers punched him. The applicant then signed the document.
The applicant was taken to a police station. The head of the police station, S., beat the applicant up in order to make him confess to the crime. The police officers also took some of the applicant’s personal effects and the cash he had on him. The applicant spent the night at the police station.
On 1 June 2007 the applicant met with a lawyer, Kh. The latter told him to confess to the crime and to give some cash to the police. They would then let him go and make sure that he received a conditional sentence. The applicant did as he had been told by Kh.
The applicant remained in custody during the criminal proceedings against him.
On 17 January 2008 the Lefortovskiy District Court of Moscow found the applicant guilty of drug dealing and sentenced him to ten years’ imprisonment. The court based its findings on (1) the testimonies of K., police officers, one of the attesting witnesses and the investigator; (2) materials pertaining to the fake drug deal; and (3) forensic evidence. The court also noted that the applicant’s allegations of ill-treatment had not been subjected to examination in the course of the trial.
At the trial the applicant was represented by three lawyers. He pleaded not guilty. He recounted his version of the events, alleging that K. and the police had set him up.
On 23 April 2008 the Moscow City Court upheld the applicant’s conviction on appeal.
The Government’s submissions as regards the conditions in which the applicant was transported may be summarised as follows:
The applicant was always transported alone in a single compartment. He was allowed to use a toilet at the courthouse, if necessary. Once at the courthouse, he had access to drinking water.
The Department of the Interior used five types of van for transporting defendants to and from the courthouse. The GAZ-2705 van had an inmate compartment measuring 2.7 by 1.6 by 1.5 m comprising two cells with seating capacity for four persons each and one single cell. The inmate compartment in GAZ-3307 and GAZ-3309 vans measured 3.8 by 2.4 by 1.6 m and had two cells with seating capacity for twelve persons each and one single cell. The inmate compartment of the KAVZ-3976 van measured 3.0 by 2.1 by 1.7 m and had one cell with seating capacity for five persons and six single cells. The inmate compartment in ZIL-4331 vans measured 4.5 by 2.4 by 1.65 m and had two cells with seating capacity for seventeen persons each and two single cells.
The vans were ventilated through an opening in the door and by vents in the compartments. They were equipped with heating and lighting. They were cleaned daily and disinfected on a weekly basis. The vans were in good working order at all times.
According to the technical specifications for prison vans submitted by the Government, a single compartment in a prison van cannot measure less than 0.5 by 0.6 m. The width of one seating place should be 0.45 m.
According to the applicant, he was placed in a prison van compartment measuring 0.7 by 0.7 by 1.6 m. It was lined with metal sheeting and completely isolated from the rest of the van interior. The height of the compartments in the van was insufficient for a man of average stature to enter or stand up without hunching. Inmates were to remain seated at all times while inside the van. On average, each trip lasted three and a half hours. After the court hearings, the applicant and other detainees were first taken to remand prison no. 77/1, where they were sorted depending on destination. Throughout the time the vans were parked at the remand prison, their engines were off and the lighting, heating and ventilation did not function. The compartments inside the vans were very cold in the winter, when the outside temperature was minus 25oC. The inmates were not allowed to use the toilet. All the inmates smoked and the applicant, a nonsmoker, was exposed to second-hand tobacco smoke.
On 21 May 2008 the applicant was transported to a correctional colony to serve his prison sentence.
According to the Government, the applicant was taken from the remand prison to the railway station in a prison van. The trip lasted four hours (from 3.40 to 7.40 a.m.). It took forty minutes to place the prisoners in railway carriages (from 7.40 to 8.20 a.m.). The train journey lasted fifteen hours and ten minutes (from 8.20 a.m. to 11.30 p.m.). On arrival at the destination station, the inmates were again placed in vans and taken to the respective detention facilities. The trip lasted thirty-five minutes (from 11.30 p.m. to 12.05 a.m.).
The train compartment in which the applicant was placed measured 2.05 by 1.51 m. The number of inmates placed in the compartment did not exceed twelve. There were five berths and eight seats in the compartment. The berth was 2.05 m long. The passage between the berths and seats in the compartment was 0.47 m wide. All the inmates had luggage which they were allowed to place under the lower berths. The railway carriage was equipped with heating and ventilation in good working order.
As regards the smoking issue, the Government submitted as follows:
“Inmates transported by [train] ... are not allowed to smoke. They are warned accordingly by the chief guard. However, the inmates who smoked, during a long trip, became stressed if deprived of smoking. They took advantage of the fact that they were allowed to have cigarettes on them and those could not be confiscated. They tried to smoke, hiding it with skill. Their attempts to smoke, if noticed by the guard, were stopped ... ”
Inmates were not allowed to use the toilet within the boundaries of Moscow, that is at the station and during the first forty minutes of the journey. Thereafter, they were allowed to use the toilet every two hours.
According to the Government, the applicant submitted three complaints to the prosecutor’s office about the conditions of his transport. In response, the latter asked the authorities in charge of detainees’ transport to conduct an inquiry. No violations were disclosed.
The trip lasted eighteen hours. The applicant was placed in a train compartment measuring 2.9 square metres together with twelve other inmates. They were not allowed to use the toilet throughout the journey and had to use plastic bottles in the compartment instead. Almost all of the inmates smoked, and the applicant was exposed to second-hand tobacco smoke.
According to a statement signed by the acting head of remand prison SIZO-6 in Moscow and submitted by the Government, during the applicant’s detention in the remand prison from 4 June 2007 to 21 May 2008, he underwent regular medical examinations and received any necessary treatment.
Upon arrival at the remand prison, the applicant underwent obligatory blood tests, an X-ray examination and a physical check-up. The blood tests confirmed the presence of HIV (stage 2 – asymptomatic HIV infection). He was prescribed a special diet and placed under regular medical supervision.
During the period from May 2008 to date, the applicant has been serving a prison sentence in a number of correctional colonies. The parties did not indicate the exact colony numbers.
Following his arrival at correctional colony no. IK-18 in Mordoviya Republic, the applicant underwent a complete physical check-up. The general practitioner recommended consultation with an infectious diseases specialist and a psychiatrist, and prescribed a general blood test and a general sputum smear test.
On 29 May and 22 October 2008 the applicant had X-ray examinations. No abnormalities in the lungs were detected.
According to the applicant’s medical file, he did not receive any HIV-related treatment or examinations in 2008.
On 22 January 2009 the applicant was transferred to a medical correctional colony in order to undergo a comprehensive medical examination. He was examined by an infectious diseases specialist and had a CD4 cell count on 29 January 2009. His CD4 cell count was 759. The diagnosis (stage 2 – asymptomatic HIV infection) was confirmed. He had a biochemical blood test and urine samples were taken. On 30 January 2009 he was discharged from hospital in a satisfactory condition and transferred back to correctional colony no. IK-18.
On 26 January, 25 April and 23 October 2009 the applicant had Xray examinations. No abnormalities in the lungs were detected.
On 5 February, 23 July and 17 December 2009 the applicant consulted the infectious diseases specialist. On 24 December 2009, following contact with a tuberculosis-infected inmate, the applicant was examined by a tuberculosis specialist who recommended preventive antituberculosis treatment.
On 9 December 2009 the applicant had a viral load test.
On 16 February 2010 the applicant had another CD4 cell count. On 11 March 2010 he consulted the infectious diseases specialist. Because the applicant had a low CD4 cell count of 182, the doctor re-classified the applicant’s diagnosis as stage 4A and recommended antiretroviral therapy. The applicant consented.
On the same day the applicant was examined by the tuberculosis specialist. Subsequently, he underwent preventive medical treatment until 30 March 2010.
It appears that the applicant started antiretroviral therapy on 22 March 2010, but developed an allergic reaction to the medication. On 27 March 2010 he consulted the infectious diseases specialist by telephone. The latter recommended discontinuing the treatment. The applicant followed the doctor’s recommendation.
On 15 April 2010 the applicant resumed antiretroviral therapy, which was discontinued in view of the allergic reaction.
From 11 to 28 May 2010 the applicant underwent a medical examination in hospital. On 18 May (or 7 June) 2010 his CD4 cell count was 583. In view of the test results and referring to the side effects of the antiretroviral therapy, the applicant refused to undergo the therapy.
On 15 May 2010 the applicant had an ultrasound scan of his liver, which disclosed diffuse liver changes.
On 5 August 2010 the applicant’s CD4 cell count was 572.
On 3 October 2010 the applicant had a chest X-ray examination. No abnormalities were detected.
From 18 (February) to 4 March and from 18 to 28 April 2011 the applicant underwent an HIV-related examination in hospital. He had an ultrasound scan in connection with polyposis of the gallbladder and diffuse liver changes, and was examined by an infectious diseases specialist.
On 18 February 2011 the applicant had a chest X-ray. No abnormalities in the lungs were detected. On 15 March 2011 the applicant consulted a tuberculosis specialist.
The applicant was admitted to hospital and received treatment for acute gastritis from 4 to 19 July 2011.
On 19 July 2011 the applicant had another chest X-ray, which showed infiltrative shadows on the left lung. On 1 August 2011 the applicant was examined by the tuberculosis specialist, who prescribed a further tomographic examination and sputum smear test.
On 20 July 2011 the applicant agreed to undergo antiretroviral treatment. It appears that it was not carried out at the time.
From 19 July to 16 August 2011 the applicant underwent another HIV-related examination in hospital.
The sputum smear test of 2 August 2011 proved negative. The tomography of 8 August 2011 showed infiltration in the left lung. On 10 August 2011 the tuberculosis specialist ruled out the possibility of tuberculosis infection.
The applicant was admitted to hospital and received treatment for acute laryngitis from 17 to 29 August 2011.
On 8 September 2011 the applicant consulted the infectious diseases specialist.
On 11 September 2011 the applicant’s CD4 cell count was 452.
On 23 September 2011 the applicant had a chest X-ray and was diagnosed with tuberculosis (infiltration stage). On the same day he was admitted to hospital, where he underwent treatment for tuberculosis until 2 December 2011.
From 31 January to 10 February and from 13 to 24 February 2012 the applicant was admitted to hospital for examinations. It was established that his HIV condition was progressing and it was diagnosed as stage 4.
From 18 May to 5 October 2012 the applicant underwent treatment for HIV and tuberculosis in hospital. His CD4 cell count of 13 August 2012 was 303. According to the applicant, he started antiretroviral treatment in September 2012.
The applicant received HIV examinations and treatment in hospital from 17 May to 14 June 2013. Upon discharge, his condition was considered satisfactory.
According to the applicant, the antiretroviral treatment was interrupted from 12 to 22 June 2013 owing to a lack of necessary medication. The applicant’s medical file contains an entry confirming the lack of necessary medication in stock. On 22 June 2013 the applicant received the medication to resume the antiretroviral treatment. Subsequently, there were no interruptions in the prescribed treatment.
On an unspecified date the applicant asked for a transfer to a correctional facility with a less strict regime.
On 14 August 2012 the Tengushevskiy District Court of the Mordoviya Republic dismissed the applicant’s request, noting that he should complete the medical treatment prescribed prior to such a transfer, if any. The applicant did not appeal.
According to the applicant, the administration of correctional colony no. LPU-5 in the Mordoviya Republic where he was serving his prison sentence refused to dispatch his letters of 15 December 2011, and 24 February, 21 June and 15 July 2012 addressed to the Court, in which he complained of inadequate medical care. He further alleged that the letters of 4 April and 1 August 2012, which he had received from the Court, had been opened and read by the administration of the correctional colony; that his letter addressed to the Court of 14 June 2012 had been opened and dispatched with twenty-five days’ delay; and that his letter addressed to his lawyer, Sh., of 22 June 2012 had not been dispatched.
The relevant provisions of domestic law and international documents are set out in the judgment of E.A. v. Russia (no. 44187/04, §§ 27-37, 23 May 2013).
On 11 January 2006 the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted Recommendation Rec(2006)2 to member States on the European Prison Rules, which replaced Recommendation No. R (87) 3 on the European Prison Rules accounting for the developments which had occurred in penal policy, sentencing practice and the overall management of prisons in Europe. As regards the prisoners’ transport, the amended European Prison Rules lay down the following guidelines:
“32.2 The transport of prisoners in conveyances with inadequate ventilation or light, or which would subject them in any way to unnecessary physical hardship or indignity, shall be prohibited.”
The conditions of prisoners’ transport were discussed by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) in a number of reports concerning the CPT visits to particular countries. The relevant parts of the reports stated as follows:
Report to the Polish Government on the visit to Poland carried out by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) from 30 June to 12 July 1996
“68.  Finally, the CPT’s delegation received allegations from several sources that conditions in the vehicles used for transporting prisoners were frequently very poor. The delegation examined a number of vehicles used for prisoner transport and shall make some observations on this subject at a later stage (cf. paragraphs 155 and 156). However, reference must be made in this section of the report to the cubicles for “dangerous” prisoners found in a prisoner transport vehicle examined at Strzelce Opolskie Prison No 2. The cubicles were extremely small (0.5m2), dark and had no evident means of ventilation; to hold any person deprived of their liberty in such a place would be totally unacceptable.
The delegation observed that more recent prisoner transport vehicles did not contain such cubicles. Further, it was informed that the cubicles contained in the older vehicles still in service were no longer used to hold prisoners; the CPT would like to receive confirmation that this is indeed the case.
Many allegations were heard that prisoners were often transported in cramped and inadequately ventilated vehicles. The delegation had the opportunity to inspect the vehicles used for the transport of prisoners at Warszawa-Bialoleka Remand Prison and Strzelce Opolskie Prison No 2.
Warszawa-Bialoleka Remand Prison possessed three vehicles for transporting sentenced prisoners to other prison establishments or hospitals. Two of them were small and used for shorter journeys (of around 45 minutes); the inner section, which could accommodate up to six prisoners, was cramped, uncomfortable and inadequately ventilated. In the third, larger, vehicle, the compartment for transporting prisoners was divided into two sections, each measuring 1.25m by 3m; the delegation was told that up to 12 prisoners could be seated in each of these sections. This vehicle was used for longer journeys and prisoners could spend all day in it; it was inadequately ventilated and not suitable for carrying up to 24 prisoners on long journeys.
One of the vehicles inspected at Strzelce Opolskie Prison No 2 was similar in design to the larger vehicle seen at Warsaw. However, a second and more modern vehicle offered far better conditions; the delegation was told that 20 to 30 percent of the existing fleet of vehicles were of this latter model.
The CPT recommends that the Polish authorities give a high priority to modernising the fleet of prison transport vehicles.
Further, the CPT would like to receive a copy of any regulations which might exist concerning the characteristics of vehicles used for transporting prisoners.”
Report to the Lithuanian Government on the visit to Lithuania carried out by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) from 14 to 23 February 2000
“C. The Convoy Division
Preliminary remarks
Apart from local escorts, the transfer of persons in police custody or held in prison is entrusted to the specialised Convoy Division, a military unit under the authority of the Ministry of the Interior.
There are regular road and rail transport services for prisoners, and ad hoc arrangements can be made in special cases, e.g. requiring reinforced security. The Convoy Division uses a fleet of vans and trucks and a specially-equipped wagon hired from the railway company.
As from the outset of the visit, the CPT’s delegation received a large number of allegations about the conditions under which prisoners were transferred. In particular, complaints were heard about the poor material conditions which obtain in the vans/trucks and the railway wagon, the large number of prisoners who are placed in each compartment and the duration of journeys. A number of prisoners also complained that they had been brought to court after having travelled for many hours in dirty and uncomfortable conditions, without having been offered the possibility to wash and change into fresh clothes, and without having been provided with a meal. Some allegations of rough treatment and verbal abuse of prisoners by Convoy Division officers were also heard.
Given the number and consistency of the complaints received, the CPT’s delegation decided to examine the conditions under which the transport of detainees/prisoners is carried out. For this purpose, it met the senior officers in charge of the transport service and visited the Convoy Division’s railway wagon; further, both at the Division’s headquarters and in several of the establishments visited, the delegation inspected vehicles used for the transport of prisoners by road.
Transport by rail
The railway wagon had nine compartments for prisoners. Five of them measured 3.5 m² (1.70 x 2.05 m) and four, 2 m² (1.0 x 2.05 m). They were equipped with wooden platforms by way of benches or bunks; the larger compartments were equipped with six such platforms, with one additional fold-up section, and the smaller compartments with three.
All compartments had a grille to the corridor, and the windows to the outside of the train could be opened to provide ventilation. A separate toilet facility was available for prisoners. At the time of the visit, the wagon was not holding prisoners and its state of cleanliness was acceptable.
The delegation was informed that the railway wagon could transport a maximum of 104 prisoners: each of the 3.5 m² compartments could accommodate up to 16 prisoners and those measuring 2 m² up to 6. The information gathered by the delegation shows that the maximum authorised occupancy levels were on occasion reached for at least part of the train’s journey.
Transport by rail operated twice per week, between Vilnius and Klaipėda, servicing seven other locations, including Kaišiadorys and Kaunas. However, the train to which the prisoners’ wagon was attached also called at a number of other stations. All journeys took place at night, with departure at about 10.20 pm, and lasted a total of some 8 ½ hours. For most prisoners, the journey would only involve a part of the train’s itinerary.
Nonetheless, from conversations with both prisoners and officers, it emerged that prisoners were taken to the station well ahead of their departure time and that they might be required to stay in the wagon following arrival at the end-of-line siding for some considerable time before being taken to their final destination. As a result, the actual duration of the journey could be much longer; the CPT received allegations from prisoners to the effect that their journey had, in all, lasted some 16 hours and that, on occasion, they had been taken directly from the train to court.
Transport by road
Journeys by road tended to be much shorter than those by train; on average, they lasted between two and four hours and, in principle, did not involve long waiting periods.
The vehicles inspected by the delegation had multi-occupancy and single-occupancy cubicles equipped with narrow benches. The single-occupancy cubicles measured as little as 0.4 m² (e.g. 55 x 73 cm). Most vehicles had a means of ventilation (a hatch on the roof) and prisoners’ compartments were often grille-fronted. However, certain of the smaller cubicles had solid metal doors and had no effective means of ventilation. Further, they provided barely enough knee and shoulder room for an average person.
Safety arrangements
The safety of prisoners - and of staff charged with their supervision - in the means of transport described in paragraphs 111 to 114 above gives rise to much concern.
The CPT’s delegation was informed that the doors of cubicles/compartments in the vehicles currently used for the transport of prisoners in Lithuania were secured with padlocks. None of the vehicles seen had any device for opening automatically (and/or rapidly) the doors in case of emergency. In their current state, such vehicles could, in case of emergency (e.g. accident or fire), become death traps.
Assessment
In view of the allegations of rough treatment and verbal abuse heard, the CPT recommends that Convoy Division officers be reminded that ill-treatment of prisoners is not acceptable and will not be tolerated.
Further, the manner in which detainees/prisoners are transported by the Convoy Division is completely unacceptable, having regard inter alia to the physical conditions in which prisoners are conveyed and the duration of their journeys. Current arrangements are particularly detrimental for persons who are brought before a court immediately following a long journey without having been offered appropriate rest, food and the opportunity to wash and change clothes.
It should be added that the fact of depriving someone of their liberty brings with it the responsibility to take reasonable measures to ensure their safety. This is clearly not the case at present in Lithuania as regards the transport of prisoners. The vehicles used should be suitably designed for their purpose, taking due account of all relevant safety requirements in order to protect prisoners, as well as staff, as far as possible in the event of an emergency or accident (e.g. locking systems should be reviewed, fire extinguishing devices should be made available).
The CPT recommends that arrangements for the transport of prisoners be reviewed as a matter of urgency, having regard to the remarks made in paragraphs 111 to 115 and 117. The review should address inter alia the conditions to be offered to prisoners during transport (e.g. space per prisoner, lighting, ventilation, access to sanitary facilities) and safety requirements.
Certain urgent measures should be adopted without waiting for the outcome of that review; the CPT recommends that:
- the maximum number of prisoners who can be held in each compartment in the wagon used for transport by rail be significantly reduced: the 3.5 m² compartments should never be used to transport more than six persons; compartments measuring 2 m² should not be used for more than three persons;
- the cubicles measuring 0.4 m² in vans or trucks no longer be used for the transport of prisoners; such a confined space is unsuitable for custody purposes, no matter how short the duration.
The CPT also recommends that steps be taken to ensure that detained persons are placed in a position to appear before a court under conditions which guarantee respect for their dignity.”
Report to the Ukrainian Government on the visit to Ukraine carried out by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) from 10 to 26 September 2000
“f. transit and transport of prisoners
At the Vinnytsia establishment, the delegation observed the intolerable conditions under which prisoners in transit were forced to wait for extended periods (which could exceed two months), pending the resumption of their journey. At the time of the visit, 42 prisoners were crowded into a cell (cell 6A) of about 50 m², deprived of natural light and fresh air and subjected to a stifling, stale atmosphere (over 26oC in the cell). It would appear that two days previously the cell had contained over fifty prisoners. At the end of the visit, the delegation requested the authorities to take immediate steps to remedy this situation. The CPT would like to receive full particulars of the action taken in response to the delegation’s request.
Concerning road transport of prisoners, the delegation inspected two Internal Affairs Ministry vans in Simferopol SIZO. Each vehicle had collective compartments and an individual compartment. The individual compartments were as small as 0.5 m²; in paragraph 189 of the report on its 1998 visit, the CPT has already recommended that the practice of placing prisoners in compartments of this size cease. Conditions in the vehicle were also similar in other respects to those described in the aforementioned paragraph of the report on the 1998 visit (poor artificial lighting, inadequate ventilation).
Concerning rail transport, the delegation examined the facilities in one of the special carriages used for transporting prisoners. It had compartments measuring 2 and 3.5 m², with folding benches. The authorised capacity in the smaller compartments was six persons for journeys lasting not more than four hours, and four persons for longer journeys. In the larger 3.5 m² compartments, up to sixteen persons could be accommodated for short distances and twelve for long distances. The compartments had some access to natural light; however, ventilation was poor. The toilets for prisoners were in a disgusting state, clogged with excrement, despite the fact that prisoners were due to board a few minutes later for a long journey.
There were no arrangements to provide prisoners with food, even over long distances; as for drinking water, only a small container was provided to supply the prisoners throughout the journey.
The manner in which prisoners are transported, particularly by train, is unacceptable, having regard inter alia to the material conditions and possible duration of travel.
The CPT recommends that conditions of prisoners’ transport in Ukraine be reviewed in the light of the foregoing remarks. As an immediate measure, it recommends that the Ukrainian authorities take steps to:
- significantly reduce the maximum number of prisoners per compartment in a railway carriage: 3.5 m² compartments should never contain more than six persons, and 2 m² compartments never more than three persons;
- ensure that during rail transport, prisoners are supplied with drinking water and that for long journeys, the necessary arrangements are made for them to be properly fed;
- no longer use 0.5 m² compartments in vans for transporting prisoners.”
Report to the Azerbaijani Government on the visit to Azerbaijan carried out by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) from 24 November to 6 December 2002
“f. transport of prisoners
The transport of prisoners is the task of the Convoy Battalion of the Ministry of Justice. Transfers take place by road (for distances not exceeding 200 km), train (for journey of up to 12 hours) or plane (to and from the Naxçivan Autonomous Republic). The Convoy Battalion uses a fleet of vans and trucks and two specially equipped train carriages (only one of which was being used at the time of the visit, due to the lack of staff).
Conditions in the vans inspected by the delegation varied. They could be considered as satisfactory in the smaller vans (UAZ 452), which were designed to transport up to six inmates in a cabin measuring some 2.6 m², which was adequately lit, ventilated and heated, and was equipped with two benches. However, conditions in the trucks (GAZ 53 and ZIL 130), intended for transporting up to 24 persons, were unacceptable. The truck cabins were divided into two bar-fronted cubicles, measuring 3 m² each and equipped with narrow benches, which had no access to natural light and heating, and had poor artificial lighting and ventilation. There was an additional very small cubicle (0.4 m² in the GAZ truck and 0.8 m² in the ZIL model), used to transport female prisoners or prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment; such a confined space is unsuitable for transporting a person, no matter how short the duration.
The CPT recommends that conditions in the prison transport vehicles be reviewed, having regard to the remarks in paragraph 152. The review should address the conditions offered to prisoners during transport (e.g. space per prisoner, lighting, ventilation, access to sanitary facilities) and safety requirements. In particular, the CPT recommends that:
- the maximum permitted number of prisoners transported in the GAZ 53 and ZIL 130 trucks be significantly reduced;
- the very small cubicles in the GAZ 53 and ZIL 130 trucks be no longer used for transporting prisoners.
Conditions in the railway carriage were on the whole satisfactory. It could transport up to 80 persons at a time, in compartments designed for three or seven prisoners. The compartments were equipped with wooden three-level platforms, had a grille to the corridor, and windows which could be opened. The delegation was informed that inmates were provided with mattresses and sheets during the journey. A separate toilet facility was also available.”
The complexity and importance of health care services in detention facilities was discussed by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture in its 3rd General Report (CPT/Inf (93) 12 - Publication Date: 4 June 1993). The following are the extracts from the Report:
“33. When entering prison, all prisoners should without delay be seen by a member of the establishment’s health care service. In its reports to date the CPT has recommended that every newly arrived prisoner be properly interviewed and, if necessary, physically examined by a medical doctor as soon as possible after his admission. It should be added that in some countries, medical screening on arrival is carried out by a fully qualified nurse, who reports to a doctor. This latter approach could be considered as a more efficient use of available resources.
It is also desirable that a leaflet or booklet be handed to prisoners on their arrival, informing them of the existence and operation of the health care service and reminding them of basic measures of hygiene.
While in custody, prisoners should be able to have access to a doctor at any time, irrespective of their detention regime... The health care service should be so organised as to enable requests to consult a doctor to be met without undue delay...
A prison’s health care service should at least be able to provide regular outpatient consultations and emergency treatment (of course, in addition there may often be a hospital-type unit with beds)... Further, prison doctors should be able to call upon the services of specialists.
As regards emergency treatment, a doctor should always be on call. Further, someone competent to provide first aid should always be present on prison premises, preferably someone with a recognised nursing qualification.
Out-patient treatment should be supervised, as appropriate, by health care staff; in many cases it is not sufficient for the provision of follow-up care to depend upon the initiative being taken by the prisoner.
The direct support of a fully-equipped hospital service should be available, in either a civil or prison hospital...
A prison health care service should be able to provide medical treatment and nursing care, as well as appropriate diets, physiotherapy, rehabilitation or any other necessary special facility, in conditions comparable to those enjoyed by patients in the outside community. Provision in terms of medical, nursing and technical staff, as well as premises, installations and equipment, should be geared accordingly.
There should be appropriate supervision of the pharmacy and of the distribution of medicines. Further, the preparation of medicines should always be entrusted to qualified staff (pharmacist/nurse, etc.). ...
A medical file should be compiled for each patient, containing diagnostic information as well as an ongoing record of the patient’s evolution and of any special examinations he has undergone. In the event of a transfer, the file should be forwarded to the doctors in the receiving establishment.
Further, daily registers should be kept by health care teams, in which particular incidents relating to the patients should be mentioned. Such registers are useful in that they provide an overall view of the health care situation in the prison, at the same time as highlighting specific problems which may arise.
The smooth operation of a health care service presupposes that doctors and nursing staff are able to meet regularly and to form a working team under the authority of a senior doctor in charge of the service. ...”