The case originated in an application (no. 11921/04) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Leonid Nikitovich Lukyanov (“the applicant”), on 12 March 2004.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Y. Zaytsev.
On 5 April 2006 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1935 and lives in .
In November 2000 the applicant instituted civil proceedings in the Yalta Court (Ялтинський міський суд) seeking to oblige the Yalta Council’s Executive Committee (Виконавчий комітет Ялтинської міської ради) to provide his family of five residing in a one-bedroom apartment with larger housing. In his statement of claim the applicant noted, in particular, that he had been placed on the special waiting list for disabled war veterans, which entitled him to obtain suitable housing within two years of the placement.
On 4 May 2001 the court ordered the Executive Committee to provide the applicant’s family with an apartment meeting the standards established by Articles 48 and 50 of the Housing Code of Ukraine (Житловий кодекс України). By way of reasoning, the court dismissed the defendant’s allegations that no municipal housing was available at the time. The court observed in this regard that the applicant’s statutory right to obtain housing within two years of the date of the placement on the waiting list was unconditional.
On 19 September 2002 the Supreme Court of Ukraine upheld this judgment following cassation review and it became final.
On 17 December 2002 the Yalta Bailiffs (Відділ Державної виконавчої служби Ялтинського управління юстиції) initiated enforcement proceedings, having given the Executive Committee the time-limit of 17 January 2003 to comply with the judgment.
In summer 2003 the enforcement proceedings were terminated on account that vacant municipal housing was lacking.
On 23 March 2006 the Executive Committee decided to allocate a newly-constructed two-bedroom apartment and a one-bedroom apartment formerly belonging to a hostel to the applicant’s family.
According to the applicant, the two-bedroom apartment at issue lacked necessary facilities, such as sanitary equipment and electric outlets. The apartment, which formerly belonged to a hostel, was unsuitable for establishing a permanent residence.
According to the Government, the apartments at issue complied with applicable housing norms, which had been certified by competent commissions. On 27 October 2006 the applicant registered his residence in the new two-bedroom apartment.
A description of the domestic law concerning the enforcement of judgments can be found in Skubenko v. Ukraine, (dec.), no. 41152/98, 6 April 2004.
According to Section 13 paragraph 18 of the Law of Ukraine “On the Status of War Veterans, Guarantees of Their Social Protection” (Закон України «Про статус ветеранів війни, гарантії їх соціального захисту») of 22 October 1993 (as amended) disabled war veterans are eligible to obtain municipal housing within two years of having been placed on the waiting list.
Article 48 of the Housing Code of Ukraine (Житловий кодекс України) of 30 June 1983 (as amended) stipulates, in particular, that the minimal size of residential premises should comply with applicable standards developed by the Cabinet of Ministers and the Trade Union Federation. According to Article 50 of the Code, residential premises should comply with sanitary and technical norms.