The case originated in two applications (nos. 68762/14 and 71200/14) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Azerbaijani national, Mr Intigam Kamil oglu Aliyev (İntigam Kamil oğlu Əliyev – “the applicant”), on 16 October 2014 and 6 November 2014 respectively.
The applicant was represented by Ms R. Remezaite and Mr J. Javadov, lawyers practising, respectively, in London and Baku, and, starting from 30 August 2015, also by Mr Grégory Thuan dit Dieudonné, a lawyer practising in Strasbourg. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Asgarov.
The applicant complained, in particular, that his conditions of detention had amounted to inhuman and degrading treatment, that he had not received adequate medical assistance while in detention, that his arrest and pre-trial detention had not been justified and had been carried out in bad faith, that interferences with his rights to respect for his private life, home and correspondence and to freedom of assembly had not been justified, and that his rights had been restricted for purposes other than those prescribed in the Convention.
On 19 November 2014 the complaints under Articles 5 §§ 1, 3, 4 and Articles 8, 11 and 18 in application no. 68762/14 were communicated to the Government and the remainder of that application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. On 2 February 2015 application no. 71200/14 was also communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1962 and at the time of the events lived in Saray, Absheron region.
The facts of the case are similar to the application Rasul Jafarov v. Azerbaijan (no. 69981/14, 17 March 2016) in that the applicant in the present case was arrested in the context of the same events and on the basis of similar charges.
The applicant is a well-known human-rights lawyer and civil-society activist. He represents applicants before the Court in a large number of pending cases.
He is also the chairman of the Legal Education Society (“the Association”), a non-governmental organisation specialising in legal education. The Association was registered by the Ministry of Justice on 2 June 1999 and acquired the status of a legal entity. Its main functions consisted of raising legal awareness, organisation of training programmes for lawyers, human-rights defenders and journalists and preparation of reports relating to various human-rights issues in Azerbaijan. The Association was also involved in the preparation of applications to the Court and the submission of communications to the Committee of Ministers in the context of the execution of the Court’s judgments.
The applicant has collaborated with various international organisations on human-rights-related projects, including the European Programme for Human Rights Education for Legal Professionals (HELP) of the Council of Europe.
The applicant was involved, together with other human-rights defenders, in the preparation of a consolidated list of political prisoners in Azerbaijan.
On 24 June 2014, during the June session of the Parliamentary Assembly of Council of Europe (PACE), the applicant, along with other local human-rights defenders, including Mr Rasul Jafarov, participated as one of the speakers at a side event organised in the Council of Europe. During this meeting the applicant delivered a report on human-rights abuses in Azerbaijan.
According to the applicant, following his participation at the above event, a smear campaign was launched against him and other human-rights defenders by the pro-government media. For instance, on 4 July 2014 an online news portal affiliated with the authorities described the applicant, together with other human-rights defenders, as “American agents who receive millions of dollars in grants for painting an anti-Azerbaijani picture”.
On 14 August 2014, following the applicant’s arrest on 8 August 2014 (see paragraphs 22-24 below), A.H., the Chairman of the Legal Policy and State Building Committee of the National Assembly, gave an interview to APA, a news agency, where he commented on the reactions to the arrests of the applicant and other human-rights defenders and stated:
“... it is those [international organisations] which made them ‘well-known’. The[se] organisations have had grants allocated to them in non-transparent ways, directing them into various activities, including those against Azerbaijan. These people, some of whom are traitors and some weak-minded, will at last answer before the law.”
On 15 August 2014 A.H., the head of the Department of Social and Political Issues of the Presidential Administration, stated the following in an interview with Trend news agency:
“The most deplorable thing is that such NGOs and individuals and some journalists, relying on foreign circles funding them, placed themselves above national law, evaded registration of their grant projects, filing financial statements, taxes and other legal requirements.”
In an interview published on 2 September 2014 Y.M., a member of parliament from the ruling party, who was also the director of the Institute of History at the Academy of Sciences, stated the following in respect of the recently arrested NGO activists and human-rights defenders:
“People who betray their motherland cannot be forgiven. ... The death penalty should be imposed on such people. Capital punishment must be the gravest punishment for them. Why should traitors be forgiven? ... Therefore, the activities of a number of non-governmental organisations must be investigated very seriously, and if any illegality is discovered, such organisations must be immediately banned and their leaders punished.”
On 3 September 2014 an online news portal Vestnik Kavkaza published an interview with R.M., the head of the Presidential Administration who stated, inter alia, the following:
“Such NGOs as the Institute for Peace and Democracy, Institute for Reporters’ Freedom and Safety, Legal Education Society, Monitoring and Teaching Democracy Center and others use big grants from foreign organisations under the guise of humanrights protection to send reports to different quarters and organise antiAzerbaijani campaigns in international structures where Azerbaijan is represented.”
On 3 December 2014 State-owned news agencies published a sixtypage manifesto written by R.M., the head of the Presidential Administration, entitled “The World Order of Double Standards and Modern Azerbaijan”. The article accused human-rights NGOs operating in the country of being the “fifth column of imperialism”. It postulated that various, mostly US-sponsored, donor organisations such as the United States of America’s National Endowment for Democracy (NED), as well as other foreign organisations, supported political opposition movements in various countries against national governments. For local human-rights NGOs, the purpose of such funding schemes was the formation of a “fifth column” inside a country. US taxpayers’ money was being spent on pushing for regime change or forcing existing governments to comply with US political demands.
On 13 May 2014 the Prosecutor General’s Office instituted criminal proceedings under Articles 308.1 (abuse of power) and 313 (forgery by an official) of the Criminal Code in connection with alleged irregularities in the financial activities of a number of non-governmental organisations, including the Association.
On 7 July 2014 the Sabail District Court ordered freezing of the applicant’s and the Association’s bank accounts.
On 8 August 2014 the applicant was invited to the Prosecutor General’s Office for questioning as a witness in connection with the abovementioned criminal proceedings. The interview lasted about thirty minutes during which the applicant was questioned about his background, his family and activities of the Association.
Following the interview, the investigator issued a decision charging the applicant under Articles 192.2.2 (illegal entrepreneurship), 213.1 (largescale tax evasion) and 308.2 (aggravated abuse of power) of the Criminal Code. The description of charges consisted of a single sentence which was one page long and was similar to that used in the case of Rasul Jafarov (cited above, § 16). The acts with which the applicant was charged appear as follows:
– the applicant, acting in his capacity as chairman of the Association, had failed to inform the relevant executive authority of his appointment as head and representative of a legal entity in accordance with Article 9.3 of the Law on State Registration of Legal Entities and the State Register;
– he had failed to register with the relevant executive authority various grant agreements which had been concluded since August 2012 with NED, Norway’s Human Rights House Foundation and other donor organisations and which had allocated to the Association for various projects certain sums in the total amount of 74,911.29 new Azerbaijani manats (AZN – approximately 71,343 euros (EUR) at the material time);
– he had signed the said agreements on behalf of the Association without having legal authority to do so and had placed the above allocated sums in the bank accounts of the Association and then, by withdrawing cash, had made payments to himself and other people involved in the projects in the guise of salaries and service fees;
– by failing to register the above grant agreements with the relevant executive authority, the applicant had been conducting illegal entrepreneurial activity and had thus profited in the amount of AZN 66,204.58 (approximately EUR 63,051 at the material time) and had avoided in this context payment of taxes in the amount of AZN 8,706.71 (approximately EUR 8,291 at the material time) which were due in accordance with Articles 124, 150.1.6, 218, 219 and 220 of the Tax Code.
On the same day the Nasimi District Court, relying on the official charges brought against the applicant and the prosecutor’s request for the application of the preventive measure of remand in custody, ordered the applicant’s detention for a period of three months. The court justified the application of remand in custody by the seriousness of the charges and the likelihood that if released he might abscond and influence other participants in the criminal proceedings.
On 11 August 2014 the applicant appealed against this decision, claiming that his detention was unlawful. He stated, in particular, that there was no reasonable suspicion that he had committed a criminal offence and that there was no justification for the application of the preventive measure of remand in custody. He pointed out in this connection that the court had failed to justify his detention on remand and to take into account his personal circumstances, such as his social and family status, his state of health and his age, when it ordered his remand in custody. The applicant further complained, relying on Article 18 of the Convention, that the charges brought against him were politically motivated and that he had been deprived of his liberty because of his work as a human-rights activist. He submitted in this connection that the actual reason for his arrest had been the fact that he had represented numerous applicants before the Strasbourg Court in cases relating to election irregularities and that he had publicly accused the Government of human-rights abuses at a PACE event in June 2014. He argued that his arrest had been part of a general policy aimed at silencing and shutting down independent NGOs and human-rights defenders in the country.
On 13 August 2014 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and found the first-instance court’s decision lawful. It referred to the seriousness of the charges and the likelihood that if released the applicant might abscond from the investigation, obstruct the proceedings and interfere with the course of justice. As regards the applicant’s complaints that the charges were politically motivated owing to his humanrights activity, the court held that these allegations were unfounded as the applicant had been accused of committing financial crimes which could not be associated with any political motives.
On 3 September 2014 the applicant applied to the Nasimi District Court, requesting the substitution of remand with either house arrest or release on bail. In his application the applicant, among other things, reiterated his complaints to the effect that the acts attributed to him did not constitute a criminal offence and there was accordingly no reasonable suspicion of his having committed such an offence.
On 12 September 2014 the Nasimi District Court dismissed the application, finding that the risks that the applicant might abscond or otherwise upset the course of the proceedings or reoffend continued to pertain.
On 15 September 2014 the applicant appealed, reiterating his arguments.
On 22 September 2014 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the Nasimi District Court’s decision of 12 September 2014.
On 23 October 2014 the applicant applied again to the Nasimi District Court, requesting the substitution of remand with either house arrest or release on bail.
On 24 October 2014 the Nasimi District Court dismissed his application based on similar findings.
On the same date the Nasimi District Court extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention by three months, finding that the grounds justifying his continued detention “had not ceased to pertain”.
On 27 October 2014 the applicant appealed against both decisions concerning his application for the substitution of remand with other alternative measures and the extension of his pre-trial detention.
On 29 October 2014 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed both appeals and upheld the first-instance court’s above decisions.
On 12 December 2014 the Prosecutor General’s Office charged the applicant de novo. In addition to the original charges, the applicant was further charged under Articles 179.3.2 (high-level embezzlement) and 313 (forgery by an official) of the Criminal Code. The acts imputed to the applicant under Article 213.1 (large-scale tax evasion) of the Criminal Code were re-qualified under Article 213.2.2 (tax evasion on a very large scale) of the Criminal Code. In particular, the period of time during which the applicant allegedly committed crimes was expanded from 2012 back to 2009 onwards. As regards the charges of embezzlement, the applicant was accused of transferring various amounts from the bank accounts of the Association to the bank account of one of the Association’s employees with a view to their subsequent withdrawing the cash. With respect to the charges concerning forgery, the applicant was accused of inserting false information into the cashbook concerning payments to various employees of the Association in the guise of salaries and services fees. As regards the requalification of the crime of tax evasion, the total amount of alleged illegal profit obtained by the applicant was raised to AZN 496,729.25 (approximately EUR 473,075 at the material time) and the amount of alleged unpaid taxes to AZN 65,636.85 (approximately EUR 62,510 at the material time).
On 29 December 2014 the Prosecutor General’s Office drew up a bill of indictment and the case went to trial.
On 7 August 2014 the prosecutor in charge applied to the Nasimi District Court to have a search of the office of the Association (see paragraph 8 above) and “other places of storage” authorised. The prosecutor justified the search by referring to the criminal investigation under Articles 308.1 (abuse of power) and 313 (forgery by an official) of the Criminal Code “into breaches of legislation discovered in the activities of a number of non-governmental organisations and branches and representatives offices of foreign non-governmental organisations in Azerbaijan”.
On the same day the Nasimi District Court authorised a search of the Association’s office and “other places of storage”. The relevant parts of the decision read as follows:
“[The prosecutor in charge of the case] applied to the court with a request to conduct a search and seizure in the framework of the criminal case no. 142006023.
[The prosecutor in charge] justified his request by [the following:] ... this criminal case concerns an investigation under Articles 308.1 [abuse of power] and 313 [forgery by an official] of the Criminal Code into breaches of legislation discovered in the activities of a number of non-governmental organisations and branches and representatives offices of foreign non-governmental organisations in Azerbaijan. Given that the evidence gathered gives grounds [to conduct a search], it is necessary for the purpose of carrying out a comprehensive, thorough and objective investigation to conduct a search [of the Association’s] office located at [office address] ... and other places of storage ...
Having regard to the above, for the purpose of conducting a comprehensive, thorough and objective investigation, a search and seizure is requested of [the Association’s] office located at [office address] ... and other places of storage.
The court considers that for the purpose of conducting a comprehensive, thorough and objective investigation it is necessary to conduct a search and seizure [of the Association’s] office located at [office address] ... and other places of storage.”
On 8 August 2014 the investigator carried out a search of the applicant’s home on the basis of the Nasimi District Court’s decision of 7 August 2014. According to the search record of 8 August 2014, the search was carried out in the presence of the applicant’s lawyer, members of his family and two attesting witnesses (hal şahidləri). The investigator seized all the documents, computers, USB flash drives and other electronic data storage devices. On the same day the investigator also carried out a search of the home of the applicant’s brother where the applicant was officially registered as a resident.
On 9 August 2014 the investigator carried out a search of the Association’s office. It appears from the search record of 9 August 2014 that the investigator seized all the documents found in the office, including documents related to the Association’s activities and case files concerning over a hundred applications pending before the Court and documents related to the proceedings before the domestic courts.
On an unspecified date the applicant lodged a complaint with the Nasimi District Court, claiming that the searches had been unlawful. Relying on Article 8 of the Convention, he complained that there had been no legal basis for carrying out the searches. He also complained that the investigator had failed to record each seized document as required by the relevant law and had taken the documents without making an inventory. He further complained of the seizure of numerous documents and files relating to the ongoing court proceedings before the Court and the domestic courts.
On 12 September 2014 the Nasimi District Court dismissed the applicant’s claim. The first-instance court held that the searches had been conducted in accordance with the relevant law. As to the seizure of the documents relating to the cases pending before the Court and the domestic court, it found that they could not be returned to the applicant at this stage of the proceedings.
On 15 September 2014 the applicant appealed against this decision, reiterating his previous complaints. He asked, in particular, the appellate court to declare the searches unlawful, to order the return of the documents relating to the cases pending before the Court and the domestic courts, and to provide him with a copy of all the seized documents in order to prepare his defence.
On 23 September 2014 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the first-instance court’s decision of 12 September 2014.
Following his arrest, the applicant was placed in the Baku pre-trial detention facility in Kurdakhani.
From 9 to 12 August 2014 the applicant was held in a so-called “quarantine” cell designed for the admission of newcomers. He was detained in this cell, which according to him measured approximately 10 sq. m, together with eight other detainees. The applicant did not have his own bed and had to share beds with others. The cell was not adequately ventilated and, although all the detainees were smokers except the applicant, there was no special place for smoking. The temperature inside the cell was very high. The applicant had no access to outdoor exercise and was confined to his cell for the whole day. There was no bathroom and the sanitary conditions were very bad. Water supply was available only two hours per day. The light was always on.
As from 12 August 2014, following a visit of a delegation from the International Committee of the Red Cross, the applicant was transferred to another cell. He was then detained in a cell measuring 12-14 sq. m together with three other detainees. The applicant had his own bed and bedding. There was a small window in the cell. However, the cell was not adequately ventilated and the temperature inside the cell was very high in August and September and very low in winter because the central-heating system was turned on only after 15 November. There was no fresh air in the cell and while there was a yard of 10 sq. m adjacent to the cell, it was closed after 4 p.m. every day. The light in the cell was never switched off, contributing further to the lack of sleep. Cold water was provided every few hours, but hot water was available only twice per week.
The food served in the detention facility was meagre and of poor quality and had to be supplemented with food sent by the applicant’s family. However, the applicant was entitled to receive only one parcel of food per week and there was no possibility to keep food fresh because of the absence of a refrigerator.
The applicant was confined to his cell for most of the day. There was an exercise room in the detention facility, but detainees were not allowed to use it.
Without specifying the relevant periods of the applicant’s detention, the Government submitted that the applicant had been detained with three other detainees in the cell measuring 17.82 sq. m., which was designed to accommodate four persons. The cell had been adequately lit and ventilated. There had been one window in the cell measuring 120 by 140 cm. Sanitary facilities had been separated by a plastic door and consisted of a toilet, a sink and a shower. The applicant had been provided with a separate bed and bedding, water, food and other necessities. In support of their account the Government submitted a copy of a certificate issued by the Prison Service which provided a general overview of the Baku pre-trial detention facility.
The applicant suffered from a number of conditions before his arrest. In particular, he suffered from osteochondrosis of the vertebral column, abnormal blood pressure, thrombophlebitis, prostatic hyperplasia, insomnia and headaches and had neurological and urological problems.
According to the applicant, his state of health significantly deteriorated following his arrest because of the interruption and postponement of medical treatment that he had been undergoing before his arrest.
On 24 October 2014 during a hearing at the Nasimi District Court the applicant felt unwell and fainted in the courtroom. The applicant’s lawyer immediately lodged an application with the judge, asking for the applicant’s examination by a medical expert in order to establish whether his state of health was compatible with his detention. The judge decided to forward the request to the Serious Crimes Department of the Prosecutor General’s Office, without taking further action.
On 24 October 2014 the applicant’s lawyer also lodged an application with the head of the detention facility, asking for the applicant to receive adequate medical treatment.
On 25 and 27 October 2014 the applicant underwent medical examinations, including a MRI scan of his brain and vertebral column in the National Oncology Centre in Baku. According to the results of the scan, there was no pathology in the brain or the vertebral column. The results of the scan revealed the presence of osteochondrosis of the vertebral column, a hernia in the vertebral column and disc protrusions in the following areas of the vertebral column: C 4-5, C 5-6, C 6-7, L 2-3, L 4-5. The doctors, however, concluded that none of these hernias or disc protrusions required surgery or inpatient treatment and prescribed outpatient treatment. The ultrasound examination of the abdominal zones showed enhanced parenchymal echogenicity of the left kidney, and some hydronephrosis and some kidney stones in the renal collecting system. Small masses were detected in the prostate. In order to determine whether there was pathological process in the prostate, the applicant was subjected to a specific prostate blood test, PSA (Prostate-Specific Antigen), and the result of the test was satisfactory.
On 28 October 2014 the applicant asked the head of the detention facility to inform him of the results of the medical examinations.
On 31 October 2014 the applicant was officially informed of the results of the medical examinations. However, according to the applicant, he was not provided with copies of these results.
On 11 November 2014 the applicant’s lawyer asked the head of the detention facility to provide him with copies of the results of the applicant’s medical examinations. It is not clear from the case-file whether the applicant was provided with those documents.
By a decision of 14 November 2014, the investigator in charge of the case dismissed a request by the applicant for examination by a forensic expert, finding that the applicant had undergone the relevant medical examinations and there was no need for his examination by a forensic expert.
On 20 November 2014 the applicant lodged a request with the prosecution authorities and the administration of the detention facility, asking them to allow his medical examination by two independent doctors, I.H. and A.G.
By a decision of 28 November 2014, the investigator in charge of the case dismissed the applicant’s request, finding that he had failed to substantiate his request.
By a letter of 2 December 2014, the medical department of the Ministry of Justice informed the applicant that he had undergone the relevant medical examinations and a conservative treatment had been prescribed for him.
In December 2014 the applicant was examined by the neurologist, who prescribed anti-anxiety drugs. The applicant was also seen by an ophthalmologist and a psychiatrist, and underwent an ultrasound examination.
On 26 December 2014 the applicant stopped taking the anti-anxiety drugs prescribed. According to the applicant, he decided not to take the drugs owing to the serious side effects, such as appearance of suicidal behaviour.
According to the Government, on 19 February 2015 the applicant was examined in the Neurosurgery Hospital by the country’s leading doctors. The laboratory and ultrasound examination did not reveal any cancer-related anomalies.
According to the applicant, he was transported several times to and from the Baku pretrial detention facility. The distance between the detention facility and the court-house was about 15-20 km.
The applicant and other detainees were transported in special vans and the journey usually lasted about one hour. According to the applicant, the vehicles were in poor condition and there was no appropriate place to sit or stand inside. Allegedly, no ventilation or air conditioning was available.
On 24 October 2014 the applicant was transported to the Nasimi District Court together with nine other detainees, in a van allegedly designed for eight people.
He was detained in a room situated in the basement of the court-house. According to the applicant, the room was not ventilated and did not allow access to daylight. There was only one little window which had metal bars and was not open. The room was small and measured 4-5 sq. m. The applicant shared this room with four detainees all day waiting for his hearing. He was allegedly not provided with food and water.
On 28 January 2015 the applicant lodged under the Code of Criminal Procedure a complaint with the Sabunchu District Court against the Baku pre-trial detention facility, complaining about his conditions of detention and of the lack of adequate medical treatment.
On 8 February 2015 the court left the applicant’s complaint without examination for lack of jurisdiction as the investigation had been already completed and his criminal case had gone to trial.
On 25 February 2015 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the above decision.
On 22 April 2015 the Baku Assize Court convicted the applicant as charged under Articles 179.3.2, 192.2.2, 213.2.2, 308.2 and 313 of the Criminal Code (see paragraphs 21 and 34 above) and sentenced him to seven and a half years’ imprisonment.
On 21 July 2015 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the applicant’s conviction and sentence.
On 24 February 2016 the Supreme Court upheld the Baku Court of Appeal’s judgment of 21 July 2015.
On an unspecified date the Prosecutor General lodged an application for supervisory review with the Plenum of the Supreme Court on the ground of the severity of the sentence imposed on the applicant.
On 28 March 2016 the Plenum of the Supreme Court granted the application and reduced the applicant’s sentence to five years’ imprisonment suspended on probation. The applicant was released from detention.
The applicant’s criminal trial is the subject of a separate application which is pending before the Court (application no. 51324/16).
For a summary of the relevant domestic law, including most of the relevant provisions of the Criminal Code, and practice and for international reports see Yunusova and Yunusov v. Azerbaijan (no. 59620/14, §§ 92-103, 2 June 2016) and Rasul Jafarov (cited above §§ 5084). Furthermore, according to Article 213.2.2 of the Criminal Code, as in force at the material time, an offence of tax evasion on a very large scale (defined as an amount above AZN 100,000 but not exceeding AZN 500,000) was punishable by imprisonment for a period between three to seven years, with or without deprivation of the right to hold a certain position or to engage in a certain activity for a period of up to three years.
The relevant parts of the Concluding observations on the fourth periodic report of Azerbaijan (CCPR/C/AZE/4) adopted by the UN Human Rights Committee on 16 November 2016, read as follows:
The Committee remains concerned about extensive restrictions on freedom of expression in practice, including:
...
The State party should take all measures necessary to guarantee the full enjoyment of freedom of expression by everyone in practice. It should take immediate steps to end any repression against the above-mentioned categories of persons, provide effective protection against persecution or retaliation and ensure that any restrictions on the exercise of their freedom of expression comply with the strict requirements of article 19 (3) of the Covenant. ...
...
The Committee is concerned about restrictive legislation negatively affecting the exercise of freedom of association, including stringent registration requirements for public associations and NGOs, broad grounds for denial of registration and temporary suspension or permanent closure of NGOs, restrictive regulations on grants and donations received by public associations and NGOs, including the ban on foreign funding, and heavy penalties for violations of the relevant legislation. The Committee is further concerned about threats against NGO leaders, the high number of criminal investigations against NGOs, the freezing of their assets and those of their members and the significant number of NGOs that have been closed. ...
The State party should revise relevant laws, regulations and practices with a view to bringing them into full compliance with the provisions of articles 19 and 22 of the Covenant, including by:
In addition, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders conducted an official visit to Azerbaijan from 14 to 22 September 2016. In the course of his visit, the Special Rapporteur met high-level representatives of the national authorities and members of civil society, including human-rights defenders in detention. The most relevant parts of the report on this visit (“Report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders on his mission to Azerbaijan”), which was presented to the Human Rights Council at its thirty-fourth session (27 February-24 March 2017), read as follows:
The situation of civil society in Azerbaijan has seen serious setbacks since 2009, as the rights to freedom of expression, assembly and association have increasingly been curtailed when exercised in opposition to the Government or its policies. Moreover, high-level government officials have used a strident rhetoric to stigmatize human rights defenders and declare them tools of Western influence bound to undermine the State.
In December 2014, the head of the Presidential Administration published an essay, stating that Western-funded NGOs played the role of a “fifth column” in Azerbaijan and made several public statements repeating the accusation. Other key officials made similar statements. Most defenders have been accused of being political opponents, promoting values that run counter to those of their society or culture. They have been denounced as politically or financially motivated actors. During the visit, it became evident that such inflammatory language by senior government officials has had a stigmatizing impact on civil society.
The continued stigmatization of defenders, which exposes them to heightened risks and produces a chilling effect on the public perception of them, remains of concern. Describing reputable organizations as paid political activists serves no legitimate purpose. The Special Rapporteur urges the Government to refrain from stigmatizing human rights defenders and to respect the legitimate role of civil society in the promotion of human rights and the rule of law in Azerbaijan.
The Government is encouraged to support the work of independent civil society organizations, despite disagreements or criticisms, bearing in mind their invaluable role in advancing Azerbaijani society. The Special Rapporteur urges the Government to undertake activities to raise awareness of human rights among the public and foster a spirit of dialogue and cooperation in society.
During the visit, the Special Rapporteur received many reports and testimonies pointing to the intensified crackdown on and criminalization of civil society in Azerbaijan. In that context, the authorities have targeted defenders, journalists, lawyers and grassroots activists through the use of politically motivated criminal prosecutions, arrests, imprisonment and travel bans. They have also used detention to intimidate political and social media activists on what often seem to be spurious misdemeanour charges of resisting police orders or petty hooliganism.
In 2015, the Committee against Torture expressed deep concern that human rights defenders had been arbitrarily deprived of their liberty, subjected to illtreatment and, in some cases, denied adequate medical treatment in retaliation for their professional activities (see CAT/C/AZE/CO/4, para. 10). At the conclusion of its visit in May 2016, the Working Group on arbitrary detention stated that defenders continued to be detained under criminal or administrative charges as a way to impair the exercise of their basic human rights and fundamental freedoms and to silence them. Those practices constituted an abuse of authority and violated the rule of law that Azerbaijan had agreed to comply with. The Working Group also referred to the large number of cases of detainees who were exposed to violence, torture and illtreatment. When he visited detained defenders during his visit, the Special Rapporteur could attest to the vulnerability of their physical integrity owing to the continued reports of violence in the context of detention in the country.
The Special Rapporteur, jointly with other mandate holders, has issued a number of public statements, urging the authorities to put an end immediately to all forms of persecution of human rights activists in the country. At the session of the Human Rights Council, held in June 2015, a group of 25 States endorsed an oral statement on the situation of human rights in Azerbaijan, raising concerns about the shrinking space for civil society and the imprisonment of independent voices, in particular defenders, and calling for their immediate and unconditional release.
The punitive approach to criminalize defenders is said to include a number of the following elements: applying politically motivated charges (inciting hatred, mass disorder and treason); resorting to fabricated charges (possession of drugs and weapons, hooliganism and embezzlement); and using special charges (illegal business activity, tax evasion, and abuse of office) to target primarily the heads of prominent NGOs in Azerbaijan and curtail the ability of NGOs to operate.
It is alarming that the maximum term of imprisonment under the code of administrative offences for misdemeanours, with which defenders are often charged (for example, hooliganism, resisting police and traffic violations), has been increased from 15 to 90 days. It is now equal to the minimum term of detention under the criminal code. The Human Rights Committee has held that such severity of punishment may amount to de facto criminal sanction (see CCPR/C/AZE/CO/4, para. 20). Furthermore, in practice, administrative trials that result in such sentences are reportedly perfunctory, with defendants having limited access to independent counsel. Judges tend to decide on periods of detention based almost exclusively on police testimonies. The widespread nature of this type of criminalization could be seen in the documenting of at least 30 cases by civil society, in which the authorities used administrative law offences to jail human rights activists in 2016.
The gravity of the arbitrary detention of defenders in Azerbaijan is illustrated through the continuous efforts by civil society to monitor and document how many political prisoners are in detention at a given time. Various lists of political prisoners are updated regularly to inform the debate about the exact number of political prisoners in the country. In fact, during their visits, both the Special Rapporteur and the Working Group on arbitrary detention received various lists of a large number of defenders, journalists and political and religious leaders who were detained on a broad range of politically motivated charges (drugs- and arms-related offences, hooliganism, resisting police, tax evasion, etc.) during their visits.
In late 2015 and early 2016, the Government conditionally released or pardoned a number of human rights defenders. However, none of those released had their convictions vacated and several still face travel restrictions. The Special Rapporteur shares the view of the Working Group on arbitrary detention that the pardon did not lead to any significant change in the country regarding other persons deprived of their liberty. Furthermore, even as some activists and journalists were released, the authorities regrettably arrested many others on spurious criminal and administrative charges to prevent them from carrying out their legitimate work.
The Special Rapporteur is deeply concerned about the intimidation facing the families and relatives of defenders who carry out their activism from abroad, which in some cases has involved criminal charges being brought against those relatives. The Special Rapporteur calls on the Government to refrain from criminalizing the important work of human rights defenders and immediately review the cases of defenders and their relatives deprived of their liberty, with a view to releasing them unconditionally.”
Supervision of the execution of the Court’s judgments in the cases of Ilgar Mammadov v. Azerbaijan (no. 15172/13, 22 May 2014, final on 13 October 2014) and Rasul Jafarov (cited above, final on 4 July 2016) is done by the Committee of Ministers under enhanced procedure. According to the Committee of Ministers’ decision CM/Del/Dec(2016)1273, adopted during its 1273 DH meeting (December 2016), the Rasul Jafarov case was classified as a clone of the “Ilgar Mammadov group of cases” in respect of the general measures.
During the first examination of the Ilgar Mammadov case at its 1214th meeting (December 2014), the Committee, in the context of general measures, “conveyed its particular concern about the finding of a violation of Article 18 taken in conjunction with Article 5 of the Convention” and “therefore called upon the Azerbaijani authorities to furnish, without delay, concrete and comprehensive information on the measures taken and/or planned to avoid that criminal proceedings are instituted without a legitimate basis and to ensure effective judicial review of such attempts by the prosecutor’s office”.
The Committee further examined this case at each of its Human Rights meetings and has repeated the above request at every examination of this case. Notably, at its 1236th meeting (September 2015), the Committee of Ministers adopted an Interim Resolution (CM/ResDH(2015)156) in which it “expressed its deepest concern in respect of the lack of adequate information on the general measures envisaged to avoid any circumvention of legislation for purposes other than those prescribed, which represents a danger for the respect of the rule of law”.
At its 1273rd meeting (December 2016), the Committee again “expressed its deep concern about the absence of any information from the authorities concerning the general measures taken or envisaged to prevent violations of the rule of law through abuse of power of the kind established in the European Court’s Ilgar Mammadov judgment”.
On 14 February 2017 the Azerbaijani Government submitted an action plan on the measures taken and planned (DH-DD(2017)172). The action plan highlighted, in particular, the Executive Order signed by the President of Azerbaijan on 10 February 2017. In this context, the action plan indicated the following:
“... [the] Executive Order covers a number of questions raised by the Court in its judgment, including existence of reasonable suspicion of having committed an offence at the time of arrest and consideration of alternative measures of restraint by relevant authorities.
Further humanisation of penal policies in Azerbaijan has been listed among the aims of the document. It says that, in application of measures of restraint by investigation authorities and courts, provisions of criminal procedure law concerning grounds for arrest shall be strictly complied with, and the level of application of alternative sanctions and measures of procedural compulsion shall be extended to attain aims of punishment and of measure of restraint through non-custodial means.
The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan has recommended to the Supreme Court, the General Prosecutor’s Office and instructed the Ministry of Justice with elaboration, within two months, of the draft laws concerning decriminalisation of certain crimes; provision of the sentences alternative to imprisonment; development of grounds for non-custodial measures of restraint and sentences alternative to imprisonment; wider application of institutions of substitution of remainder of imprisonment by lighter punishment, parole and suspended sentence; extension of cases of application of measures of restraint alternative to arrest; simplification of rules for amendment of arrest by alternative measures of restraint; and further limitation of grounds for arrest for low-risk or less serious crimes.
The President has also recommended to the Office of the Prosecutor General to start with examination of alternative measures of restraint when considering motions for arrest.
It has also been recommended to the courts that they examine the existence of reasonable suspicions of individual’s having committed an offence and grounds for arrest, when deciding on measure of restraint, and arguments in favour of alternative measures.
According to Executive Oder, the Supreme Court shall hold continued analysis of case law of the courts concerning application of arrest and imposition of imprisonment...”
At its 1294th meeting (September 2017), the Committee, as regards the general measures, noted with interest the information provided about the progress of the implementation of the Presidential Order of 10 February 2017 and invited the authorities to provide detailed information about the legislative amendments foreseen in this regard. The Committee also urged the authorities to provide information on the other measures foreseen in the Presidential Order of relevance for the prevention of violations of the rule of law through abuse of power of the kind established in the European Court’s judgments in the Ilgar Mammadov group of cases.
The Government of Azerbaijan subsequently informed the Committee of Ministers that, in addition to a number of measures taken pursuant to the Executive Order of 10 February 2017 (see paragraph 85 above), on 20 October 2017 the National Assembly had adopted the Law on Amendments to the Criminal Code decriminalising certain acts and creating the possibility for those convicted for serious crimes to apply for conditional release after having served two-thirds of a criminal sentence.
On 17 December 2015 the General Assembly of the United Nations, at its seventieth session, adopted a Resolution on Human rights defenders in the context of the Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. The most relevant passages of the Resolution read as follows:
“The General Assembly ...
...
Stresses that the right of everyone to promote and strive for the protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms without retaliation or fear thereof is an essential element in building and maintaining sustainable, open and democratic societies;
Calls upon all States to take all measures necessary to ensure the rights and safety of human rights defenders who exercise the rights to freedom of opinion, expression, peaceful assembly and association, which are essential for the promotion and protection of human rights;
...
Urges States to acknowledge through public statements, policies or laws the important and legitimate role of individuals, groups and organs of society, including human rights defenders, in the promotion of human rights, democracy and the rule of law, as essential components of ensuring their recognition and protection, including by condemning publicly all cases of violence and discrimination against human rights defenders, including women human rights defenders, underlining that such practices can never be justified;
Strongly condemns the violence against and the targeting, criminalization, intimidation, torture, disappearance and killing of any individuals, including human rights defenders, for reporting and seeking information on human rights violations and abuses, and stresses the need to combat impunity by ensuring that those responsible for violations and abuses against human rights defenders, including against their legal representatives, associates and family members, are promptly brought to justice through impartial investigations;
Condemns all acts of intimidation and reprisal by State and non-State actors against individuals, groups and organs of society, including against human rights defenders and their legal representatives, associates and family members, who seek to cooperate, are cooperating or have cooperated with subregional, regional and international bodies, including the United Nations, its representatives and mechanisms, in the field of human rights;
...
Calls upon States to take concrete steps to prevent and put an end to the arbitrary arrest and detention of human rights defenders, and in this regard strongly urges the release of persons detained or imprisoned, in violation of the obligations and commitments of States under international human rights law, for exercising their human rights and fundamental freedoms, such as the rights to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and association, including in relation to cooperation with the United Nations or other international mechanisms in the area of human rights;
...
Encourages States to develop and put in place sustainable public policies or programmes that support and protect human rights defenders at all stages of their work in a comprehensive manner;
...
Strongly calls upon all States:
On 6 February 2008 at its 1017th meeting the Committee of Ministers adopted a Declaration on Council of Europe action to improve the protection of human-rights defenders and promote their activities. The most relevant parts of the Declaration read as follows:
“The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe ...
...
Condemns all attacks on and violations of the rights of human rights defenders in Council of Europe member States or elsewhere, whether carried out by state agents or non-state actors;
Calls on member States to:
On 27 June 2012 the Parliamentary Assembly adopted Resolution 1891 (2012) on the situation of human rights defenders in Council of Europe member States, which in the relevant parts read as follows:
“4.  The Assembly ... recalls that the responsibility for promoting and protecting human rights defenders lies first and foremost with States.
The Assembly therefore calls on the member States of the Council of Europe to:
1.  ensure full observance of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of human rights defenders, as guaranteed by the European Convention on Human Rights (ETS No. 5);
2.  put an end to any administrative, fiscal or judicial harassment of human rights defenders and ensure, in all circumstances, that they are able to carry out their activities in accordance with international human rights standards and relevant national legislation ...”
On 26 June 2018 the Parliamentary Assembly adopted Resolution 2225 (2018) on protecting human rights defenders in Council of Europe member States, which in the most relevant parts read as follows:
“1.  The Parliamentary Assembly recalls its  and  on the situation of human rights defenders in Council of Europe member State and its  and  on strengthening the role and protection of human rights defenders in Council of Europe member States. It pays tribute to the invaluable work of human rights defenders for the protection and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms. Human rights defenders are “those who work for the rights of others” – individuals or groups who act, in a peaceful and legal way, to promote and protect human rights, whether they are lawyers, journalists, members of non-governmental organisations or others.
...
The Assembly notes that in the majority of Council of Europe member States, human rights defenders are free to work in an environment conducive to the development of their activities. Nevertheless, it notes that over the past few years the number of reprisals against human rights defenders has been on the rise. New restrictive laws on NGO registration and funding have been introduced. Many human rights defenders have been subject to judicial, administrative or tax harassment, smear campaigns and criminal investigations launched on dubious charges, often related to alleged terrorist activities or purportedly concerning national security. Some of them have been threatened, physically attacked, arbitrarily arrested, detained or imprisoned. Others have even been assassinated. As a result, the space for human rights defenders’ action is becoming more and more restricted and less safe.
The Assembly condemns these developments and reaffirms its support for the work of human rights defenders ...
The Assembly therefore calls on member States to:
1.  respect the human rights and fundamental freedoms of human rights defenders, including their right to liberty and security, a fair trial and their freedoms of expression and assembly and association;
2.  refrain from any acts of intimidation or reprisal against human rights defenders and protect them against attacks or harassment by non-State actors;
...
5.  conduct effective investigations into all acts of intimidation or reprisal against human rights defenders, and especially cases of assassinations, physical attacks and threats;
6.  ensure an enabling environment for the work of human rights defenders, in particular by reviewing legislation and bringing it into line with international human rights standards, refraining from organising smear campaigns against defenders and other civil society activists and firmly condemning such campaigns where organised by non-State actors;
...
10.  fully co-operate with the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights in addressing individual cases of persecution and reprisals against human rights defenders;
11.  evaluate the sufficiency in practice, as measured by concrete results, of their efforts taken to protect human rights defenders since the adoption of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and the Committee of Ministers’ Declaration on Council of Europe action to improve the protection of human rights defenders and promote their activities. ...”
On 10 June 2014 the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) published Guidelines on the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, the most relevant parts of which read as follows:
“4.  Need for protection of human rights defenders: Human rights defenders face specific risks and are often targets of serious abuses as a result of their human rights work. Therefore, they need specific and enhanced protection at local, national and international levels. Certain groups of human rights defenders are exposed to heightened risks due to the specific nature of their work, the issues they are working on, the context in which they operate, their geographical location or because they belong to or are associated with a particular group.
The nature of state obligations: The primary responsibility for the protection of human rights defenders rests with states. States have both positive and negative obligations with regard to the rights of human rights defenders. In line with their duties under international law – according to which they must respect, protect and fulfill human rights – they have an obligation to:
A safe and enabling environment to empower human-rights work: Effective protection of the dignity, physical and psychological integrity, liberty and security of human rights defenders is a pre-requisite for the realization of the right to defend human rights. Furthermore, a safe and enabling environment requires the realization of a variety of other fundamental human rights that are necessary to carry out human rights work, including the rights to freedom of opinion and expression, peaceful assembly and association, the right to participate in public affairs, freedom of movement, the right to private life and the right to unhindered access to and communication with international bodies, including international and regional human rights mechanisms.
...
Human rights defenders must not be subjected to judicial harassment by unwarranted legal and administrative proceedings or any other forms of misuse of administrative and judicial authority, or to criminalization, arbitrary arrest and detention, as well as other sanctions for acts related to their human rights work. They must have access to effective remedies to challenge the lawfulness of detention or any other sanctions imposed on them.
Criminalization and arbitrary and abusive application of legislation
States should review the domestic legal framework relevant to human rights defenders and their activities for its compliance with international human rights standards. They should broadly and effectively consult with human rights defenders and seek international assistance in doing so. Any legal provisions that directly or indirectly lead to the criminalization of activities that are protected by international standards should be immediately amended or repealed.
...
Laws, administrative procedures and regulations must not be used to intimidate, harass, persecute or retaliate against human rights defenders. Sanctions for administrative or minor offences must always be proportionate and must be subject to the possibility of appeal to a competent and independent court or tribunal.
States should take steps, where required, to strengthen the independence of the judiciary and prosecution authorities, as well as the proper functioning of law enforcement bodies, to ensure that human rights defenders are not subjected to politically-motivated investigations and prosecutions or to the otherwise abusive application of laws and regulations for their human rights work.
Effective oversight mechanisms should be put in place to investigate possible misconduct by law enforcement and judicial officials concerning the judicial harassment of human rights defenders. In addition, any structural shortcomings that may give rise to the abuse of power or corruption within the judiciary and law enforcement should be rigorously addressed.
...
Arbitrary detention and treatment in detention
States should not subject human rights defenders to arbitrary deprivation of liberty because of their engagement in human rights activity. Any form of deprivation of liberty must be based on and in accordance with procedures established by law, subject to the possibility for the detained to challenge the legality of detention before a competent court and otherwise comply with international human rights standards ...”