The case originated in an application (no. 68556/10) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Harun Gürbüz (“the applicant”), on 12 October 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Yılmaz, a lawyer practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged that his right to a fair trial had been prejudiced irretrievably, as he had been denied legal assistance when in police custody and as he had not been able to obtain the attendance of witnesses on his behalf at trial.
On 8 June 2017 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1988 and lives in Istanbul.
On 31 January 2007 a taxi driver, F.B., was stabbed and killed in Istanbul.
On 10 April 2007 another taxi driver, E.K., was stabbed in Istanbul at around 8.30 p.m.
On the same day at 10.30 p.m., the applicant and M.K. were arrested and taken into police custody on suspicion of murder, intentionally causing bodily harm and attempted robbery. While the police records stated that they had been detained during a police check, the applicant contested that fact, alleging that he and M.K. had attended the police station to surrender as they regretted being responsible for the stabbing incident that had occurred earlier that day.
The record of arrest and form of rights (Yakalama ve Gözaltına Alma Tutanağı Şüpheli ve Sanık Hakları Formu) was issued in respect of the accused on 10 April 2007 at 10.30 p.m., as a pre-printed form signed by the applicant, the relevant part of which had been filled in to indicate that the applicant was suspected of causing bodily harm to E.K. and of killing F.B. and that he had been reminded of his rights. On the form, there was also a pre-printed message stating, inter alia, that the person being questioned had the right to remain silent and the right to choose a lawyer, that the lawyer could be present during his police interview, and that if the applicant needed to have free legal assistance then the Bar Association could appoint a lawyer for him.
An incident report dated 11 April 2007 was drawn up by the police at 2 a.m. and signed by four police officers, the applicant and M.K. According to that report, the police had taken statements from the victim at the hospital after the incident and he had given them physical descriptions of the perpetrators. According to the report, the applicant and M.K. had been arrested on suspicion of stabbing taxi driver E.K. during a police check near the crime scene, and a knife had been found on M.K. The report further stated that the suspects had been taken to the hospital, where the victim E.K. had identified them as the perpetrators of the stabbing and attempted robbery, in the presence of the police but in the absence of their lawyers. The victim had stated that the applicant had requested money from him and attacked him, while M.K. had stabbed him. The report also stated that subsequently the applicants had been taken into police custody and that they had confessed to killing another taxi driver, namely F.B., in the course of another robbery attempt that had taken place two months previously on 31 January 2007 (see paragraph 6 above). The report lastly stated that photographs had been obtained from a CD found in the investigation file for the murder of F.B., and showed M.K. and the applicant.
At 4 p.m. on 11 April 2007 the police contacted the Istanbul Bar Association by telephone to request free legal aid for the police questioning of the two suspects. However, the Bar Association informed them that it was not appointing defence counsel unless the suspects were minors. A record was made of that call. According to the applicant, the Bar Association had stopped the designation of officially appointed lawyers, owing to being on strike at the time.
According to another record, a pre-printed form entitled “Telephone notification record” (Telefonla Haber Verme Tutanağı), dated 11 April 2017, filled in by the police and signed by the applicant, the applicant made a telephone call to his mother on that day to inform her that he was in police custody. The time of that telephone conversation was not noted, although there was a section dedicated to that in the form. The applicant contested the validity of that form, claiming that he had not been able to inform his family of his arrest on that day.
On 11 April 2007 between 7.40 p.m. and 8.30 p.m., the applicant’s statements were taken by the police in the absence of a lawyer, concerning the stabbing of E.K. According to the written interview record, the applicant was suspected of intentionally causing bodily harm and of attempted robbery that had taken place on 10 April 2007. On the first page of the record, there was a pre-printed message stating, inter alia, that the person being questioned had the right to remain silent and the right to choose a lawyer, that the lawyer could be present during his police interview, and that if he needed to have free legal assistance then the Bar Association could appoint a lawyer for him. It was also stated in the same paragraph that a person of the applicant’s choice would be immediately notified of the fact that the applicant was being held in police custody. The record further stated: “A defence counsel was requested from the Istanbul Bar Association to be present during the interview, but the Association declared that it was not possible to appoint a defence counsel for persons older than 18 years of age, following a decision it had taken”. The written interview record indicated that the applicant had stated that he had no lawyer of his own, and that he had been informed of his right to remain silent, but that he would nevertheless make statements to the police. Each page of the form was signed by the applicant with a note stating “I have read my statements and signed the form”.
According to that police interview record, the applicant admitted that he had attempted to rob a taxi driver with M.K., that he had wanted money from the taxi driver, and that M.K. had stabbed the driver, but he stated that they had run away afterwards without having been able to get any money from the taxi driver. The applicant added that they had surrendered to the police in the Beşiktaş District Security Directorate on the same day because they had regretted their actions, and that subsequently they had been taken to the hospital by the police, where they had been confronted with the injured taxi driver, who had identified them.
On the same day, between 9 p.m. and 9.40 p.m., the police questioned the applicant further, still in the absence of a lawyer. During that interview the applicant gave statements concerning the murder of a taxi driver, F.B., that had occurred on 31 January 2007. Another written record was prepared by the police containing the applicant’s statements. The relevant part of the record indicated that the applicant was suspected of murdering F.B. with a knife in order to commit a robbery. The first page of the record included the same pre-printed message stating, inter alia, that the person being questioned had the right to remain silent and the right to choose a lawyer, that a lawyer could be present during his police interview, and that if he needed to have free legal assistance then the Bar Association could appoint a lawyer for him. It was also stated in the same paragraph that the fact that the applicant was being held in police custody would be immediately notified to a person of the applicant’s choice. According to the record, the applicant had stated that he had no lawyer and he had been informed that the Bar Association had refused to appoint a lawyer for any suspects over eighteen years of age. The record also stated that the applicant had been informed that he had the right to remain silent, but that he had indicated that he would nevertheless make statements to the police. Each page of the record was signed by the applicant, indicating “I have read my statements and signed the form”.
According to the record of the second police interview, the applicant gave detailed information about the robbery and murder he had committed with the other accused, M.K., stating that their intention had been to rob the taxi driver and get his money. The applicant stated that at first they had wanted money from the driver but he had resisted. Subsequently, M.K. had stabbed various parts of the driver’s body, the applicant had stabbed the driver’s leg and they had both run away from the scene.
Still on the same day, after the applicant’s second police interview, the applicant had a private meeting with a lawyer who had been hired by his family, between 10.25 and 10.50 p.m. A record was issued by a police officer with regard to the time, date and place of this meeting, which was signed by the applicant and his lawyer in addition to the police officer. According to the applicant, his family had learned of his arrest by their own means and had then hired a lawyer for him. The applicant alleged that his lawyer had obtained the information about where the applicant was being held from the authorities and had then come to the police station. The lawyer had been made to wait until the end of the police interview and when he had requested that the interview be redone in his presence the police had rejected that request.
On 12 April 2007, a medical examination of the applicant was conducted, which revealed no signs of ill-treatment on his body.
On the same day, the applicant was brought before the Istanbul public prosecutor, where he was questioned in the presence of his lawyer. The applicant partly confirmed and partly denied the content of the statements he had made to the police in the absence of a lawyer. The applicant confirmed the content of his statements regarding his involvement in intentionally causing bodily harm and the attempted robbery of E.K., stressing that it was M.K. who had stabbed E.K. and that he had committed the crime on the incitement of M.K. However, the applicant denied the content of the statements made in the second police interview. The applicant stated that he had not had any connection with the acts of murder and attempted robbery that had taken place on 31 January 2007. He further stated that M.K. had told him that he had murdered a taxi driver during a robbery attempt, with the help of another person, two or three months before the incident of 10 April 2007. The applicant alleged that it was only M.K.’s statements that he had reported to the police during his interview.
On 12 April 2007, the applicant was brought before the investigating judge, where he confirmed the content of his statements to the prosecutor in the presence of his lawyer.
Meanwhile, M.K. gave statements to the police, also in the absence of a lawyer. He admitted to having been involved in the stabbing of E.K. and the murder of F.B., and his version of events was corroborated by the applicant’s statements set out in the interview records. M.K. confirmed the content of the statements made to the police before the public prosecutor and the investigating judge, each time in the absence of a lawyer.
On 12 April 2007 the applicant and M.K. were placed in detention on remand.
On 1 May 2007 and on 13 July 2007 respectively, the public prosecutor at the Istanbul Assize Court filed two bills of indictment against the applicant and M.K., the first one charging them with attempting to commit robbery with more than one person and intentionally causing serious bodily harm, and the second one charging them with murder and attempted robbery.
The applicant was tried by the Istanbul Assize Court and twelve hearings were held in total. The applicant was represented by a lawyer during the trial.
During the hearings, the applicant alleged that he had been coerced into signing the written interview record in the absence of a lawyer while he was held in police custody, without having been able to read it first. The applicant and M.K. denied all the charges related to the robbery and murder of F.B. throughout the entire trial. The two accused further stated that their statements to the police had been taken under duress. M.K. also stated that he had confirmed his statements to the police before the public prosecutor because he had been threatened by the police.
On 26 September 2007, at the first hearing, the Istanbul Assize Court rendered an interim decision to ensure that F.S., a witness, would be present before the trial court for examination, once his address was found, on the basis that the police interview records indicated that the applicants had claimed that they had borrowed money from him right after the incident.
Although the investigation file referred to a CD containing security camera recordings taken from a hotel near the crime scene, which allegedly had footage of the last customers the victim had taken into his taxi, that CD was not included in the case file. At the hearing of 26 September 2007 a witness, namely S.İ., who had watched the video recordings of the security camera in question, was examined. The witness stated that he had seen the recordings with the police, that there were two people who had got into the victim’s car, but that the video images were dark and not clear enough for identification.
Upon the request of the trial court, the hotel near the crime scene informed the domestic court, by a statement dated 30 October 2007, that they had already provided the police with recordings from their security cameras on two separate CDs, and that the recordings in their system had been automatically deleted afterwards.
By an application dated 23 November 2007, the applicant’s lawyer requested that the applicant’s uncle and father be examined as witnesses. At a hearing held on the same day, the trial court held that the applicant’s witnesses would be examined when the applicant’s lawyer had them ready before the trial court. It further rendered an interim decision to ensure the presence of the witness F.S. before the trial court, once the defendants’ lawyers had advised the court of his address. However, those witnesses were never examined, as they never appeared before the trial court.
Upon a request made by the applicant dated 10 December 2007, the statements of the police officers who had issued the written interview record were consulted during the hearings. The police officers were asked why they had taken the applicant’s statements in the absence of a lawyer, and whether they had coerced the applicant into signing the written interview record. The police officers denied the allegations of ill-treatment and coercion in their statements during the hearings. One of the police officers, O.Y., stated that the Bar Association had not appointed a lawyer for the applicant despite their request, owing to a strike at the Bar Association at that time, and that he did not remember the applicant informing them that he had a lawyer of his own choosing. The other police officer, H.D., stated that the applicant’s statements had been taken in the presence of his lawyer as far as he remembered, and that his lawyer had been able to meet with the applicant on his arrival at the police station. He further stated that the applicant’s lawyer had not requested the applicant to be questioned again in his presence.
At the hearing of 27 December 2007, another witness, E.Ö., was questioned about the video recordings of the security camera of the hotel near the crime scene. The witness stated that he had had two CDs prepared with the video footage at issue and had given them to the police but that he did not have any further knowledge of the recordings.
During the proceedings, voice recordings of the police interviews of the accused were transcribed by an expert. According to the expert report dated 30 May 2008, which was added to the case file during a hearing on 23 June 2008, the applicant had not admitted to committing any criminal act regarding the incident of 31 January 2007, whereas M.K. had stated that he and the applicant had murdered a taxi driver with the motive of robbery.
During the proceedings it was confirmed that the results of a forensics examination comparing the applicant’s and M.K.’s DNA with sample tissue found on the victim’s hands did not show a match.
In written pleadings that were lodged on 19 November 2008, the applicant’s lawyer argued that his client’s statements had been taken by the police unlawfully in the absence of a lawyer, that the police interview record had been falsified, and that the expert report transcribing the recordings of the interview revealed that the applicant had not admitted committing the offence in question. The applicant’s lawyer further submitted that the written arrest record had also been falsified, and that the applicant had not been arrested by the police during an identity check near the police station but had in fact surrendered himself to the police. The applicant’s lawyer also submitted that his client and M.K. had given their statements to the police under duress. The applicant’s lawyer lastly submitted, by means of a written application dated 23 November 2008, that the applicant’s family had not been immediately informed of the applicant’s arrest, alleging that this was so that the police could take the applicant’s statements in the absence of a lawyer.
On 11 February 2009 the Istanbul Assize Court convicted the applicant and M.K. of attempted robbery and murder. The trial court sentenced them to five years’ imprisonment for attempted robbery and life imprisonment for murder. The trial court based its decision, inter alia, on the accuseds’ statements from all stages of the proceedings. The trial court held that the applicant’s statements to the police, the public prosecutor and the investigating judge had been similar and that they had been corroborated by the statements given by M.K. at the preliminary investigation stage. The trial court lastly found that there was no evidence in the case file showing that the accused had been under pressure while giving their statements.
On 8 June 2010 the Court of Cassation upheld the Istanbul Assize Court’s decision of 11 February 2009.
The applicant was tried by the Istanbul Assize Court and eight hearings were held in total. The applicant was represented by a lawyer during the trial.
During the proceedings, the applicant and M.K. retracted their statements given at the pre-trial stage. They denied having committed attempted robbery and alleged that they had been threatened by the police to repeat the statements made to the police before the public prosecutor and the investigating judge. The applicant stated that he and M.K. had taken a taxi even though they had not had any money, and that M.K. had stabbed the taxi driver when a dispute had arisen because they had been unable to pay the fare.
At a hearing on 28 August 2007 the victim, E.K., was examined by the trial court. E.K. identified the two accused as the perpetrators of the stabbing. However, he modified the statements that he had given to the police and stated that the applicant and M.K. had not requested money from him.
In written pleadings that were lodged on 10 December 2007 and 24 March 2008, the applicant’s lawyer argued that his client’s statements had been taken by the police unlawfully in the absence of a lawyer.
During the proceedings, the applicant’s lawyer requested on several occasions that the police officers who had issued the written interview records be examined by the trial court. However, this request was rejected by the trial court on the ground that an expansion in the scope of the investigation would have no effect on the outcome of the proceedings.
On 13 June 2008 the Istanbul Assize Court convicted the applicant of attempted robbery and of taking part in intentionally causing bodily harm The applicant was sentenced to five years’ imprisonment for attempted robbery and two years and one month’s imprisonment for taking part in intentionally causing bodily harm. The Istanbul Assize Court based its decision, inter alia, on the statements made by the applicant, M.K. and the victim throughout the proceedings.
On 13 April 2010 the Court of Cassation upheld the Istanbul Assize Court’s decision of 13 June 2008.
On 9 June 2008 the applicant lodged two criminal complaints against police officers. The first complaint was against the police officers who had allegedly issued a false record of his arrest. The second concerned allegations of ill-treatment and coercion during police custody.
The public prosecutor initiated an investigation into the matter. He took statements from the applicant and seven police officers who had been on duty when the applicant’s original statements had been taken. He further examined an expert report transcribing the contents of the police interview recordings.
On 30 November 2010, on the basis of all the evidence, the public prosecutor issued a decision not to prosecute the police officers concerned.
On 21 March 2011 the applicant’s objection against the decision not to prosecute was rejected by the Beyoğlu Assize Court.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Law no. 5271) in force as of 1 June 2005, provided as follows:
“(1)  The statement of the suspect and the accused should be based on his or her own free will. Physical or psychological interferences capable of undermining [free will] such as ill-treatment, torture, the administration of drugs, induced fatigue, torment and deception, duress, threat, or the use of other equipment shall be prohibited.
(2)  No benefit that is contrary to law shall be promised.
(3)  Statements that were obtained through such methods shall not be used in evidence even if consent has been given [by the accused or the suspect] for their use.
(4)  Statements taken by the police without a lawyer present shall not be relied on [for conviction] unless the suspect or the accused confirms them before a judge or a court.
...”
“(1)  The suspect or the accused shall be asked to choose a defence counsel to act on his or her behalf. In cases where the suspect or accused declares that he or she is not able to choose a defence counsel, a defence counsel shall be appointed on his or her behalf, if he or she so requests.
(2)  If the suspect or the accused who does not have a defence counsel is a minor, or an individual who is disabled to the extent that he or she cannot provide his own defence, or is deaf or mute, then a defence counsel shall be appointed whether or not he or she has requested representation.
(3)  During the investigation or prosecution of offences entailing a sentence of more than five years’ imprisonment, the provision in paragraph 2 shall also be applied.
...”