The case originated in an application (no. 66610/09) against the Hellenic Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Greek national, Mr Anastasios Zolotas (“the applicant”), on 7 December 2009.
The Greek Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent’s delegates, Ms F. Dedoussi, Adviser at the State Legal Council, and Ms Z. Hadjipavlou, Legal Assistant at the State Legal Council.
The applicant alleged, in particular, a violation of the right guaranteed by Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
On 31 August 2011 the Government were given notice of the application. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1 of the Convention).
The applicant was born in 1924 and died on 27 February 2011, while his application was pending before the Court. His son, Mr Panayotis Zolotas, stated that he wished to continue the proceedings.
On 11 July 1974 the applicant, who at that time was a practising lawyer, opened a bank account with the General Bank of Greece, into which he paid the sum of 660,000 drachmas (1,936.90 euros (EUR)). From the second half of 1981 until 2003, he did not perform any transactions on the account (cash withdrawals or deposits or entering of interest in the booklet provided for that purpose). As both he and his wife had severe and disabling health problems, the applicant was obliged to live abroad for many years. On 6 February 2003 he requested the bank to inform him of the status of his account. The bank replied that, because there had been no transactions on the account since the second half of 1981, all his claims in respect of the account had become time-barred. However, it informed the applicant that it still kept an up-to-date file concerning him in its records, in which it entered the interest accruing on the account.
On 3 June 2003 the applicant brought an action against the bank in the civil courts, claiming the sum he had deposited with the bank, plus interest, giving a total amount of EUR 30,550.74. In judgment no. 1481/2005 of 21 April 2005 the Athens Court of First Instance dismissed his action, finding that the applicant’s claims were barred by the twenty-year limitation period laid down in respect of claims arising out of an agreement on the deposit of fungible goods (Ανώμαλη παρακαταθήκη) within the meaning of Article 830 of the Civil Code (see paragraphs 18 and 19 below). In particular, the court stated as follows:
“... [The applicant] relies on Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 ... and on the Paris Protocol of 20 March 1952 concerning protection of property; these are not applicable in the present case since the institution of statutory limitation under domestic law prevails over them. This statutory limitation [provided for by Article 247 of the Civil Code] is independent of the fact that, in accordance with Article 3 of Legislative Decree no. 1195/1942, cash deposits with national banks and the corresponding interest are transferred permanently to the State where they have not been claimed by the account holder for a period of twenty years for the deposits and a period of five years for the interest ...”
The applicant appealed against that judgment, basing his arguments on the relevant provisions of domestic law and on Article 1 of Protocol No. 1. He submitted that the limitation period had been suspended by force majeure or had stopped running in accordance with Article 260 of the Civil Code, since the bank had updated his file every six months, entering the interest that had accrued.
By judgment no. 2452/2006 of 6 April 2006 the Athens Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal, taking the view that the twenty-year limitation period applicable to agreements on the deposit of fungible goods had been justified by an aim in the public interest, namely that of terminating, in the interests of the community (Κοινωνική οικονομία), legal relationships that had been created so long before that their existence had become uncertain. The fact that the bank had continued to enter the interest accruing on the applicant’s account did not, in the Court of Appeal’s view, amount to a recognition of the applicant’s claims capable of stopping the running of the twenty-year limitation period. In the case of bank deposits, the running of that period could be interrupted only by a new deposit or withdrawal, by a transfer of funds or by the payment of interest. The Court of Appeal also based its decision on Legislative Decree no. 1195/1942, according to which sums of money in bank accounts that had remained dormant for twenty years were transferred to the State on expiry of that period.
The Court of Appeal also rejected the objection raised by the applicant to the effect that the limitation period had been suspended by force majeure (his and his wife’s health problems). The court considered that there had been no force majeure in the case before it since the applicant and his wife had not been continuously ill throughout the limitation period, and particularly during the last six months of the period, with the result that it had not been impossible for the applicant to withdraw the sum deposited and the corresponding interest, either in person or via a representative.
The applicant appealed on points of law, relying on Article 1 of Protocol No. 1.
On 12 January 2009 the Court of Cassation dismissed the appeal as unfounded, on the ground that the application of the legislation in question had not infringed the applicant’s right to the peaceful enjoyment of his possessions as defined by Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 (judgment no. 50/2009). More specifically, the Court of Cassation found as follows:
“... [O]wing to the fact that the above-mentioned limitation period, like any statutory limitation period, is laid down in the public interest, which requires the regularisation of relationships that lie in the past and have therefore become uncertain, and is also dictated by the interest of the community, the impugned provisions are not contrary [to Protocol No. 1].”
That judgment was finalised and certified as authentic on 9 June 2009.
Article 3 of Legislative Decree no. 1195/1942 on the statutory limitation of bank deposits and other securities and claims to the benefit of the State reads as follows:
Statutory limitation of deposits and interest to the benefit of the State
“Cash deposits with national banks and the corresponding interest ... shall be transferred permanently to the State where they have not been claimed by the account holder or have not been the subject of any account transactions for a period of twenty years from the date on which they became available and, in the case of interest, for a period of five years from the date on which it became payable.”
Legislative Decree no. 1195/1942 was ratified by Cabinet decision no. 315 of 30 May 1946 and remained in force after the enactment of the Civil Code.
Under the terms of the legislative decree, the time-barring of certain debts and claims, instead of benefiting the debtor as is the case under the ordinary law, benefits the State. In addition to deposits with banks and credit institutions, these debts and claims also encompass those arising out of the capital and income from securities held with banks and limited companies.
...
The relevant provisions of the Civil Code read as follows:
Article 247
Statutory limitation of claims
“The right to require another to perform or refrain from performing an act (claim) shall be subject to statutory limitation.”
Article 249
Twenty-year limitation period
“Except where otherwise provided, the limitation period for claims shall be twenty years.”
Article 260
Interruption – Recognition
“The limitation period shall stop running when the claim is recognised, by whatever means, by the debtor.”
Article 830
Deposit of fungible goods
“The deposit of a sum of money or other fungible goods shall, in the event of doubt, be considered as a loan if the deposit taker is authorised to make use of the goods. However, as regards the time and place for return of the goods, the provisions concerning deposits shall apply in the event of doubt. ...”
The term “deposit of fungible goods” refers to the deposit, following agreement between the parties, of money or other fungible goods for safekeeping by the other party, where the latter is authorised to use the goods. According to well-established legal theory and case-law, the depositing of money in a bank at the normal interest rate and with the possibility of immediate withdrawal is characterised as an agreement for the deposit of fungible goods.
Under Article 260 of the Civil Code, the limitation period stops running when the debtor recognises the claim by whatever means. It is generally accepted that such recognition simply requires some act or conduct which demonstrates clearly that the debtor recognises his or her obligation and the creditor’s claim. This may take the form of partial reimbursement of the debt, the payment of interest, the provision of a security, a request for additional time or a request to be discharged from the debt (Georgiadis-Stathopoulos, Civil Code – Interpretation article by article, p. 461).
In order for the act of recognition by the debtor to stop the limitation period running (Article 260 of the Civil Code), it must be addressed to the creditor and must reach him or her (Court of Cassation judgment no. 1178/1976, Nomiko Vima 25/710). The mere fact of the debtor entering the debt in his or her records does not amount to recognition of the claim within the meaning of Article 260 and is therefore not capable of stopping the running of the limitation period (Court of Cassation judgment no. 924/1977, Nomiko Vima 26/726).
As to the limitation period for claims by account holders in respect of their accounts, it is accepted that the period ceases to run with any new deposit or withdrawal or any action resulting in a change to the account. Time does not cease to run as a result of interest accruing on the account, even if the interest is capitalised, or as a result of the six-monthly update of the account holder’s file (Court of Cassation judgments nos. 739/2004 and 50/2009).
...
In a similar vein, the Court of Cassation ruled that banks were not obliged to notify account holders when the limitation period was due to expire. As the banks issued each customer with an account booklet, it was up to the customer to have it kept up to date, since it constituted proof of the sum deposited in the account and the performance of transactions on the account (Court of Cassation judgments nos. 432/1990 and 1623/1995).