The case originated in an application (no. 59552/08) against the Czech Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Czech national, Mr Petr Rohlena (“the applicant”), on 4 December 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr J. Kružík, a lawyer practising in Brno. The Czech Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V.A. Schorm, of the Ministry of Justice.
Relying on Article 7 of the Convention, the applicant alleged in particular that, in convicting him of a continuous criminal offence, the domestic courts had applied the criminal law retroactively, to his detriment.
The application was allocated to the Fifth Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). On 14 November 2011 the President of the Fifth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. On 18 April 2013 a Chamber of that Section, composed of Mark Villiger, President, Angelika Nuβberger, Ganna Yudkivska, André Potocki, Paul Lemmens, Helena Jäderblom, Aleš Pejchal, judges, and Claudia Westerdiek, Section Registrar, gave judgment. They unanimously declared the complaint under Article 7 of the Convention admissible and the remainder of the application inadmissible, and held that there had been no violation of Article 7. Judge Lemmens expressed a separate concurring opinion which was annexed to the judgment.
On 9 September 2013, following a request by the applicant dated 11 July 2013, a panel of the Grand Chamber decided to refer the case to the Grand Chamber under Article 43 of the Convention.
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined according to the provisions of Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24.
On 16 January 2014 the President of the Court decided to cancel the hearing scheduled in the case and to pursue the written procedure.
The applicant and the Government each filed further written observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1) and replied to the specific questions put to them by the Grand Chamber.
The applicant was born in 1966 and lives in Brno.
On 29 May 2006 the applicant was formally indicted by the Brno municipal prosecutor for having, at least between 2000 and 8 February 2006, repeatedly abused his wife both physically and mentally while he was drunk. He was accused of having subjected her to verbal abuse, hit her on the head with his hand and fist, slapped her, held her by the throat, tried to strangle her, thrown her against the furniture or onto the ground, pushed her down stairs and kicked her. He was further accused of having hit the children, gambled away the household’s money on gaming machines and smashed the crockery. As a result, his wife had sustained haematomas, bruising and a fractured nose and had been obliged to seek medical assistance on that account on 26 June 2000, 18 July 2003 and 8 February 2006 following assaults committed on 24 June 2000, 17 July 2003 and 8 February 2006 respectively. The applicant had allegedly sought to undermine his wife psychologically in order to control her. According to the prosecutor, the applicant had thus committed the “continuing” criminal offence (trvající trestný čin) of abusing a person living under the same roof within the meaning of Article 215a §§ 1 and 2 (b) of the Criminal Code, given that his conduct prior to the introduction of that offence on 1 June 2004 had amounted to the offence of violence against an individual or group of individuals under Article 197a of the Criminal Code and assault occasioning bodily harm under Article 221 of the Code.
On 18 April 2007 the Brno Municipal Court found the applicant guilty of the offence of abusing a person living under the same roof, committed at least between 2000 and 8 February 2006, as described in the bill of indictment, which also referred to the fact that the abuse had occurred repeatedly. It sentenced him to a suspended term of two and a half years’ imprisonment and placed him on probation for five years. The applicant was also placed under supervision and ordered to undergo treatment for alcohol dependency. The court based its decision on the statements given by the applicant, the victim (his wife) and several witnesses, including the couple’s two children – who reported, among other incidents, ten instances of the applicant verbally insulting his wife, four instances of the applicant grabbing his wife by the arms and strangling her, and verbal and/or physical assaults committed by the applicant on his wife at monthly intervals – and on documentary evidence and expert reports. It also took into account the fact that the applicant had confessed to quarrels and physical violence in his relationship with his wife; he admitted in particular that he had sometimes slapped his wife or hit her with his fist.
The court adopted the classification of the offence as abuse of a person living under the same roof within the meaning of Article 215a §§ 1 and 2 (b) of the Criminal Code as in force since 1 June 2004, taking the view that this classification also extended to the acts committed by the applicant prior to that date since they had been punishable at the material time and amounted at least to the offence of violence against an individual or group of individuals under Article 197a of the Criminal Code. Lastly, the court considered that, owing to the duration of the conduct in question, the offence committed in the present case presented a relatively high degree of danger which justified a sentence ranging from two to eight years’ imprisonment under paragraph 2 of Article 215a of the Criminal Code. Taking into consideration the extenuating circumstances (in particular the fact that the applicant had confessed and that he had no previous convictions), it imposed a suspended sentence situated at the lower end of the range.
On 6 September 2007 the Brno Regional Court dismissed an appeal by the applicant in which he contested the facts as established by the Municipal Court and the unilateral assessment of the evidence. The Regional Court found no defects in the previous proceedings and considered that the classification of the applicant’s conduct was in conformity with the provisions of the Criminal Code.
On 21 February 2008 the Supreme Court dismissed as manifestly illfounded an appeal on points of law lodged by the applicant in which he complained that the trial court had applied Article 215a of the Criminal Code even to his conduct prior to 1 June 2004, when the offence of abuse had not yet existed in domestic law. On this point the Supreme Court noted, referring to its ruling Tzn 12/93 of 8 December 1993, that where there was, as in the case at hand, a “continuation of the criminal offence” (pokračování v trestném činu), which was considered to constitute a single act, its classification in criminal law had to be assessed under the law in force at the time of completion of the last occurrence of the offence. That law therefore also applied to the earlier acts, provided that these would have amounted to criminal conduct under the previous law. In the instant case the Supreme Court considered that the applicant’s conduct prior to the amendment of the Criminal Code on 1 June 2004 had amounted at least to an offence punishable under Article 197a or Article 221 § 1 of the Criminal Code. After examining the file it also concluded that the accused’s actions as described in the operative part of the first-instance court’s judgment disclosed all the legal elements of the offence of abusing a person living under the same roof within the meaning of Article 215a §§ 1 and 2 (b) of the Criminal Code. Concerning the continuation of the offence, the Supreme Court noted that the abuse itself amounted to ill-treatment characterised by a certain duration. For the offence to be regarded as having continued over a long period of time it had to have lasted for some months. As the applicant had perpetrated the offence in question at least from 2000 until 8 February 2006, that is, over a period of several years, his conduct certainly disclosed the material element of continuation of the offence of abuse under Article 215a § 2 (b) of the Criminal Code.
On 10 June 2008 the Constitutional Court dismissed as manifestly ill-founded a constitutional appeal lodged by the applicant in which he complained that the proceedings had been unfair and that the Criminal Code had been applied retroactively, to his detriment. Referring to the ruling of the Supreme Court and to its relevant case-law, the Constitutional Court held that the decisions given by the courts in the present case had been logical and coherent and had not had any retroactive effect prohibited by the Constitution.
As the applicant committed another offence while on probation and did not undergo any treatment for his alcohol dependency, he was required to serve the prison sentence imposed by the judgment of 18 April 2007. He began serving his prison sentence on 3 January 2011. According to the Government, he was granted conditional release on 17 May 2012.
Pursuant to Article 16 § 1, the criminal nature of an act was assessed under the law in force at the time the act was committed. A subsequent law had to be applied if it was more favourable to the offender.
Under Article 34k, when imposing a sentence the court had to consider as an aggravating circumstance in particular the fact that the offender had committed several offences.
Article 35 § 1 stated that, when a court sentenced a perpetrator for two or more criminal offences, a concurrent sentence (úhrnný trest) was to be imposed on the basis of the legal provision concerning the most serious of the offences. Where the minimum prison terms differed, the longest one constituted the minimum term for the concurrent sentence.
Under Article 67 § 1 (d), criminal liability for an offence punishable by a maximum sentence of less than three years became statute-barred on expiry of the limitation period of three years. Pursuant to Article 67 §§ 3 and 4, this period was interrupted and a new period began running (a) when the offender was charged with the offence in question and when subsequent measures were taken with a view to his criminal prosecution (such as a prosecutor’s indictment, court summons, and so forth), or (b) if, during that period, the offender committed a further crime punishable by the same or a more severe sentence.
Under Article 89 § 3, which was introduced into the Criminal Code by Law no. 290/1993 which came into force on 1 January 1994, the continuation of a criminal offence (pokračování v trestném činu) was to be understood as consisting of individual acts (jednotlivé dílčí útoky) which were driven by the same purpose, comprised the elements of the same offence and were linked by virtue of being carried out in an identical or similar manner, occurring close together in time and pursuing the same object.
Pursuant to Article 197a, a person who threatened to kill another person or to cause him or her bodily harm or other serious harm, in a manner giving reasonable grounds for fear, was liable to a term of imprisonment of up to one year or to a fine.
Under paragraph 1 of Article 215a, introduced on 1 June 2004, anyone who abused a relative or other person living under the same roof was liable to a sentence of up to three years’ imprisonment. According to paragraph 2, the perpetrator of such an offence faced between two and eight years’ imprisonment if (a) he or she acted in a particularly brutal manner or committed the offence against several persons, or (b) he or she continued the conduct in question over a lengthy period.
The relevant explanatory report stated that the purpose of introducing the above provision had been to address the lack of specific legislation in this area, since the general criminal-law provisions that were applicable allowed prosecution of only the most serious acts of physical domestic violence (for example, the offences set forth in Articles 197a or 221 which, according to judicial practice, had to result in at least seven days’ incapacity to work, which was rarely the case in situations of domestic violence). The new provision required neither physical violence nor any consequences for the victim’s health. It also pursued the aim of overcoming the difficulties faced by the prosecuting authorities in view of the specific features of domestic violence.
It was noted that the term “abuse/ill-treatment” was not new since there was already an offence of abuse/ill-treatment of a person in one’s care. This was interpreted to mean persistent ill-treatment involving a particularly high degree of cruelty and impassivity and which the victim perceived as a serious wrong. It was not necessarily a systematic course of conduct or conduct spanning a lengthy period.
Under Article 221 § 1, the offence of assault with intent to cause bodily harm was punishable by a prison term of up to two years. Paragraph 2 provided for a prison term ranging from one to five years where, among other factors, the perpetrator caused serious bodily harm to the victim; under paragraph 3, where the perpetrator’s conduct resulted in death, he or she was liable to a prison sentence of between three and eight years.
According to the Czech legal literature, the continuation of a criminal offence, that is, a “continuous” criminal offence (pokračující trestný čin), was considered to constitute a single act; when one of the elements referred to in Article 89 § 3 of the Criminal Code was absent, the offence in question was characterised as “repeated”.
As established by the settled and long-standing case-law of the Supreme Court (decisions nos. 3 Tz 155/2000, 3 Tdo 1115/2003, 6 Tdo 1314/2003, 11 Tdo 272/2007, 6 Tdo 181/2012, 11 Tdo 258/2012 and 6 Tdo 1553/2012), a continuous offence was deemed to have come to an end on completion of the last occurrence of the offence. The Government additionally referred to the decisions published in the Reports of Judicial Decisions and Opinions under nos. 103/1953, 44/1970 and 7/1994 and to Supreme Court decision no. 5 Tdo 593/2005. Thus, when a continuous offence extended over a period of time during which the applicable legislation changed, it was considered to be covered by the new legislation provided that at least some of the punishable acts had been committed after the entry into force of the new law and that the previous acts had constituted a criminal offence at the time they were committed (see Supreme Court decision no. Tzn 12/93), even if that offence carried a lighter sentence.
By judgment no. 11 Tdo 272/2007 of 27 August 2007 in a factually similar case, the Supreme Court quashed the lower courts’ decisions by which the person concerned had been found guilty of two criminal offences (violence against an individual under Article 197a of the Criminal Code committed before 1 June 2004, and abuse of a person living under the same roof committed after that date) and had imposed a concurrent sentence of two years and six months. The Supreme Court held that this interpretation by the courts, distinguishing between acts committed before and after the entry into force of Article 215a of the Criminal Code, was incorrect since the situation amounted to a continuous offence; the court nevertheless upheld the sentence. It stated in particular:
“The question is whether a continuous criminal offence can encompass conduct the individual occurrences of which were perpetrated partly before and partly after the entry into force of the applicable criminal rules, without infringing the provisions of Article 16 § 1 of the Criminal Code. ... In the case of the continuation of an offence which, from a material point of view, is understood as a single act [skutek], the time of its commission is considered to be that of completion of the last occurrence of the offence (which forms a unity with the previous ones). It follows that the continuation of the offence is to be examined under the new law, which may be stricter, as in force at the time when the offence was completed, even if part of the offence (irrespective of its extent) falls within the temporal scope of the older criminal provisions which are more favourable to the offender.
This conclusion is in line with the existing case-law, according to which continuous offences are considered to have been committed under a new (later) law provided that at least part of the offence (that is to say, individual acts) was committed after this new law came into force. Such offences are deemed to have been committed in their entirety under the new, later law ... provided that the conduct in question was also punishable under the previous law.”
With regard to the application of Article 89 § 3 of the Criminal Code specifically to conduct covered by Articles 197a, 215a and 221 of the Criminal Code or comparable conduct, the Government also referred to Supreme Court decisions nos. 3 Tdo 1431/2006 of 10 January 2007, 6 Tdo 548/2008 of 28 May 2008 and 7 Tdo 415/2013 of 21 May 2013. They pointed out in particular that in those decisions the Supreme Court had confirmed that the notion of a close temporal connection had not been defined precisely and that each particular case therefore required a comprehensive assessment of all its circumstances and of the relevant formal criteria set out in Article 89 § 3. Moreover, the constituent elements of a crime could be made out in various ways; hence, the manner of execution of an offence did not always have to be identical as long as the act was directed against the same protected interest.
It transpires from the legal systems of the Contracting States that there is a need to distinguish between two situations, the second of which is in issue in the present case:
(a)  a “continuing” criminal offence (trvající trestný čin, Dauerdelikt, infraction continue, reato permanente), defined as an act (or omission) which has to last over a certain period of time – such as the act of assisting and giving shelter to members of an illegal organisation, dealt with by the Court in Ecer and Zeyrek v. Turkey (nos. 29295/95 and 29363/95, ECHR 2001II); and
(b)  a “continuous” criminal offence (pokračující trestný čin, fortgesetzte Handlung, infraction continuée, reato continuato), defined as an offence consisting of several acts all of which contain the elements of the same (or similar) offence committed over a certain period of time – such as the intentional, continuous and large-scale concealment of taxable amounts that was in issue in Veeber v. Estonia (no. 2) (no. 45771/99, ECHR 2003I).
Moreover, several types of sentence exist in the Contracting States when more than one offence is committed:
(a)  a consecutive or cumulative sentence (peine cumulée ou peines consécutives), where a separate sentence is imposed in respect of each offence committed and all of these sentences are added up or served one after the other;
(b)  a concurrent sentence (úhrnný trest, peine confondue ou peines simultanées), where the offender is given the heaviest penalty in accordance with the legal provision concerning the most serious of the offences, or where he or she is given several sentences which are to be served simultaneously;
(c)  an aggregate, consolidated or overall sentence (souhrnný trest, peine globale ou peine d’ensemble), which is calculated according to different methods depending on whether the sentence is imposed for offences committed simultaneously or consecutively or whether it encompasses other penalties imposed previously; it fluctuates between the sum of all the individual penalties and the heaviest one.
The notion of a continuous criminal offence as understood in the present case was introduced into European law in the Middle Ages with a view to softening the hard sentencing rule quod criminae tot poenae (in other words, material accumulation of all penalties) under Roman law. Two different approaches were developed by scholars and legislatures, based on a subjective and an objective view of the notion of a continuous criminal offence. According to the subjective view, which existed, for instance, in Italy (see, for example, Article 81 of the 1930 Italian Criminal Code), a continuous criminal offence was a group of acts united by a single intention, by one single criminal plan. According to the objective view, developed mainly in Germany (see, for example, Article 110 of the 1813 Bavarian Criminal Code), a continuous criminal offence was based on the repeated intention of the offender to attack the same or similar object or legally protected interest (Rechtsgut). Moreover, the fact that the repetition of the criminal acts and of the criminal intention was facilitated by the material circumstances – involving the offender, the close temporal connection and the identity of the legally protected interest affected – was seen as justifying the imposition of a lighter penalty on the offender. This objective perspective gained support all over Europe, with some countries incorporating it in their legislation. However, in order to avoid excessive leniency towards repeat offenders, certain legislatures restricted the application of this concept to specific categories of crimes.
The existence of a European tradition of a continuous criminal offence, understood in an objective sense, is confirmed by the research undertaken by the Court in relation to all forty-seven Council of Europe member States. Indeed, the vast majority of them have introduced the notion of a continuous criminal offence into their legal systems, either by means of specific legal provisions or via the legal literature and/or judicial practice.
On the basis of this comparative survey, the Contracting States can be divided into three different groups:
(a)  thirty member States where the concept of a continuous criminal offence is enshrined in law: Andorra (Article 59 of the Criminal Code), Armenia (Article 21 § 2 of the Criminal Code), Belgium (Article 65 § 1 of the Criminal Code), Bosnia and Herzegovina (Article 54 § 2 of the Criminal Code), Bulgaria (Article 26 of the Criminal Code), Croatia (Article 52 of the Criminal Code), the Czech Republic (Article 89 § 3 of the Criminal Code), the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (Article 45 of the Criminal Code), Georgia (Article 14 of the Criminal Code), Greece (Article 98 § 1 of the Criminal Code), Hungary (Article 6 § 2 of the Criminal Code), Italy (Article 81 § 2 of the Criminal Code, referring to a continuous offence stricto sensu), Latvia (Article 23 of the Criminal Code), Malta (Article 18 of the Criminal Code), the Republic of Moldova (Article 29 of the Criminal Code), Montenegro (Article 49 of the Criminal Code), the Netherlands (Article 56 of the Criminal Code), Norway (Article 219 of the Criminal Code, specifically concerning domestic violence), Poland (Article 12 of the Criminal Code), Portugal (Article 30 § 2 of the Criminal Code), Romania (Article 35 of the new Criminal Code), San Marino (Article 50 of the Criminal Code), Serbia (Article 61 of the Criminal Code), Slovakia (Article 122 § 10 of the Criminal Code), Slovenia (Article 54 § 1 of the Criminal Code), Spain (Article 74 of the Criminal Code), Sweden (Article 4a of Chapter 4 of the Criminal Code), Turkey (Article 43 of the Criminal Code), Ukraine (Article 32 of the Criminal Code) and the United Kingdom (Rule 14.2(2) of the Criminal Procedure Rules 2013);
(b)  fourteen member States where the concept of a continuous criminal offence has been developed by legal theory and practice: Albania, Austria, Azerbaijan, Denmark, Estonia, France, Germany, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Russia and Switzerland;
(c)  three member States which do not report the existence either in the law or in legal theory of the notion of a continuous criminal offence as understood in the present case: Cyprus, Finland and Ireland.
The comparative-law material available to the Court concerning the existence of a concept of a continuous criminal offence (see paragraphs 3132 above) shows a high degree of convergence between the domestic legal systems of the Council of Europe member States in this particular area. There appears indeed to be a broad consensus arising out of a long European tradition (see paragraph 30 above) with regard to the following features of a continuous criminal offence, which include both objective (actus reus) and subjective (mens rea) elements testifying to the legal unity of the acts concerned:
(a)  the perpetrator commits a number of identical, similar or different criminal acts against the same legally protected interest (Rechtsgut, bien juridique, bene giuridico); in addition, it is often required that the identity of the perpetrator and of the victim be the same on each occasion;
(b)  there is at least a similarity in the manner of execution of the individual acts (modus operandi), or there are other material circumstances connecting them which constitute a whole (actus reus);
(c)  there is a temporal connection between the different individual acts, which is to be assessed in the particular circumstances of each case;
(d)  there is the same, repeated criminal intent or purpose (mens rea) for all the individual acts, although they do not all have to be planned ab initio;
(e)  the individual acts comprise, either explicitly or implicitly, the constituent elements of the criminal offence(s).
There is also agreement on the principle that the law in force at the time of the cessation of the continuous criminal activity is applicable to the facts which occurred prior to its entry into force, provided that these facts satisfy the conditions of the new law, and in most countries also of the previous law. This also applies, in the majority of member States, when the new law is more severe since the perpetrator is presumed to have tacitly agreed to a harsher sentence by continuing his unlawful conduct after the change in the law.
Moreover, in all member States a single penalty is imposed on the perpetrator of the continuous criminal offence. When the individual acts comprising a continuous criminal offence are covered by a number of different provisions, the provision laying down the most severe penalty will apply.
Finally, the penalty imposed for a continuous criminal offence is invariably more lenient than the cumulative, consecutive or concurrent sentences imposed for multiple criminal offences.
On the basis of the above considerations, the Court notes that the notion of a continuous criminal offence is not only a commonly used legislative and judicial approach to penalising a particular type of conduct, but is also specifically aimed at applying more lenient sentencing rules (see, by way of comparison, Maktouf and Damjanović v. Bosnia and Herzegovina [GC], nos. 2312/08 and 34179/08, § 70, ECHR 2013). It can be said that the concept of a continuous criminal offence confers two benefits on the offender:
(a)  he or she is given one single sentence instead of a cumulative, consecutive or concurrent sentence imposed for several offences; and
(b)  there is a requirement that the constituent elements of the offence defined by the new law, if any, be made out from the onset of the criminal conduct, that is, also with regard to the facts which occurred before the entry into force of the new law.
Under this Convention, which the Czech Republic has not ratified, the State has an obligation to address fully violence against women in all its forms and to take measures to prevent it, protect its victims and prosecute the perpetrators. The Convention provides, inter alia, as follows:
“Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to ensure that the following circumstances, insofar as they do not already form part of the constituent elements of the offence, may, in conformity with the relevant provisions of internal law, be taken into consideration as aggravating circumstances in the determination of the sentence in relation to the offences established in accordance with this Convention:
...
b  the offence, or related offences, were committed repeatedly;
...”
According to paragraph 237 of the explanatory report on the above-mentioned Convention, the aggravating circumstance mentioned in Article 46, sub-paragraph b, concerns offences that are committed repeatedly. This refers to any of the offences established by this Convention as well as any related offences which are committed by the same perpetrator more than once during a certain period of time. The drafters thereby decided to emphasise the particularly devastating effect on a victim who is repeatedly subjected to the same type of criminal act. This is often the case in situations of domestic violence, which inspired the drafters to require the possibility of increased court sentences. It is important to note that the facts of an offence of a similar nature which led to the conviction of the same perpetrator may not be considered as a repeated act referred to under sub-paragraph b, but constitute an aggravating circumstance in their own right under sub-paragraph i.
In its judgment of 17 May 2013 in Trelleborg Industrie SAS and Trelleborg AB v. European Commission (joined cases T-147/09 and T148/09), the General Court dealt with the distinction between a “continuing” and a “repeated” infringement.