The case originated in an application (no. 20317/09) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Vyacheslav Fedorovych Deyneko (“the applicant”), on 27 March 2009.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr I. Lishchyna of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant complained, inter alia, about the lack of medical treatment in detention, the lack of the effective remedies for the above complaint, the unlawfulness and excessive length of his pre-trial detention, and the authorities’ failure to give relevant and sufficient reasons to justify it. On 12 November 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1966 and lives in Morozivka.
On 20 September 2007 the applicant, who was head of the Brusyliv District State Administration of Zhytomyr Region at the time, was arrested on charges of bribery.
On 21 September 2007 the investigator applied to the court for the applicant’s pre-trial detention as a preventive measure pending trial. The application indicated that the applicant had been accused with a serious crime punished up to twelve years’ imprisonment, and that he could try to abscond from justice, obstruct the investigation, and continue his criminal activities. On the same day the Pechersk District Court of Kyiv ordered the applicant’s pre-trial detention. The court reiterated the reasons mentioned in the investigator’s application without providing further details in that regard.
In the course of the pre-trial investigation the applicant’s detention was extended a number of times, including on 15 November 2007, 17 January 2008 and 19 March 2008. The reasons for extending the applicant’s detention were the need to take additional investigative and procedural steps and the fact that there were no grounds to change the preventive measure. No further details were provided in that regard.
On 19 May, 17 June, 26 June, 29 July and 7 August 2008 the courts further extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention, basing their decisions, in addition to the previously mentioned grounds (see paragraph 7 above), on the need for him to familiarise himself with the case file.
In the course of reviewing the extension of his detention on 24 September 2007, 8 January, 19 March and 7 August 2008, the applicant raised objections arguing, in particular, that his state of health had been unsatisfactory, that he had a stable family relationship, and that he had not absconded from justice. It appears from the relevant decisions that his arguments were not addressed by the courts.
On 3 October 2008 the Malyn District Court of Zhytomyr Region (“the trial court”) committed the applicant for trial. The trial court maintained the custodial preventive measure, providing no reasons for that decision and setting no time-limit.
In the course of the trial the applicant applied eleven times to change the preventive measure to a non-custodial one. He stated that his state of health had been unsatisfactory, that his relatives were ready to make the necessary payment of bail, and that a number of individuals, including a member of parliament and State officials, had provided personal guarantees securing his presence during the trial. The trial court rejected those requests, giving similar reasons to those given at the initial stage (see paragraph 6 above). The court further stated that the applicant had been provided with the necessary medical treatment in detention and that his state of health did not warrant his release.
On 16 July 2010 the court found the applicant guilty of bribery and sentenced him to nine years’ imprisonment, confiscated half of his property and banned him from occupying posts in State bodies and local authorities for three years. On 1 December 2010 and 19 May 2011 respectively the Zhytomyr Regional Court of Appeal and the Higher Specialised Court for Civil and Criminal Matters upheld that judgment with minor amendments.
According to the material in the case file, the applicant has suffered from varicose dilatation (варикозне розширення вен) since 1980. According to the Government, the applicant was diagnosed with varicose dilatation of the lower limbs as early as in 1984.
On 18 October 2007 the applicant was placed in the Kyiv pre-trial detention centre (“the SIZO”). In the course of the criminal proceedings the applicant was transferred between different detention facilities.
It was concluded in a forensic examination carried out on 16 January 2008 at the request of the investigator that the applicant had a number of endocrine, heart, venous, neurologic, and digestive conditions. In particular, he was diagnosed with varicose dilatation of the lower limbs and chronic venous insufficiency of the lower limbs with trophic disorders. The forensic experts concluded that the applicant required elective surgery in respect of the varicose dilatation, and outpatient treatment in respect of the other conditions.
Overall, in the course of his detention the applicant was recommended surgery six times in respect of the varicose dilatation, on 16 January 2008, 5 May 2008, 23 October 2008, 18 March 2009, 22 July 2009 and 18 March 2010.
On 8 April 2009 the applicant was recognised as falling into the “third category” (the mildest category) of disability (третя група інвалідності).
On 22 April 2009 the SIZO informed the applicant’s lawyer that he had been diagnosed with varicose dilatation of the lower limbs, third degree chronic venous insufficiency of the lower left limb, second degree chronic venous insufficiency of the lower right limb, hypothalamic dysfunction, impaired glucose tolerance, first degree diffuse non-toxic goiter (an enlarged thyroid) and a chronic trophic ulcer on the left shin. It was specified that the recommended surgical treatment in respect of the varicose dilatation was not available in the SIZO.
On 12 October and 19 November 2009 the SIZO issued another reply to the applicant’s lawyer, stating that it had been recommended that the applicant undergo surgical treatment in respect of his progressing varicose dilatation. This type of treatment could not be carried out within the SIZO, and its medical staff were not in a position to foresee the consequences of the refusal to provide him with surgical treatment.
On 15 February 2013 the applicant consulted a specialist in therapeutics, who recommended that he undergo further examination and treatment at a medical facility within the penal system. On 18 February 2013 the applicant refused that offer, insisting that he needed highly qualified medical assistance in specialist civilian medical institutions.
There is no information in the case file regarding whether the applicant received any medical care after the above-mentioned refusal.
On 18 November 2013 the applicant was dispensed from serving the remainder of his sentence pursuant to a decision of the local court of 8 November 2013 altering his imprisonment to correctional labour.
On 28 November 2013 the applicant underwent surgery on his lower limbs.
On 20 January 2014 he was recognised as falling into the “second category” (more advanced category) of disability (друга група інвалідності).
According to the available information, from November 2007 to February 2013 the applicant consulted a surgeon thirteen times in respect of the varicose dilatation. Outpatient medical treatment was prescribed to him. From 21 March to 5 May and from 23 October to 17 November 2008 he underwent outpatient medical treatment both within the SIZO and at a civilian hospital.