The case originated in an application (no. 23444/12) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Ms Adriana Arps (“the applicant”), on 28 March 2012.
The applicant was represented by Mr S. Babić, a lawyer practising in Zagreb. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged that she had not had a fair trial in that the session of the appeal panel in the criminal proceedings against her on charges of aggravated fraud had been held in her absence, contrary to Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (c) of the Convention.
On 26 May 2014 the complaint concerning the applicant’s absence from the session of the appeal panel was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1958 and lives in Hamburg.
On 26 August 2004 the Zagreb Municipal State Attorney’s Office (Općinsko državno odvjetništvo u Zagrebu; hereinafter: the “State Attorney’s Office”) indicted the applicant and another person in the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court (Općinski kazneni sud u Zagrebu) on charges of aggravated fraud under Article 224 §§ 1 and 4 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 14 below).
The applicant was tried in summary proceedings (skraćeni postupak). On 11 February 2009 the Zagreb Municipal Criminal Court found the applicant and the other accused guilty as charged and sentenced the applicant to one year’s imprisonment, suspended for four years. She was also ordered, jointly with the other accused, to pay damages to the victims in the total amount of 230,335.22 Croatian kunas (HRK; approximately 31,100 euros (EUR)).
The applicant appealed against her conviction and sentence, challenging all legal and factual aspects of the case and asking that her conviction be quashed and a retrial ordered. She submitted, in particular, that she had not had fraudulent intentions, but had merely acted as an intermediary between the loan provider and the borrowers in order to earn commission for herself. Moreover, she stressed that the trial judge had erred in the factual findings and had failed to obtain certain evidence requested by her, which meant that some crucial facts had been left undetermined. She also asked that she and her defence lawyer be allowed to appear at the session of the appeal panel.
On 20 January 2011 the Bjelovar County Court (Županijski sud u Bjelovaru), without informing the applicant or her lawyer, examined the case without holding a hearing. After examining all of the factual and legal issues of the case it dismissed the appeal and upheld the applicant’s conviction and sentence.
On 5 April 2011 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske), complaining of a lack of fairness of the criminal proceedings against her. She contended in particular that she had not been allowed to appear at the session of the appeal panel.
On 29 September 2011 the Constitutional Court declared the applicant’s constitutional complaint inadmissible as manifestly ill-founded.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 56/1990, 135/1997, 113/2000, 28/2001, 76/2010, 5/2014) read as follows:
“In the determination of his rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law.
In the event of suspicion of a criminal offence or criminal charges [being brought], the suspect, defendant or accused shall have the right:
...
- to defend himself in person or with the assistance of a defence lawyer of his own choosing, and if he does not have sufficient means to pay for legal assistance, to be given it free as provided by law;
- to be tried in his presence, provided that he is available to the court;
...”
The relevant part of section 62 of the Constitutional Act on the Constitutional Court (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 99/1999, 29/2002, 49/2002) reads:
“1. Anyone may lodge a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court if he or she deems that a decision (pojedinačni akt) by a State body, or a body of local or regional self-government, or a legal person with public authority that has decided a matter concerning his or her rights and obligations or a suspicion or accusation of a criminal act, has violated his or her human rights or fundamental freedoms, or his or her right to local and regional self-government guaranteed by the Constitution (hereinafter: constitutional right) ...”
The relevant part of the Criminal Code (Kazneni zakon, Official Gazette no. 110/1997, 27/1998, 50/2000, 129/2000, 51/2001, 190/2003, 105/2004, 84/2005 and 71/2006) provides:
“(1) Anyone who, with the aim of obtaining unlawful pecuniary gain for himself or a third party, by false representation or concealment of facts deceives another or continues the deception of another, thereby inducing him to do or to omit to do something to the detriment of his property or the property of another, shall be punished by imprisonment lasting from three months to three years.
...
(4) If the perpetration of the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article results in significant pecuniary gain or if it causes significant damage, and the perpetrator acted with intent to obtain such pecuniary gain or to cause such damage, he shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.”
At the material time, the relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Zakon o kaznenom postupku, Official Gazette nos. 110/1997, 27/1998, 58/1999, 112/1999, 58/2002 and 62/2003) provided:
“1.  The municipal courts, county courts and the Supreme Court shall have competence in criminal matters.
...”
“The county courts shall be competent:
...
(2) to decide on appeals lodged against decisions of the municipal courts rendered in the first-instance.
...”
“A judgment can be challenged:
(1)  for a procedural miscarriage of justice;
(2)  for a violation of the Criminal Code;
(3)  for any error of fact;
(4)  in respect of any sanction, confiscation of the proceeds of crime, costs and expenses ordered or any civil claim lodged in the criminal proceedings, and in respect of a decision to publish the judgment.”
“1.  An appeal shall be lodged with the first-instance court in a sufficient number of copies for the court, the opposing party and the defence counsel to reply thereto.
...”
“The first-instance court shall forward a copy of the appeal to the opposing party, which may submit a reply. The appeal, together with all the files, shall be forwarded by the first-instance court to the second-instance court, which shall also take into account any reply to the appeal received before its session begins.”
“1.  When the second-instance court receives the files, the president of the appeal panel shall assign a reporting judge. If the case concerns an offence which is subject to public prosecution, the reporting judge shall forward the case file to the competent State Attorney, who shall examine it and then return it to the court without delay.
When the State Attorney returns the case file, the president of the panel shall schedule the session of the panel. The State Attorney shall be notified of the session.
...”
“1.  The second-instance court shall examine the first-instance judgment in the part and on the grounds referred to in the appeal (Article 366).
...”
“If the appeal has been lodged only in favour of the defendant, the judgment cannot be amended to his detriment.”
“1.  The second-instance court may, after a session of the appeal panel or after a trial, reject the appeal as being lodged out of time or as being inadmissible, or dismiss the appeal as ill-founded and uphold the first-instance judgment, or quash the first-instance court’s judgment and remit the case to it for a retrial, or reverse the first-instance judgment.
...”
“In proceedings before a municipal court for offences punishable by a fine or up to five years’ imprisonment, the provisions of Articles 431-445 of this Code shall apply, and if they do not provide otherwise, other provisions of this Code shall apply.”
“When a second-instance court decides on an appeal against the judgment of a first-instance court rendered in the summary proceedings, both parties shall be notified of the second-instance panel session if the first-instance judgment pronounced a prison sentence and if the parties requested to be notified of the session or if the president of the panel or the second-instance court panel consider that the presence of all or one of the parties would be of benefit for the clarification of the case.”