The case originated in an application (no. 32247/07) against the Republic of Moldova lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a company registered in Moldova, Bercut SRL (“the applicant company”), on 8 June 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Chiriac, a lawyer practising in Moldova. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V. Grosu.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the closure of the company constituted a breach of its rights under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 20 October 2010 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant company was founded in 1992 and since 1995 has, inter alia, run a driving school, being in possession of the necessary licence issued by the State for that purpose. On 30 June 2005 the applicant company’s licence was renewed with a term of validity of five years. At that time the driving school employed approximately sixty people and had approximately 2,400 students.
On 7 August 2006 the State Registration Chamber conducted an unannounced check on the driving school and discovered that two of its instructors had been replaced and that the State Registration Chamber had not been informed of this within the ten-day time-limit provided for by the law.
On 10 August 2006 the State Registration Chamber issued decision no. 2985, by which the applicant company’s licence was withdrawn in view of the irregularity.
On 12 August 2006 the applicant company initiated court proceedings against the State Registration Chamber, seeking the revocation of its order of 10 August 2006. The applicant company submitted, inter alia, that the check carried out by the defendant on 7 August 2006 had been unlawful and that it had announced to the State Registration Chamber the changes to its personnel by letters of 19 August 2005 and 7 February 2006. In that respect the applicant company submitted a copy of its internal register of incoming and outgoing correspondence containing notes of two letters sent to the State Registration Chamber.
On 27 November 2006 the Chişinău Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant company’s action, finding that its system of registering correspondence was not sufficient proof. The applicant company appealed against the judgment.
On 21 February 2007 the Supreme Court of Justice dismissed the applicant’s appeal.
The relevant provisions of Law no. 451 on Licensing (“the Licensing Act”) read as follows:
Section 19. Checks on licence holders
(2)  Unannounced checks can be conducted only on the basis of a written request in respect of a breach of licence conditions by a licence holder.
Section 21. Withdrawal of licences
(1) (f)  [A licence may be withdrawn] if a licence holder fails to notify the appropriate authority in due time of a change in the data contained in the annexes to an application for a licence.
The relevant provisions of the Civil Code read as follows:
Article 619. Default interest
(2)  In non-consumer-related situations default interest shall be 9% above the interest rate provided for in Article 585 unless the law or the contract provides otherwise. Evidence that a lower level of damage has been incurred shall be inadmissible.”