The case originated in an application (no. 15074/08) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Mr Tsanko Todorov Doktorov (“the applicant”), on 18 February 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr T. Valchev, a lawyer practising in Varna. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms R. Nikolova, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged that it was impossible for him, both in law and in practice, to contest the paternity of a child born during his marriage to the child’s mother.
On 7 December 2016 this complaint was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1973 and lives in Varna.
The applicant and his wife divorced on 21 August 2006 pursuant to a court-approved agreement between the two of them. Under the terms of this agreement, the applicant undertook to pay child support to the two children born during the marriage and agreed to his wife’s keeping his family name after the divorce.
Subsequently, the applicant learned that his former wife had conceived their second child, born in 2003, as a result of a relationship with another man during her marriage to the applicant. The applicant underwent a DNA test to determine whether he was the father of the younger child. The DNA test ‒ the result of which the applicant received on 15 January 2007 ‒ established that he was not the biological father of the second child. The results of this DNA test were never considered by a court.
Shortly thereafter, in February 2007, the applicant brought a civil claim in court, seeking to contest his paternity of the child in question. On 1 March 2007 the Varna Regional Court dismissed his request, finding that it was time-barred due to the expiry – in 2004 – of the year-long limitation period counting from the child’s birth or from learning thereof (see the section “Relevant domestic law and practice” below”). This finding was confirmed by two higher judicial instances, the final decision being pronounced by the Supreme Court of Cassation on 19 September 2007.
The applicant brought subsequent proceedings in which he sought to stop paying child support to the second child. On 20 May 2008 his claim was rejected by the Varna District Court, which found that it had not been proven that the applicant was not the child’s father, given that he had not rebutted the legal presumption under Article 32 (1) of the Family Code 1985 (“the 1985 Code”).
The applicable law at the time was the 1985 Code. According to its Article 32 (1), the husband of a child’s mother was considered to be the father of any child born during the marriage or before the expiry of three hundred days from its dissolution. According to its Article 33 (1), the husband of a child’s mother could contest his paternity of the child by proving that the child could not have been fathered by him. Such a claim could be brought within a year of the date on which the father learned of the child’s birth.
Article 303 (1) (7) of the Code of Civil Procedure 2007 (CCP 2007) provides that civil proceedings may be reopened when a judgment of the European Court of Human Rights has established that the Convention had been violated and where a fresh examination of the case is necessary in order to eliminate the consequences of the violation. The interested party may make the request for reopening no later than six months after the judgment has become final (Article 305 (2) of the CCP 2007). The request is examined by the Supreme Court of Cassation (Article 307 of the CCP 2007).