The case originated in an application (no. 29784/07) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Macedonian national, Ms Rosica Stoilkovska (“the applicant”), on 3 July 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr R. Aleksovski, a lawyer practising in Kriva Palanka. The Macedonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr K. Bogdanov.
The applicant complained, in particular, that the Court of Appeal had deprived her of the right to a fair trial by deciding her case contrary to its earlier case-law in identical cases. She also complained that the length of the proceedings had been excessive.
On 31 August 2011 these complaints were communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1948 and lives in Kriva Palanka.
The applicant worked as a salesperson in a food store run by company T. (“the employer”). In 1994 goods went missing from the store. As the person responsible for the loss could not be identified, on 31 January 1995 the employer requested that the employees compensate the losses sustained. The amount which each employee was asked to pay was calculated in proportion to their working hours with the employer. Several employees, including the applicant, were required to pay 115,682 Macedonian denars (the equivalent of 1,880 euros (EUR)).
On 7 March 1995 the applicant and nine colleagues brought a civil action against the employer seeking annulment of the payment requests. On 26 April 1995 the Kriva Palanka Court of First Instance (“the first-instance court”) accepted the claim. On 17 April 1997 the Skopje Court of Appeal quashed that judgment due to the lower court’s errors in fact and law. On 26 March 1999 the Skopje Court of Appeal again ordered the re-examination of the case, because the payment requests had not been enforceable and binding on the claimants. Accordingly, it found that the claimants had lacked a legal interest in pursuing the claim. On 31 May 1999 the first-instance court dismissed the claim for lack of legal interest. That judgment was quashed on appeal, as it had failed to state whether there had been any procedural flaws regarding the payment requests. On 15 May 2003 the first-instance court accepted the claim and annulled the employer’s payment requests. On 2 March 2005 the Skopje Court of Appeal quashed that judgment and rejected the claim as inadmissible (недозволена). It found that the claimants had not been entitled, under section 138 of the Employment Act 1993 as in force at the time (see paragraph 22 below), to seek the annulment of the payment requests, but rather that the employer instead had the right to seek, under section 101 of the same Act (see paragraph 21 below), a court order that the claimants reimburse the losses sustained. In those proceedings, the court would assess whether there was any damage attributable to any employee.
As the first-instance court stated in a letter of 3 September 2010, there was no evidence that the judgment was served on the applicant or her legal representative. The applicant asserted that she had learnt about it in February 2007. The Government did not present any evidence to disprove that allegation.
On 21 November 1995 the employer brought a civil action seeking a judgment ordering the applicant to pay the amount specified in the payment request. Initially, the first-instance court rejected the claim. Subsequently, it dismissed the employer’s claim on three occasions due to lack of evidence that any responsibility could be attributed to the applicant. All of those judgments were quashed on appeal by the Skopje Court of Appeal.
On 3 April 2006 the first-instance court rendered its most recent judgment in the matter, in which it again dismissed the employer’s claim. The relevant parts of the judgment read as follows:
“... the loss was either the result of goods going missing from the store ... or money not being put in the cash register each day. Since [the employer] did not identify the person responsible for the losses, it requested that the employees [reimburse its losses] in an amount corresponding to their working hours in 1994 ... no (internal) proceedings were carried out in order (that the employer) identify the person responsible for the losses sustained or to establish disciplinary [liability] or (any) other breaches of the working rules ...”
The court further relied on section 98 of the Employment Act 1993, as then in force (see paragraph 19 below), and stated that:
“The above-cited provision suggests that the Employment Act endorses the principle of individual responsibility ... which requires not only identification of the employee who caused the damage, but also (determination of) responsibility for damage caused intentionally or negligently ... In the present case and on the basis of the admitted evidence, it is established that criminal proceedings were instituted against the store’s responsible person in relation to the loss sustained ... the criminal proceedings finally ended with an acquittal (of the responsible person), thus leaving two disputed issues unresolved – who caused [the damage] and whether any responsibility could be attributed to [the perpetrator] ... It appears that [the payment request] and [the employer’s] claim are based on the principle of objective responsibility, which runs counter to the above-cited [statutory] provisions ... [the employer] did not present any evidence that [the applicant] contributed to the loss or was responsible for it ... consequently, the court’s view is that section 98(1) of the Employment Act is not applicable [in the applicant’s case] ...”
On 23 November 2006 the Skopje Court of Appeal overturned the judgment and accepted the employer’s claim. It stated, amongst other things, the following:
“According to this court, [the employer] correctly claims in the appeal that [the payment request] was lawful. On the correctly established facts, the first-instance court wrongly applied section 98(1) and (3) of the Employment Act ... Section 98(3) of the Employment Act, according to which all employees are regarded as responsible and should compensate damage in equal proportions when it is impossible to establish any individual responsibility, applies in the present case ... Since several employees caused the damage, they are jointly responsible for it ... none of the employees, including [the applicant], alerted the responsible persons [working for the employer] to the fact that goods or money were going missing from the store, or that the responsible person (against whom criminal proceedings were instituted) had taken goods for himself or others without paying the price, or that he had misappropriated part of the daily takings etc. ... It appears that [the applicant] contributed to the damage. Had she, as well as the other employees, reacted in a timely manner by reporting the store’s responsible person, they would have prevented the damage ... The responsibility of other employees lies in their failure to undertake actions to prevent the damage. Had they reacted in a timely manner to the unlawful activities of the store’s responsible person, he would have been prevented from further breaking the working rules. That would have also stopped the losses.”
The applicant was ordered to pay, in addition to the principal debt (EUR 1,880), statutory interest calculated from the date of submission of the claim. That decision was served on the applicant on 4 January 2007.
On 14 May 2008 the Supreme Court rejected an appeal on points of law brought by the applicant as inadmissible, finding that the claim value was below the statutory threshold specified in section 372(2) of the Civil Proceedings Act 2005 (see paragraph 24 below).
The applicant submitted copies of several judgments of the Skopje Court of Appeal in which it had upheld the first-instance court’s judgments dismissing identical claims brought by the employer against the applicant’s colleagues. Those decisions were taken between September 2004 and March 2006 (Gž.br.4295/04; Gž.br.6708/04; Gž.br.6709/04; Gž.br.6711/04; and Gž.br.1544/06). The relevant parts of two of these judgments read as follows:
“... In the court’s view, the first-instance court correctly held that the Employment Act employs the principle of individual responsibility ... which requires identification of the person who caused the damage and [an assessment of] whether it was caused intentionally or negligently ... A person’s responsibility under section 98 of the Employment Act cannot be assumed, but rather should be established in appropriate proceedings ... Criminal proceedings instituted against the store’s responsible person finally ended with his acquittal. Thus [the criminal proceedings] did not resolve two contested issues, namely who caused [the damage] and whether any responsibility could be attributed ... On the basis of the admitted evidence, the first-instance court established that the payment request was based on the principle of objective responsibility, which runs counter to the Employment Act ... The first-instance court correctly concluded that the defendant had not contributed to the losses or that any responsibility could be attached to him ... The Appeal Court has examined [the employer’s] arguments that the employees, including the defendant, were responsible because they had failed to exercise their working duties properly and had allowed the company to sustain damage, but it nevertheless dismisses them as unfounded ... The employees reported to the store’s responsible person and available evidence suggests that there were irregularities in his work ... accordingly the defendant cannot be held responsible, all the more so since [the employer] did not institute any proceedings against the defendant or other store employees.” (Gž.br.4295/04 of 29 September 2004)
“As claimed [in the appeal], the defendant’s responsibility was based on the fact that she knew about the workplace irregularities and the damage, but she failed to undertake any action in order to prevent the losses. This court has examined [those] allegations and finds that they are unfounded ... employees reported to the store’s responsible person and the available evidence suggests that there were irregularities in his work. The [first-instance] court correctly interpreted section 98 of the Employment Act, under which the principle of individual responsibility applies to damage caused to an employer ... In the present case, criminal proceedings were instituted against the store’s responsible person in relation to the losses sustained. They finally ended with his acquittal ... thus [the criminal proceedings] did not identify who was responsible for the losses. On the other hand, it was not established whether the defendant or any other salesperson was responsible for the losses ... the [employer] did not present any evidence to prove the defendant’s individual responsibility...” (Gž.br.6708/04 of 21 January 2005)
The remaining judgments (Gž.br.6709/04 dated 14 January 2005; Gž.br.6711/04 dated 21 January 2005 and Gž.br.1544/06 dated 8 March 2006) of the Skopje Court of Appeal contained identical reasoning as above regarding the first-instance court’s findings that section 98 of the then Employment Act required, in the circumstances of the case, the application of the principle of individual responsibility; that no internal proceedings had been carried out, nor had the employer presented any evidence to prove any individual responsibility; that no responsibility could be attributed to any defendant for any alleged omissions; and that the principle of objective responsibility could not apply.
By a decision of 5 December 2001, the Supreme Court accepted the employer’s appeal on points of law in an identical case brought against a colleague of the applicant. That decision was given under the statutory rules concerning the Supreme Court’s competence ratione valoris provided for in the Civil Proceedings Act of 1977 (see paragraph 24 below). The first-instance court’s decision in that case was given on 30 September 1997 (Rev.br.50/99).
Under Article 101 of the Constitution, the Supreme Court is the highest court, providing for the uniform application of laws by courts.
Section 98 (1), (2) and (3) of the Employment Act 1993 read as follows:
Section 98
“An employee is required to compensate losses caused in the course of work or related to his or her work for which he or she is responsible.
If the losses are caused by several employees, each employee is required to compensate the losses attributable to him or her.
When individual responsibility cannot be established, all employees are considered equally responsible and required to pay compensation in equal proportions ...”
Section 100 empowered the employer to issue a request for compensation of damages. The employee could object to such a request within eight days after the service of the request.
Under section 101, in the event of non-compliance by the employee with a request for compensation of damages, the employer could institute court proceedings seeking to recover the sum claimed.
Under section 138(1) of the Employment Act 1993, the employee could institute civil proceedings in order to protect his or her rights affected by an employer’s request for compensation.
Section 106 of the Employment Act 2003 and section 156 of the Employment Act 2005 provided for the same rules of compensation of damages caused by employees as those contained in section 98 of the Employment Act 1993 (see paragraph 19 above). The only difference is that section 156 of the Employment Act 2005 concerns damage caused “intentionally or in gross negligence”.
Under the Civil Proceedings Act 1977, as amended in 1990, the claim value required for lodging an appeal on points of law was set at 8,000 denars (MKD). Section 368 of the Civil Proceedings Act 1998 set that threshold at MKD 1,000,000. Section 372 of the Civil Proceedings Act 2005 provided that an appeal on points of law would be inadmissible if the claim value did not exceed MKD 500,000.
Under the transitional provisions of Civil Proceedings Acts 1998 and 2005 (sections 476 and 474 respectively), proceedings would be completed in accordance with the law valid when the proceedings at first instance had ended.
Sections 35 § 1 (6) and 36 of the 2006 Act provided for a length remedy, which was to be decided, as stated in section 35 § 1 (6), by the Supreme Court. According to the Act, in case of a violation of the reasonable-time requirement, the competent court could award just satisfaction.
The Government also submitted copies of two judgments of the Skopje Court of Appeal adopted in June and September 2011. These cases concerned similar compensation claims submitted against nine employees in respect of drugs going missing from a pharmacy. In these cases, each defendant was ordered, under sections 106(3) and 156(3) of the 2003 and 2005 Employment Acts respectively (see paragraph 23 above), to compensate in equal proportions the losses sustained, since no individual responsibility could be attached to any of them (Рож.бр.113/11 and Рож.бр.418/11). They further submitted copies of other judgments in which that court had applied section 106 of the 2003 Employment Act to payment requests that the responsible persons (одговорни лица) employed by the claimant, namely a manager and a deputy manager, compensate the losses sustained in certain proportions (Рож.бр.853/09; Рож.бр.715/10 and Рож.бр.1072/11).