The case originated in an application (no. 41833/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Yevgeniy Yuryevich Alekseyenko (“the applicant”), on 2 December 2003.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms Y. Yefremova and Ms K. Moskalenko, lawyers practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were initially represented by Mrs V. Milinchuk, former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights, and subsequently by their Representative, Mr G. Matyushkin.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been detained in appalling conditions in the Izhevsk detention facility from 30 January 2002 to 16 July 2004, that he had contracted tuberculosis in detention and had not been provided with adequate medical assistance in the facility, that he had been subjected to ill-treatment by warders and had not benefited from an effective investigation into the events, that the criminal proceedings against him had been excessively long, that there had been no remedy for the violation of his right to trial within a reasonable time, and that the authorities had interfered with his right of individual petition.
On 5 July 2007 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
On 28 April 2008 the Judge appointed as rapporteur requested the Government pursuant to Rule 49 § 2 of the Rules of Court to submit factual information concerning the alleged interference with the applicant's right of individual petition.
The Government objected to the joint examination of the admissibility and merits of the application. Having examined the Government's objection, the Court dismissed it.
The applicant was born in 1972 and lived until his arrest in the town of  in the Novosibirsk Region. He is now serving his prison sentence in a correctional colony in the Novosibirsk Region.
On 12 October 2001 the  found the applicant guilty of having threatened a person with murder and sentenced him to a suspended term of one year's imprisonment.
In December 2001 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of manslaughter. On 24 April 2002 the Supreme Court of the  found the applicant guilty of unintentional manslaughter and aggravated disorderly behaviour and sentenced him to thirteen years' imprisonment.
On 16 January 2002 criminal proceedings were instituted against the applicant on suspicion of robbery. On an unspecified date the criminal charges against him were amended: he was charged with several counts of aggravated robbery, unlawful possession and manufacturing of weapons, car hijacking and theft of identification documents.
On 17 June 2002 the applicant was served with the bill of indictment. A month later the pre-trial investigation was completed and the applicant was committed to stand trial before the Supreme Court of the .
On 5 August 2002 the Supreme Court fixed a preliminary hearing for 13 August 2002. At that hearing the Supreme Court returned the case to a prosecutor's office for five days, finding that the applicant had been served with an illegible copy of the bill of indictment. The following preliminary hearing was fixed for 30 September 2002. That hearing was rescheduled for 3 December 2002 because the applicant was participating in a hearing before another court.
On 3 December 2002 the Supreme Court remitted the case to the prosecutor's office for the drafting of a new bill of indictment. It noted that the bills of indictment which had been served on the defendants did not include the list of evidence on which the prosecution grounded their accusations. The following preliminary hearing scheduled for 4 January 2003 was adjourned because two counsel for the defendants had failed to attend.
From 13 to 20 January 2003 the Supreme Court held four preliminary hearings. At the hearing on 20 January 2003 the applicant unsuccessfully sought the removal of the entire bench, alleging that the judges could have been influenced by various publications concerning his case.
On 20 January 2003 the Supreme Court fixed the first trial hearing for 18 February 2003. The applicant and his co-defendants were to be tried by a jury.
On 19 February 2003 the Supreme Court remitted the case to the prosecutor's office for correction of defects in the bill of indictment. At the beginning of March 2003 the prosecutor's office returned the case file to the Supreme Court and the first preliminary hearing was fixed for 19 March 2003. At that hearing the prosecution dropped certain charges against the defendants and the Supreme Court transferred the case to the Industrialniy District Court of Izhevsk, which acquired subject-matter jurisdiction. The applicant was to be tried by professional judges. The District Court fixed a preliminary hearing for 29 April 2003.
At the hearing of 29 April 2003 the District Court remitted the case file to the prosecutor's office because a defendant, Mr H., had been served with an illegible copy of the bill of indictment. On 19 May 2003 Mr H. received the bill of indictment and on 4 June 2003 the District Court fixed a preliminary hearing for 11 June 2003. However, the hearing fixed for 11 June 2003, as well as that listed for 19 June 2003, was adjourned in view of counsel's failure to attend.
On 3 July 2003 the District Court held the first trial hearing. At the following hearing on 7 July 2003 the applicant requested the District Court to dismiss his counsel, Mr Ch., from the proceedings owing to the fact that their positions regarding the defence strategy did not coincide. Of the six hearings listed between 14 July and 15 September 2003, three were adjourned because the defendants were ill, two were rescheduled because counsel  had refused to represent the applicant and had not attended, and two were annulled because witnesses defaulted. On 9 September 2003 the District Court appointed Mr B. to act as the applicant's counsel. As shown by the Government's submissions, some time later the applicant refused Mr B.'s services and on 16 December 2003 Ms Zh. was assigned to the case as the applicant's representative. Between 5 March and 21 April 2004 the defendants and their lawyers studied the case-file materials.
In the meantime, at a hearing of 12 April 2004 the applicant unsuccessfully sought the dismissal of his counsel, Ms Zh., from the proceedings. Ms Zh. did not attend the two subsequent hearings, on 21 and 27 April 2004, and did not inform the District Court about the reasons for her absence. On 12 May 2004 the District Court appointed Ms G. to act as the applicant's counsel and stayed the proceedings until 24 May 2004 to allow the applicant's new lawyer to familiarise herself with the case.
On 9 June 2004, having received the applicant's petition for a dismissal of his counsel, Ms G., from the case, the District Court stayed the proceedings until 29 June 2004. On 2 July 2004 Ms G. successfully asked the District Court to be released from her duty as the applicant's representative. Two weeks later Mr S. was assigned the task of representing the applicant. The District Court granted a two-week stay in the proceedings for Mr S. to read the case file and develop the defence strategy with the applicant.
According to the parties, between 17 August 2004 and 25 January 2005 the District Court scheduled and held hearings at regular intervals.
On 25 January 2005 the Industrialniy District Court of Izhevsk found the applicant guilty of several counts of aggravated robbery and car hijacking and sentenced him to seventeen years and six months' imprisonment. The District Court acquitted the applicant of the remaining charges.
On 27 September 2005 the Supreme Court of the  amended the judgment, reducing the applicant's sentence to seventeen years' imprisonment.
The applicant complained about the conditions of his detention in temporary detention facility no. IZ-18/1 in  from 30 January 2002 to 16 July 2004.
Relying on submissions by the three inmates who had been detained in facility no. 1 in , the applicant alleged that he had been detained in severely overcrowded cells. Having indicated the average number of inmates for each cell in which he had been detained and the number of sleeping places, the applicant argued that he had usually had less than two square metres of personal space. Given the lack of beds, inmates had slept in shifts. They were not provided with bedding.
The applicant further submitted that the sanitary conditions had been appalling. The cells were infested with insects but the management did not provide any insecticide. The walls in the cells were covered with a thick layer of mould. The applicant submitted that the windows were covered with metal blinds which blocked access to natural light and air. The artificial ventilation system did not function. It was impossible to take a shower as inmates were given only fifteen minutes and several men had to use one shower-head at the same time. That situation was further aggravated by the fact that the applicant frequently missed a “bathing day” if he had to take part in a hearing before the court. For instance, he was denied an opportunity to shower for two months in December 2003 and January 2004. Inmates had to wash and dry their laundry indoors, creating excessive humidity in the cells. They were also allowed to smoke in the cells. In the majority of the cells the lavatory pan was not separated from the living area by a small partition. However, even if a small partition was installed, it did not afford any privacy. In fact, at no time did inmates have complete privacy. Anything they happened to be doing – using the toilet, sleeping – was in view of the guard or fellow inmates. No toiletries were provided. The food was of poor quality and in scarce supply. Inmates were afforded an hour of outdoor recreation per day.
According to certificates issued on 27 August 2007 by a deputy director of the facility and produced by the Government, the applicant was kept in eighteen different cells measuring from 6 to 37.3 square metres. The Government submitted that, given the average number of inmates which had been detained together with the applicant and the size of the cells, the applicant had never been afforded less than four square metres of personal space. They further noted that at all times he had had an individual bunk and bedding.
Relying on the information provided by the deputy director of the facility, the Government further argued that the sanitary conditions in the cells were satisfactory.  In particular, they submitted that the cells received natural light and ventilation through one or two windows each measuring no less than one square metre. Each cell was equipped with a lavatory pan separated from the living area by a one-metre-high partition, a sink, a tap with running water, bunks and a table. Inmates were allowed to take a shower once every seven days for no less than fifteen minutes. Clean bedding was also provided once a week. The cells were disinfected. The Government, relying on the information provided by the deputy director of the facility, further stated that the applicant was given food “in accordance with the established norms”.
On 30 January 2002, on his admission to detention facility no. IZ-18/1, the applicant was examined by the prison doctor and given a chest fluorography examination, which revealed no signs of tuberculosis. According to the Government, between February 2002 and June 2004 the applicant was subjected to three fluorography tests. The most recent fluorography test in the series performed on 20 February 2004 revealed no pathology in the applicant's lungs. On 20 June 2004, in the course of a medical check-up, also involving an X-ray examination, tuberculosis changes in the applicant's lungs were detected. That finding was confirmed by another radiography test performed on 25 June 2004.
On 16 July 2004 the applicant was transferred to prison tuberculosis hospital no. 4 in the . Following a number of medical analyses carried out in the hospital he was diagnosed with infiltrative tuberculosis (“TB”) of the left lung in the disintegration stage. A number of sputum smear tests performed in the hospital showed that the applicant was smear-negative. On 23 July 2004 the applicant was released from the hospital, having failed to comply with the hospital's internal regulations. He was, however, prescribed continuation of the treatment started in the hospital under intensive chemotherapy regimen and comprising a number of drugs: isoniazid, pyrazinamide, rifampicin, ethambutol, antihistamines, etc. (so-called “2HRZE” regimen). The applicant was transferred to the medical unit of detention facility no. 18/1.
As shown by a copy of the applicant's medical record produced by the Government, during the initial stage of the treatment the applicant adhered to a strict medication regime, having received prescribed doses of anti-bacteriological medicines. An intake of every dose was observed by the facility medical staff. Attending tuberculosis specialists examined the patient on a regular basis, sometimes daily, to react to his concomitant complaints about the state of his health and to identify whether a correction of the drug regimen was necessary. Clinical blood and urine analyses, sputum monitoring, as well as regular chest radiography and liver examinations, were conducted regularly. In the first few months of the treatment the doctors already noted a positive dynamic in the clinical TB symptoms.
On the completion of the intensive phase of the treatment, the continuation phase of the therapy commenced, accompanied by a special dietary ration. That phase of the treatment ended in March 2005.
The applicant's medical history contained a number of entries made by attending tuberculosis specialists, recording the applicant's negative attitude towards the treatment, his refusal to take anti-bacteriological medicines and his decisions to go on a hunger-strike. The attending doctors had conversations with the applicant, persuading him to continue the treatment and warning about negative effects of treatment interruption and fasting.
Following medical examinations of the applicant in April and May 2005 it was established that the infiltrative tuberculosis had gone into the resolution stage. Recommendations to continue treatment on a reduced chemotherapy regimen were made and followed through.
On 14 October 2005 the applicant was examined by a medical panel comprising a number of specialists. Having studied his medical history, including results of the most recent X-ray examinations, blood and urine analysis and sputum smear tests, the panel issued the following diagnosis: “clinical recovery from infiltrative tuberculosis”. The applicant's medical record shows that he continued to remain under close medical supervision, undergoing necessary medical testing and being prescribed seasonal retreatment chemotherapy courses to prevent relapse of the illness.
According to the applicant, at a trial hearing on 9 July 2003 he informed the Industrialniy District Court of his intention to waive his right to attend hearings and participate in the trial because the trial court was impartial and violated his rights as a defendant. On the following day warders attempted to take the applicant to the courthouse. He agreed to proceed to a prison van but informed the warders about his refusal to take part in the hearing. After the van had arrived at the courthouse, the applicant refused to leave it. The warders dragged him out of the van, accompanying their actions with kicks and blows. After the District Court had recessed for lunch, the applicant was taken back to facility no. IZ-18/1. After lunch the applicant was driven to the courthouse. He again refused to leave the prison van. A warder tried to force the applicant out of the van and, in response to the applicant's resistance, hit him with handcuffs on the head. The applicant's forehead started bleeding. He was taken to a warder's office, where he remained until approximately 5 p.m. On arrival back at the detention facility in the evening of 10 July 2003 the applicant was examined by a prison doctor, who recorded a laceration on his forehead. No other injuries were discovered during the examination.
The Government provided the following version of events. On 10 July 2003 the applicant and another inmate, Mr H., refused to leave a prison van to take part in a trial hearing. Acting on an order from the presiding judge, warders, Mr K., Mr P.,  and Mr Ka., used physical force and handcuffs to ensure the defendants' presence in the courtroom. The applicant resisted, hit and kicked a warder. He slipped, having fallen in the van and injured his head. In the evening of the same day the applicant was examined by a prison doctor in facility no. IZ-18/1. A laceration measuring four millimetres in length and two millimetres in depth covered by a crust of dried blood was recorded on his forehead.
On 11 July 2003 the applicant complained to the Prosecutor of the Udmurtiya Republic alleging that the warders had hit him on the head on 10 July 2003 in response to his refusal to leave the prison van. He asked the prosecutor to initiate an investigation into the events and consider the warders criminally liable. Having provided the Court with a copy of the applicant's complaint to the prosecutor, the Government submitted that the applicant had never asked for criminal proceedings to be brought against the warders. The Government also produced a copy of the applicant's co-defendant's complaint to the prosecutor's office. The co-defendant alleged that warders had threatened him with violence and that he perceived those threats as real because the warders had already beaten the applicant up on 10 July 2003, causing him a head injury.
On 11 July 2003 the applicant was examined by experts of the Forensic Medical Expert Bureau of the , who confirmed the findings of the prison doctor. The experts concluded that the head injury was minor, that the applicant had been afforded necessary medical assistance and that he did not require placement in a hospital.
The head of the warders' service issued a written report describing the events of 10 July 2003. Without providing any details, he stated that the applicant had refused to leave the prison van and had injured his forehead inside the vehicle.
An investigator of the Industrialniy District prosecutor's office interviewed the applicant about the events of 10 July 2003. As shown by a copy of the interview record submitted by the Government, the applicant testified that in the morning of 10 July 2003 the warders had grabbed him by the hands to force him out of the prison van. In the afternoon of the same day, when the warders had again ordered him to leave the van, the applicant had attempted to bite a warder. The latter responded by hitting the applicant on the head with handcuffs, cutting his forehead open. The investigator also interrogated inmate H., who had been in the prison van during the alleged beatings, the applicant's lawyer and a co-defendant, Mr S. Mr H. corroborated the applicant's account of events, noting that a warder had placed handcuffs on his fist in a knuckle-duster manner and hit the applicant on the forehead. Mr S. testified that on 10 July 2003 he had seen the applicant in a courtroom. His forehead was bleeding. The lawyer confirmed seeing an injury on the applicant's forehead.
The investigator also questioned the warders who had witnessed the events of 10 July 2003. The warders testified that on arrival at the courthouse the applicant and Mr H. had started acting aggressively, having refused to leave the van. The applicant had given a warder a head-butt and had attempted to hit and kick other warders. The warders had lifted the applicant and Mr H. and carried them to the courthouse. In the courtroom the applicant and Mr H. had screamed obscenities, thrown personal belongings at the warders and threatened them with violence. Similar events had occurred again in the afternoon when the applicant had injured his forehead and had refused to leave the prison van.
On 8 August 2003 the investigator issued a decision, finding that the warders' actions had constituted a lawful response to the applicant's improper behaviour. The applicant was provided with a copy of the decision and with an opportunity, following his request, to study materials from the prosecution investigation.
On 9 December 2003 the Industrialniy District Court, on the applicant's request, quashed the decision of 8 August 2003 finding that it was premature because the investigator had not questioned all witnesses who had been present when the applicant had been injured. The District Court ordered an additional investigation.
Having once again interviewed the warders, the applicant and inmate H., on 15 June 2004, the investigator refused to institute criminal proceedings against the warders, finding no prima facie case of ill-treatment. The participants in the events of 10 July 2003 did not amend their previous statements, save for the applicant, who added that in addition to a head injury the warder had cut his lip. The investigator concluded that the use of force against the applicant had been necessary and had been the result of his unlawful behaviour.
On 29 November 2004 the Ustinovskiy District Court of Izhevsk quashed the decision of 15 June 2004 and sent the case for additional investigation. The relevant part of the decision read as follows:
“After having heard the parties to the proceedings and having examined the case file, the court considers that [the applicant's] claims are substantiated and should be upheld on the following grounds.
The decision of the investigator, Mr N., is based on the conclusion that the use of physical force against [the applicant] was caused by his unlawful behaviour and was conducted in accordance with orders and instructions of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Udmurtiya Republic, as a result of which [the investigator] refused to institute criminal proceedings in accordance with Article 24 § 1 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation – absence of criminal conduct.
At the same time, as shown by the decision of the investigator, Mr N., [the applicant], in fact, sustained an injury; however, the person who had caused that damage was not established. The investigator only refers in his decision to statements by the warders who had participated in escorting [the applicant], and who had used the following formula: “a member of the warders' team”, in order to describe the person who had injured [the applicant], without referring to the particular individual.”
On 7 February 2005 the investigator dismissed the applicant's complaint against the warders, finding that the applicant had been injured as a result of his unlawful behaviour in the prison van. That decision was quashed on 18 April 2005 by the Ustinovskiy District Court, which concluded that the investigation was “incomplete” as the investigator had not questioned all the warders who had taken the applicant to the courthouse after lunch and had not established whether the applicant could have hurt himself as had been stated by the warders.
On 4 July 2005 the investigator issued a decision finding no criminal conduct in the warders' actions. The decision was based on statements by the entire staff of the warders' service.
In particular, warder B. testified that on 10 July 2003 the applicant and inmate H. had resisted lawful orders, had refused to leave the prison van and had several times hit warder P. The warders had used force, lifted the applicant and carried him to a courtroom. The applicant had used offensive language, threatened the warders and spat on them. On the same day, warders who had escorted the applicant to the courthouse after lunch had told Mr B. that the applicant had injured his forehead in the prison van. When the applicant and inmate H. had been taken back to the detention facility after the hearing, the warders had used force and handcuffed them to prevent unlawful behaviour. The applicant had not had any visible injuries.
Warder K. confirmed the statements given by warder B.
 stated that he had escorted the applicant from the detention facility to the prison van. The applicant had not had any visible injuries. After the applicant had refused to leave the prison van, the warders had reported this to a judge. The judge had ordered that the applicant be brought to the courthouse against his will. The applicant had refused to leave the van and the warders had forced him out.  testified that the applicant had blood on his face.
Warder P. explained that on 10 July 2003, in the morning, the applicant had hit him several times in the prison van. The warders who had taken the applicant to the courthouse after lunch had told Mr P. that the applicant had hit his head against the door of the prison van.
The investigator noted that the applicant's injury had been “acquired as a result of his unlawful behaviour in the Industrialniy District Court of Izhevsk and in the prison van... That conclusion was corroborated by the injuries received by warder P.”
On 18 October 2005 the Ustinovskiy District Court upheld the decision of 4 July 2005, having found that the prosecution investigation had been meticulous, objective and thorough. The District Court noted that the investigator had heard eyewitnesses, had authorised a medical examination of the applicant and of the warder who had been injured by the applicant, and had assessed the warders' actions and those of the applicant on the basis of the evidence before him and the requirements of the domestic legal norms.
In the spring of 2006 the applicant, who had been duly served with a copy of the District Court's judgment on 20 October 2005, appealed against it. However, the leave to appeal was rejected because the applicant had missed the ten-day time-limit stipulated by Russian law.
According to the applicant, on 7 December 2001 a police patrol had found him in a street. He had been severely beaten up by unidentified individuals. The police had taken him to a nearby police station and later to a hospital. Criminal proceedings were instituted, but they were closed on 31 August 2002 because the investigation had been unable to identify the perpetrators of the offence.
The applicant complained that numerous articles had been published in the local press concerning the last set of criminal proceedings against him and his co-defendants. They had been referred to as “a gang of Mr Alekseyenko”. The applicant's attempts to institute criminal proceedings against the newspapers and reporters had been unsuccessful.
On 7 April 2008 the applicant's representative sent a letter to the Court alleging that following the communication of the case to the Government the applicant had been visited on a number of occasions by
A letter from the applicant was attached to the representative's letter of 7 April 2008. The applicant submitted that the authorities had suggested that he sell his flat in . The sale could have legitimised his stay in the Udmurtiya Republic as he would no longer have been resident in .
In response to the Court's request for factual information, the Government submitted that on 20 and 22 August 2007 the applicant had had meetings with a high-ranking official of the Federal Service for Execution of Sentences in the , Ms I. Rassadina. The meetings had been organised on a request from the office of the Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights to determine the applicant's position regarding a friendly settlement in the case. Relying on written statements from Ms Rassadina and the head of the detention facility, Mr Galiyev, the Government argued that during the first meeting held in Mr Galiyev's presence Ms Rassadina had interviewed the applicant about his terms for settling the case. The applicant had allegedly responded by putting forward one requirement, namely that he would continue to serve his sentence in the . On 22 August 2007, when Ms Rassadina arrived at the detention facility with the draft of the friendly settlement agreement, the applicant, without providing any further explanation, had refused to sign it.
In May 2008 the applicant was transferred to a correctional colony in the Novosibirsk Region.
On 19 September 2008 the Court received another letter from the applicant's representative in which she alleged that in July 2008 the authorities had delayed dispatching the applicant's two letters to the Court by approximately four days. Having been uncertain about the fate of those letters, the applicant gave copies to his wife during a conjugal visit several days later. At the same time the applicant was also allowed to have a short telephone conversation with his representative before the Court.
Copies of the applicant's letters were attached to his representative's letter of 19 September 2008. In those letters the applicant alleged that the conditions of his detention in the colony in the Novosibirsk Region were inferior to those in the detention facility in the Udmurtiya Republic and that his transfer to the  colony had been carried out merely for the sake of expedience.
The letters which the applicant allegedly sent directly to the Court in July 2008 have never been received.
Section 7. Organisation of anti-tuberculosis aid
“1.  Provision of anti-tuberculosis aid to individuals suffering from tuberculosis is guaranteed by the State and is performed on the basis of the principles of legality, compliance with the rights of the individual and citizen, [and] general accessibility in the amount determined by the Programme of State guarantees for provision of medical assistance to citizens of the Russian Federation, free of charge.
Anti-tuberculosis aid shall be provided to citizens when they voluntarily apply [for such aid] or when they consent [to such aid], save for cases indicated in Sections 9 and 10 of the present Federal law and other federal laws...”
Section 8. Provision of anti-tuberculosis aid
“1. Individuals suffering from tuberculosis who are in need of anti-tuberculosis aid shall receive such aid in medical anti-tuberculosis facilities licensed to provide [it].
Individuals who are or have been in contact with an individual suffering from tuberculosis shall undergo an examination for the detection of tuberculosis in compliance with the laws of the ...”
Section 9. Regular medical examinations
Regular medical examinations of persons suffering from tuberculosis shall be performed in compliance with the procedure laid down by a competent federal executive body...
Regular medical examinations of persons suffering from tuberculosis shall be performed irrespective of the patients' or their representatives' consent.
A medical commission appointed by the head of a medical anti-tuberculosis facility... shall take decisions authorising regular medical examinations or terminating them and record such decisions in medical documents...; an individual in respect of whom such a decision has been issued, shall be informed in writing about the decision taken.”
Section 10. Mandatory examinations and treatment of persons suffering from tuberculosis
“2. Individuals suffering from contagious forms of tuberculosis who... intentionally avoid medical examinations aimed at detecting tuberculosis, or avoid treating it, shall be admitted, by court decision, to specialised medical anti-tuberculosis establishments for mandatory examinations and treatment.”
Section 12. Rights of individuals.... suffering from tuberculosis
“2.  Individuals admitted to medical anti-tuberculosis facilities for examinations and (or) treatment, shall have a right to:
	receive information from the administration of the medical anti-tuberculosis facilities on the progress of treatment, examinations...
	have meetings with lawyers and clergy in private;
take part in religious ceremonies, if they do not have a damaging impact on the state of their health;
	continue their education...
Individuals... suffering from tuberculosis shall have other rights provided for by the laws of the  on health care...”
Section 13. Obligations of individuals... suffering from tuberculosis
“Individuals... suffering from tuberculosis shall;
	submit to medical procedures authorised by medical personnel;
	comply with the internal regulations of medical anti-tuberculosis facilities when they stay at those facilities;
	comply with sanitary and hygiene conditions established for public places when persons not suffering from tuberculosis [visit them].”
Section 14. Social support for individuals... suffering from tuberculosis
“4.  Individuals... suffering from tuberculosis shall be provided with medication free of charge for out-patient treatment of tuberculosis by federal specialised medical facilities in compliance with the procedure established by the Government of the Russian Federation...”
Russian law gives detailed guidelines for the provision of medical assistance to detained individuals. These guidelines, found in joint Decree no. 640/190 of the Ministry of Health and Social Development and the Ministry of Justice, on Organisation of Medical Assistance to Individuals Serving Sentences or Detained (“the Regulation”), enacted on 17 October 2005, are applicable to all detainees without exception. In particular, section III of the Regulation sets out the procedure for initial steps to be taken by medical personnel of a detention facility on admission of a detainee. On arrival at a temporary detention facility all detainees must be subjected to preliminary medical examination before they are placed in cells shared by other inmates. The examination is performed with the aim of identifying individuals suffering from contagious diseases or in need of urgent medical assistance. Particular attention must be paid to individuals suffering from contagious conditions. No later than three days after the detainee's arrival at the detention facility, he should receive an in-depth medical examination, including fluorography. During the in-depth examination a prison doctor should record the detainee's complaints, study his medical and personal history, record injuries if present, and recent tattoos, and schedule additional medical procedures if necessary. A prison doctor should also authorise laboratory analyses to identify sexually transmitted diseases, HIV, tuberculosis and other illnesses.
Subsequent medical examinations of detainees are performed at least twice a year or at detainees' request. If a detainee's state of health has deteriorated, medical examinations and assistance should be provided by medical personnel of the detention facility. In such cases a medical examination should include a general medical check-up and additional methods of testing, if necessary, with the participation of particular medical specialists. The results of the examinations should be recorded in the detainee's medical history. The detainee should be fully informed of the results of the medical examinations.
Section III of the Regulation also sets the procedure for cases of refusals by detainees to undergo medical examination or treatment. In each case of refusal, a corresponding entry should be made in the detainees' medical record. A prison doctor should fully explain to the detainee the consequences of his refusal to undergo the medical procedure.
Detainees take prescribed medicines in the presence of a doctor. In a limited number of cases the head of the medical department of the detention facility may authorise his medical personnel to hand over a daily dose of medicines to the detainee for unobserved intake.
Section X of the Regulation regulates medical examinations, monitoring and treatment of detainees suffering from tuberculosis. It lays down a detailed account of medical procedures to be employed, establishes their frequency, and regulates courses of treatment for new tuberculosis patients and previously treated ones (relapsing or defaulting detainees). In particular, it provides that when a detainee exhibits signs of a relapse of tuberculosis, he or she should immediately be removed to designated premises (infectious unit of the medical department of the facility) and should be sent for treatment to an anti-tuberculosis establishment. The prophylactic and anti-relapse treatment of tuberculosis patients should be performed by a tuberculosis specialist. Rigorous checking of the intake of anti-tuberculosis drugs by the detainee should be put in place. Each dose should be recorded in the detainee's medical history. A refusal to take anti-tuberculosis medicine should also be noted in the medical record. A discussion of the negative effects of the refusal should follow. Detainees suffering from tuberculosis should also be put on a special dietary ration.
On 21 March 2003 the Ministry of Health adopted Decree no. 109 on Improvement of Anti-Tuberculosis Measures in the  (“the Anti-Tuberculosis Decree” or “Decree”). Having acknowledged a difficult epidemic situation in the Russian Federation in connection with a drastic increase in the number of individuals suffering from tuberculosis, particularly among children and detainees, and a substantial rise in the number of tuberculosis-related deaths, the Decree laid down guidelines and recommendations for country-wide prevention, detection and therapy of tuberculosis which conform to international standards, identifying forms and types of tuberculosis and categories of patients suffering from them, establishing types of necessary medical examinations, analyses and testing to be performed in each case and giving extremely detailed instructions on their performance and assessment; it also laid down rules on vaccination, determined courses and regimens of therapy for particular categories of patients, and so on.
In particular, Addendum 6 to the Decree contains an Instruction on chemotherapy for tuberculosis patients. The aims of treatment, essential anti-tuberculosis drugs and their dose combinations, as well as standard regimens of chemotherapy laid down by the Instruction for Russian tuberculosis patients conformed to those recommended by the World Health Organisation in Treatment of Tuberculosis: Guidelines for National Programs (see below).
Section 22 of the Detention of Suspects Act (Federal Law no. 103-FZ of 15 July 1995) provides that detainees should be given free food sufficient to maintain them in good health according to standards established by the Government of the . Section 23 provides that detainees should be kept in conditions which satisfy health and hygiene requirements. They should be provided with an individual sleeping place and given bedding, tableware and toiletries. Each inmate should have no less than four square metres of personal space in his or her cell.
The Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation (in force since 1 July 2002, “the CCrP”) provides that a criminal investigation can be initiated by an investigator or a prosecutor upon a complaint by an individual or on the investigative authorities' own initiative, where there are reasons to believe that a crime has been committed (Articles 146 and 147). The prosecutor is responsible for the overall supervision of the investigation (Article 37). He or she can order specific investigative measures, transfer the case from one investigator to another or order an additional investigation. If there are no grounds upon which to initiate a criminal investigation, the prosecutor or investigator shall give a reasoned decision to that effect, which must be brought to the attention of the interested party. The decision is amenable to appeal to a higher-ranking prosecutor or to a court of general jurisdiction in accordance with a procedure established by Article 125 of the CCrP (Article 148). Article 125 of the CCrP provides for judicial review of decisions by investigators and prosecutors that might infringe the constitutional rights of parties to proceedings or prevent access to court.
Russian law sets out detailed guidelines for the detention of individuals in temporary detention facilities. These guidelines are found in Ministry of Justice Decree no. 189 on Internal Regulations of Temporary Detention Facilities (“the Decree”), enacted on 14 October 2005. In particular, Section II of the Decree provides that an investigation should be carried out into the circumstances in which a detainee sustained injuries. Case-file materials drawn up as part of the investigation into the circumstances of a possible offence should be transferred to a prosecutor's office which has to take a decision on the institution or refusal to institute criminal proceedings in compliance with the requirements of the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure (paragraph 16 of section II).
On 30 April 2010 the Russian Parliament enacted Federal Law no. 68-FZ “On Compensation for Violation of the Right to a Trial within a Reasonable Time or the Right to Enforcement of a Judgment within a Reasonable Time” (“the Compensation Act”). The Compensation Act entered into force on 4 May 2010. It provides that in case of a violation of the right to trial within a reasonable time, an individual is entitled to seek compensation for the non-pecuniary damage. Federal Law № 69-FZ, also enacted on 30 April 2010, introduced the pertinent changes to the Russian legislation.
Section 6.2 of the Compensation Act provides that all individuals who have complained to the European Court of Human Rights that their right to a trial within a reasonable time has been violated may claim compensation in domestic courts under the Act within six months of its entry into force, provided the European Court has not ruled on the admissibility of the complaint.
Section 73 of the Russian Code on the Execution of Criminal Sentences (no. 1-FZ adopted on 8 January 1997) provides that an individual sentenced to imprisonment, save in exceptional cases, should serve his sentence in correctional institutions in a region where he lived prior to conviction or where he was convicted. In exceptional cases, in view of poor health, for considerations of personal safety or with his consent, he may be sent to serve the sentence in a correctional institution in another region. If there is no corresponding correctional facility in the region where the individual resided or where he was convicted, he should be sent to a correctional institution in another region following consultations with higher-ranking authorities within the system for execution of criminal sentences.
The European Prison Rules provide a framework of guiding principles for health services. The relevant extracts from the Rules read as follows:
“Health care
Prison authorities shall safeguard the health of all prisoners in their care.
Organisation of prison health care
1 Medical services in prison shall be organised in close relation with the general health administration of the community or nation.
2 Health policy in prisons shall be integrated into, and compatible with, national health policy.
3 Prisoners shall have access to the health services available in the country without discrimination on the grounds of their legal situation.
4 Medical services in prison shall seek to detect and treat physical or mental illnesses or defects from which prisoners may suffer.
5 All necessary medical, surgical and psychiatric services including those available in the community shall be provided to the prisoner for that purpose.
Medical and health care personnel
1 Every prison shall have the services of at least one qualified general medical practitioner.
2 Arrangements shall be made to ensure at all times that a qualified medical practitioner is available without delay in cases of urgency.
...
4 Every prison shall have personnel suitably trained in health care.
Duties of the medical practitioner
1 The medical practitioner or a qualified nurse reporting to such a medical practitioner shall see every prisoner as soon as possible after admission, and shall examine them unless this is obviously unnecessary.
...
3 When examining a prisoner the medical practitioner or a qualified nurse reporting to such a medical practitioner shall pay particular attention to:
..;
diagnosing physical or mental illness and taking all measures necessary for its treatment and for the continuation of existing medical treatment;
...
isolating prisoners suspected of infectious or contagious conditions for the period of infection and providing them with proper treatment;
...
1 The medical practitioner shall have the care of the physical and mental health of the prisoners and shall see, under the conditions and with a frequency consistent with health care standards in the community, all sick prisoners, all who report illness or injury and any prisoner to whom attention is specially directed.
...
Health care provision
1 Sick prisoners who require specialist treatment shall be transferred to specialised institutions or to civil hospitals when such treatment is not available in prison.
2 Where a prison service has its own hospital facilities, they shall be adequately staffed and equipped to provide the prisoners referred to them with appropriate care and treatment.”
The complexity and importance of health care services in detention facilities was discussed by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture in its 3rd General Report (CPT/Inf (93) 12 - Publication Date: 4 June 1993). The following are the extracts from the Report:
“33. When entering prison, all prisoners should without delay be seen by a member of the establishment's health care service. In its reports to date the CPT has recommended that every newly arrived prisoner be properly interviewed and, if necessary, physically examined by a medical doctor as soon as possible after his admission. It should be added that in some countries, medical screening on arrival is carried out by a fully qualified nurse, who reports to a doctor. This latter approach could be considered as a more efficient use of available resources.
It is also desirable that a leaflet or booklet be handed to prisoners on their arrival, informing them of the existence and operation of the health care service and reminding them of basic measures of hygiene.
While in custody, prisoners should be able to have access to a doctor at any time, irrespective of their detention regime... The health care service should be so organised as to enable requests to consult a doctor to be met without undue delay...
A prison's health care service should at least be able to provide regular out-patient consultations and emergency treatment (of course, in addition there may often be a hospital-type unit with beds)... Further, prison doctors should be able to call upon the services of specialists.
As regards emergency treatment, a doctor should always be on call. Further, someone competent to provide first aid should always be present on prison premises, preferably someone with a recognised nursing qualification.
Out-patient treatment should be supervised, as appropriate, by health care staff; in many cases it is not sufficient for the provision of follow-up care to depend upon the initiative being taken by the prisoner.
The direct support of a fully-equipped hospital service should be available, in either a civil or prison hospital...
A prison health care service should be able to provide medical treatment and nursing care, as well as appropriate diets, physiotherapy, rehabilitation or any other necessary special facility, in conditions comparable to those enjoyed by patients in the outside community. Provision in terms of medical, nursing and technical staff, as well as premises, installations and equipment, should be geared accordingly.
There should be appropriate supervision of the pharmacy and of the distribution of medicines. Further, the preparation of medicines should always be entrusted to qualified staff (pharmacist/nurse, etc.). ...
A medical file should be compiled for each patient, containing diagnostic information as well as an ongoing record of the patient's evolution and of any special examinations he has undergone. In the event of a transfer, the file should be forwarded to the doctors in the receiving establishment.
Further, daily registers should be kept by health care teams, in which particular incidents relating to the patients should be mentioned. Such registers are useful in that they provide an overall view of the health care situation in the prison, at the same time as highlighting specific problems which may arise.
The smooth operation of a health care service presupposes that doctors and nursing staff are able to meet regularly and to form a working team under the authority of a senior doctor in charge of the service. ...
A prison health care service should ensure that information about transmittable diseases (in particular hepatitis, AIDS, tuberculosis, dermatological infections) is regularly circulated, both to prisoners and to prison staff. Where appropriate, medical control of those with whom a particular prisoner has regular contact (fellow prisoners, prison staff, frequent visitors) should be carried out.”
A further elaboration of European expectations towards health care in prisons is found in the appendix to Recommendation no. R (98) 7 of the Committee of Ministers to Member States on the ethical and organisational aspects of health care in prison (adopted on 8 April 1998 at the 627th meeting of the Ministers' Deputies). Primarily restating the European Prison Rules and CPT standards, the Recommendation went beyond reiteration of the principles in some aspects to include more specific discussion of the management of certain common problems including transmissible diseases. In particular, in respect of cases of tuberculosis, the Committee of Ministers stressed that all necessary measures should be applied to prevent the propagation of this infection, in accordance with relevant legislation in this area. Therapeutic intervention should be of a standard equal to that outside prison. The medical services of the local chest physician should be requested in order to obtain the long-term advice that is required for this condition, as is practised in the community, in accordance with relevant legislation (Section 41).
The fact that transmissible diseases in European prisons have become an issue of considerable concern prompted a recommendation of the Committee of Ministers to Member States concerning prison and criminological aspects of the control of transmissible diseases and related health problems in prison (adopted on 18 October 1993 at the 500th meeting of the Ministers' Deputies). The relevant extracts from the Recommendation read as follows:
“2.  The systematic medical examination carried out on entry into prison should include measures to detect intercurrent diseases, including treatable infectious diseases, in particular tuberculosis. The examination also gives the opportunity to provide health education and to give prisoners a greater sense of responsibility for their own health....
Adequate financial and human resources should be made available within the prison health system to meet not only the problems of transmissible diseases and HIV/Aids but also all health problems affecting prisoners.”
An expanded coverage of the issue related to transmissible diseases in detention facilities was given by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture in its 11th General Report (CPT/INF (2001) 16 published on 3 September 2001), a discussion prompted by findings of serious inadequacies in health provision and poor material conditions of detention which were exacerbating the transmission of the diseases. Addressing the issue, the CPT reported as follows:
“31.  The spread of transmissible diseases and, in particular, of tuberculosis, hepatitis and HIV/AIDS has become a major public health concern in a number of European countries. Although affecting the population at large, these diseases have emerged as a dramatic problem in certain prison systems. In this connection the CPT has, on a number of occasions, been obliged to express serious concerns about the inadequacy of the measures taken to tackle this problem. Further, material conditions under which prisoners are held have often been found to be such that they can only favour the spread of these diseases.
 The CPT is aware that in periods of economic difficulties - such as those encountered today in many countries visited by the CPT - sacrifices have to be made, including in penitentiary establishments. However, regardless of the difficulties faced at any given time, the act of depriving a person of his liberty always entails a duty of care which calls for effective methods of prevention, screening, and treatment. Compliance with this duty by public authorities is all the more important when it is a question of care required to treat life-threatening diseases.
 The use of up-to date methods for screening, the regular supply of medication and related materials, the availability of staff ensuring that prisoners take the prescribed medicines in the right doses and at the right intervals, and the provision when appropriate of special diets, constitute essential elements of an effective strategy to combat the above-mentioned diseases and to provide appropriate care to the prisoners concerned. Similarly, material conditions in accommodation for prisoners with transmissible diseases must be conducive to the improvement of their health; in addition to natural light and good ventilation, there must be satisfactory hygiene as well as an absence of overcrowding.
 Further, the prisoners concerned should not be segregated from the rest of the prison population unless this is strictly necessary on medical or other grounds...
  In order to dispel misconceptions on these matters, it is incumbent on national authorities to ensure that there is a full educational programme about transmissible diseases for both prisoners and prison staff. Such a programme should address methods of transmission and means of protection as well as the application of adequate preventive measures.
   It must also be stressed that appropriate information and counselling should be provided before and - in the case of a positive result - after any screening test. Further, it is axiomatic that patient-related information should be protected by medical confidentiality. As a matter of principle, any interventions in this area should be based on the informed consent of the persons concerned.
 Moreover, for control of the above-mentioned diseases to be effective, all the ministries and agencies working in this field in a given country must ensure that they co-ordinate their efforts in the best possible way. In this respect the CPT wishes to stress that the continuation of treatment after release from prison must be guaranteed.”
The CPT report on the visit to the  carried out from 2 to 17 December 2001 (CPT/INF (2003) 30) provides as follows:
“102. The CPT is also seriously concerned by the practice of transferring back from SIZO [temporary detention facility] to IVS [temporary detention ward in police departments] facilities prisoners diagnosed to have BK+ tuberculosis (and hence highly contagious), as well as by the interruption of TB treatment while at the IVS. An interruption of the treatment also appeared to occur during transfers between penitentiary establishments.
In the interest of combating the spread of tuberculosis within the law-enforcement and penitentiary system and in society in general, the CPT recommends that immediate measures be taken to put an end to the above-mentioned practice.”
On 23 December 2009 the World Bank published the Implementation Completion and Results Report (Report no. ICR00001281, Volume I) on a loan granted to the  for its Tuberculosis and Aids Control Project. The relevant part of the Report read as follows:
“According to the World Health Organization (WHO), Russia was one of the 22 high-burden countries for TB in the world (WHO, Global Tuberculosis control: Surveillance, Planning, Financing, , 2002). The incidence of TB increased throughout the 1990s. This was due to a combination of factors, including: (i) increased poverty, (ii) under-funding of TB services and health services in general, (iii) diagnostic and therapeutic approaches that were designed for a centralized command-and-control TB system, but were unable to cope with the social mobility and relative freedom of the post-Soviet era, and (iv) technical inadequacies and outdated equipment. Migration of populations from ex-Soviet republics with high TB burdens also increased the problem. Prevalence rates were many times higher in the prison system than in the general population. Treatment included lengthy hospitalizations, variations among clinicians and patients in the therapeutic regimen, and frequent recourse to surgery. A shrinking health budget resulted in an erratic supply of anti-TB drugs and laboratory supplies, reduced quality control in TB dispensaries and laboratories, and inadequate treatment. The social conditions favouring the spread of TB, combined with inadequate systems for diagnosis, treatment, and surveillance, as well as increased drug resistance, produced a serious public health problem.
TB control in the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) and in most of  in the 1990s was heavily centralized, with separate hospitals (TB dispensaries), TB sanatoriums, TB research institutes and TB specialists. The system was designed in the 1920s to address the challenges of the TB epidemic. Case detection relied strongly on active mass screening by X-ray (fluorography). Specificity, sensitivity, and cost-effectiveness considerations were not features of this approach. Bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG) immunization was a key feature of the TB control system...
By 2000, there was more than a two-fold increase in TB incidence, and mortality from TB increased 3 times, compared with 1990. The lowered treatment effectiveness of the recent years resulted in an increase in the number of TB chronic patients, creating a permanent 'breeding ground' for the infection. At that moment, the share of pulmonary TB cases confirmed by bacterioscopy did not exceed 25%, and the share of such cases confirmed by culture testing was no more than 41% due to suboptimal effectiveness of laboratory diagnosis, which led to poor detection of smear-positive TB cases. Being a social disease, TB affected the most socially and economically marginalized populations in .”
The following are extracts from Treatment of Tuberculosis: Guidelines for National Programmes, World Health Organisation, 1997, pp. 27, 33 and 41:
“Treatment regimens have an initial (intensive) phase lasting 2 months and a continuation phase usually lasting 4-6 months. During the initial phase, consisting usually of 4 drugs, there is rapid killing of tubercle bacilli. Infectious patients become non-infectious within about 2 weeks. Symptoms improve. The vast majority of patients with sputum smear-positive TB become smear-negative within 2 months. In the continuation phase fewer drugs are necessary but for a longer time. The sterilizing effect of the drugs eliminates remaining bacilli and prevents subsequent relapse.
In patients with smear positive pulmonary TB, there is a risk of selecting resistant bacilli, since these patients harbour and excrete a large number of bacilli. Short-course chemotherapy regimens consisting of 4 drugs during the initial phase, and 2 drugs during the continuation phase, reduce this risk of selecting resistant bacilli. These regimens are practically as effective in patients with initially resistant organisms as in those with sensitive organisms.
In patients with smear negative pulmonary or extra-pulmonary TB there is little risk of selecting resistant bacilli since these patients harbour fewer bacilli in their lesions. Short-course chemotherapy regimens with three drugs during the initial phase, and two drugs in the continuation phase, are of proven efficacy...
Patients with sputum smear-positive pulmonary TB should be monitored by sputum smear examination. This is the only group of TB patients for whom bacteriological monitoring is possible. It is unnecessary and wasteful of resources to monitor the patient by chest radiography. For patients with sputum smear-negative pulmonary TB and extra-pulmonary TB, clinical monitoring is the usual way of assessing response to treatment. Under programme conditions in high TB incidence countries, routine monitoring by sputum culture is not feasible or recommended. Where facilities are available, culture surveys can be useful as part of quality control of diagnosis by smear microscopy...
Directly observed treatment is one element of the DOTS strategy, i.e. the WHO recommended policy package for TB control. Direct observation of treatment means that a supervisor watches the patient swallowing the tablets. This ensures that a TB patient takes the right drugs, in the right doses, at the right intervals...
Many patients receiving self-administered treatment will not adhere to treatment. It is impossible to predict who will or will not comply, therefore directly observed treatment is necessary at least in the initial phase to ensure adherence. If a TB patient misses one attendance to receive treatment, it is necessary to find that patient and continue treatment.”