The case originated in an application (no. 49037/09) against the Republic of Latvia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Latvian national, Mr Sergejs Dmitrijevs (“the applicant”), on 25 August 2009.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms I. Nikuļceva, a lawyer practising in Riga. The Latvian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs K. Līce.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the national courts had failed to award him compensation for unlawfully transferring him to a prison where the regime was stricter than the one to which he was entitled.
On 24 June 2013 the complaints concerning Articles 3 and 13 were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The applicant was born in 1960 and lives in Riga.
He was arrested in July 1995 and in May 1998 he was convicted and sentenced to capital punishment. In June 1999, following the amendments to the Criminal Law Code, the appellate court converted the sentence of capital punishment into fifteen years’ imprisonment. The applicant started serving his sentence in a closed-type prison under the strictest (“lower”) regime (zemākais soda izciešanas režīms) (see “Relevant domestic law” below).
On 27 March 2001 the applicant was transferred to the “medium” regime in a closed-type prison (vidējais soda izciešanas režīms). In accordance with domestic law, the applicant was entitled to a list of rights (see “Relevant domestic law” below).
On 27 July 2005, while the applicant was serving his sentence in Pārlielupe Prison, the prison’s administrative commission decided to apply a more stringent regime to him and to transfer him to a closed-type prison under the “lower” regime. Relying on that decision, on 16 August 2005 the governor of Pārlielupe Prison recommended transferring the applicant to Daugavpils Prison owing to the fact that Pārlielupe Prison did not have appropriate facilities for him to continue serving his sentence under a more stringent regime.
On 5 September 2005, on an appeal by the applicant, the decision of the administrative commission was revoked by a decision of the Jelgava Court, which on 6 September 2005 was forwarded to Pārlielupe Prison. At the same time, on 5 September 2005 the Prisons Administration approved the recommendation by Pārlielupe Prison to transfer the applicant to Daugavpils Prison (see paragraph 8 above) and on 6 September 2005 the governor of Pārlielupe Prison issued an order to that effect.
On 18 October 2005 the order was executed despite the fact that the initial decision of 27 July 2005 had been revoked, and the applicant – who in the meantime had been admitted to the prison hospital – was transferred to Daugavpils Prison. During his stay in that prison the applicant was able to enjoy only a limited number of rights normally applicable to prisoners under the “medium” regime. In particular, he could not exercise his right to leave his cell for more than one hour a day, or his right to unrestricted access to the medical unit, prison shop, canteen and library.
On 20 October 2005 the management of Daugavpils Prison informed the Prisons Administration that they could not provide the facilities required under the “medium” regime.
On 26 October 2005 the Prisons Administration adopted a decision to transfer the applicant to Jēkabpils Prison to serve his sentence under the “medium” regime. That decision was executed on 4 November 2005.
It appears from the file on the applicant’s case before the administrative courts that on 27 September 2005 he raised an objection with the Prisons Administration about his transfer to Daugavpils Prison under a more stringent regime, but that the Prisons Administration dismissed it on 13 October 2005, and also dismissed a further complaint on 21 April 2006.
According to the Government’s submissions, on 17 October 2005 the applicant sent a complaint to the Prosecutor General’s Office, which forwarded it to the Specialised Multibranch Prosecutor’s Office. The latter then forwarded the complaint to the Prisons Administration.
On 20 December 2005 the Prisons Administration mentioned in a letter addressed to the applicant that his stay in Daugavpils Prison had been the result of the slow exchange of information between the courts, the prisons and the Prisons Administration.
On 26 October 2005 the applicant complained to the District Administrative Court that as a result of the unlawful activities of the Prisons Administration, he had been transferred to a prison in which he could not serve his sentence under the regime applicable to him.
Before initiating the administrative proceedings the District Administrative Court asked the applicant to pursue the appropriate outofcourt procedure by appealing against the negative decision of the Prisons Administration, which the applicant did in March 2006 (see paragraph 13 above).
After a series of procedural decisions, on 6 November 2007 the District Administrative Court found that the applicant’s transfer to Daugavpils Prison in order to serve his sentence under a stricter regime had been carried out without any lawful basis and awarded him 100 Latvian lati (LVL – 150 euros (EUR)) in compensation for non-pecuniary damage. Its finding was based on a comparison of the list of rights to which the applicant was entitled under the “medium” regime and the rights which he had actually enjoyed as a result of his unlawful transfer to more stringent prison conditions. The court also took into account the actions of the management of Daugavpils Prison and the duration of the applicant’s stay there.
The Regional Administrative Court partly upheld that decision, after analysing whether the applicant’s transfer to a more stringent regime amounted to a significant infringement of his rights under Article 3 of the Convention. The court established that in transferring him, the authorities had executed a decision which had been already revoked by the national courts, and that for a duration of eighteen days he had unlawfully been required to serve his sentence under a regime whereby he remained locked in a shared prison cell all day. According to the court, these conditions were aggravated by the fact that both the applicant and the authorities were aware that his transfer was unlawful. It held that he had suffered a serious infringement of his rights and accordingly awarded him LVL 300 (EUR 450) in compensation for non-pecuniary damage.
Following an appeal by the Prisons Administration, on 16 September 2009 the Senate of the Supreme Court quashed the appellate court’s decision and discontinued the administrative proceedings owing to the fact that the examination of decisions taken in the course of the execution of prison sentences did not fall within the jurisdiction of the administrative courts. The Senate also referred to section 16 of the Law on the Prosecutor’s Office, concerning the prosecuting authorities’ powers to initiate investigations into alleged violations of prisoners’ rights. In this connection the Senate mentioned that the applicant had lodged a complaint with the Prosecutor General’s Office about his transfer.
On 14 July 2010 the applicant was released from prison after completing his sentence.
On 15 March 2013 the Prisons Administration destroyed the applicant’s file on account of the expiry of the statutory archiving period.
Section 50.4 of the Code (Sentence Execution Regime in Closed Prisons) read as follows at the material time:
In accordance with the same section, convicted persons serving their sentence under the medium regime in a closed-type prison are entitled to remain outside their cell from wake-up time until night time in a specially designated area. The other rights normally applicable to prisoners under the medium regime, namely wearing their own clothing, visiting the medical unit, prison canteen, dining room and library unaccompanied, and attending events outside their separate prison block, are not available to prisoners who have been sentenced to life imprisonment or whose initial sentence of capital punishment has subsequently been replaced by deprivation of liberty.
Section 15 of the Law on the Prosecutor’s Office provides that, in accordance with the procedure prescribed by law, a prosecutor supervises the execution of sentences in custodial facilities.
Section 16 provides that on receiving information concerning an alleged breach of the law, a prosecutor, in accordance with the procedure prescribed by law, is to carry out an investigation if the information relates to a crime or to a breach of the rights and lawful interests of certain categories of persons, including prisoners and other persons who have limited capacity to protect their own rights. A prosecutor must also carry out an investigation if a complaint is received from an individual regarding a violation of his or her rights or lawful interests; moreover, the complaint must have been examined by a competent State institution which has refused to rectify the breach of the law referred to in the complaint or has failed to reply at all within the term specified by law.
Section 17 reads as follows:
Section 18 governs prosecutorial warnings, where, having established the existence of events indicating a breach of the law or any other evidence of allegedly unlawful activities, the prosecutor issues a written warning to the perpetrators explaining that their actions are impermissible.
In accordance with section 21, where a prosecutor has established a breach of the law which does not disclose the elements of a criminal offence, but the submission of a warning, complaint or application has not remedied the breach, the prosecutor is to bring an action before a court.
Part VIII of the European Prison Rules, set out in the Appendix to Recommendation Rec(2006)2, reads as follows:
“Sentenced prisoners
Objective of the regime for sentenced prisoners
1  In addition to the rules that apply to all prisoners, the regime for sentenced prisoners shall be designed to enable them to lead a responsible and crime-free life.
2  Imprisonment is by the deprivation of liberty a punishment in itself and therefore the regime for sentenced prisoners shall not aggravate the suffering inherent in imprisonment.
Implementation of the regime for sentenced prisoners
1  The regime for sentenced prisoners shall commence as soon as someone has been admitted to prison with the status of a sentenced prisoner, unless it has commenced before.
2  As soon as possible after such admission, reports shall be drawn up for sentenced prisoners about their personal situations, the proposed sentence plans for each of them and the strategy for preparation for their release.
3  Sentenced prisoners shall be encouraged to participate in drawing up their individual sentence plans.
4  Such plans shall as far as is practicable include:
5  Social work, medical and psychological care may also be included in the regimes for sentenced prisoners.
6  There shall be a system of prison leave as an integral part of the overall regime for sentenced prisoners.
7  Prisoners who consent to do so may be involved in a programme of restorative justice and in making reparation for their offences.
8  Particular attention shall be paid to providing appropriate sentence plans and regimes for life sentenced and other long-term prisoners.
Organisational aspects of imprisoning sentenced prisoners
1  As far as possible, and subject to the requirements of Rule 17, separate prisons or separate sections of a prison shall be used to facilitate the management of different regimes for specific categories of prisoners.
2  There shall be procedures for establishing and regularly reviewing individual sentence plans for prisoners after the consideration of appropriate reports, full consultations among the relevant staff and with the prisoners concerned who shall be involved as far as is practicable.
3  Such reports shall always include reports by the staff in direct charge of the prisoner concerned.
...”
The relevant parts of the CPT’s report read as follows:
“38.  ... Daugavpils Prison had recently been formally transformed into a remand institution, although it was still accommodating sentenced prisoners as well. Its official capacity had been reduced from 800 to 543 places (including 43 juveniles). At the time of the 2004 visit, the establishment was accommodating 426 inmates, of whom 101 were sentenced and 314 on remand (including 29 juveniles). ...
The Committee is particularly concerned by the frequency and severity of allegations of inter-prisoner violence it received both at Daugavpils Prison and Rīga Central Prison. These allegations referred, inter alia, to severe beatings, sexual assaults (including rapes), and threats.
...
... That said, the material conditions at Daugavpils Prison and in Block 5 at Rīga Central Prison (in particular, in the quarantine/transit cells Nos. 501, 502 and 503) remained very poor (state of repair, ventilation, etc.). In both establishments, metal shutters had still not been removed from all windows, and inmates were still not provided with basic personal hygiene products (including toilet paper). Further, in a number of cells (including in certain renovated parts of Rīga Central Prison) toilets were not (adequately) partitioned. ...”