The case originated in an application (no. 15035/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Bulgarian national, Mr Konstantin Popov (“the applicant”), on 23 April 2003.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Ekimdzhiev and Mrs S. Stefanova, lawyers practising in .
The applicant alleged that the authorities opened and checked his correspondence in prison and that he had had no effective remedy.
On 12 November 2007 the President of the Fifth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on its admissibility and merits at the same time (Article 29 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1982 and lives in Saedinenie.
On an unspecified date before 2003 he was charged with the commission of a criminal offence and detained pending trial in Plovdiv Prison. On a later unspecified date he started serving a custodial sentence. In 2007 he was released.
On three separate occasions, namely on 4 February, 28 February and 7 April 2003, the applicant sent letters to his defence counsel regarding his multiple sentences, the expected cumulative sentence and his request to be released on bail. The letters were handed to the prison administration by him in envelopes bearing the address of the lawyer, ready to be posted. The staff of the prison put a stamp “inspected” on the envelope of each letter prior to dispatching them to their destination.
On 4 June 2003 the applicant’s counsel sent a letter to the prison administration in which she brought to the attention of the head of the prison the fact that certain letters sent to her by prisoners bore the stamp “inspected”. By a letter dated 2 July 2003 the applicant’s counsel was informed that in cases where there was suspicion that a prisoner’s letter, which appeared to have been addressed to a defence lawyer, was in fact addressed to a third party, the prison administration carried out inspections in order to ascertain who the genuine recipient was.
The relevant domestic law and practice concerning the correspondence of detainees and prisoners has been summarised in the Court’s judgment in the case of Petrov v. Bulgaria, no. 15197/02, §§ 17-23 and 25, 22 May 2008.