The present case concerns summary minor-offence proceedings in which the applicant was found guilty of a traffic-related minor offence on the basis of a statement by a witness who had given evidence in court in the absence of the defence.
The applicant was born in 1971 and lives in Viškovo. The applicant was represented by Mrs S. Vizjak, a lawyer practising in Viškovo.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 29 December 2013, while driving at an intersection of two streets near his home, a police officer, D.I., signalled to the applicant with a traffic paddle marked with the words “Stop – Police” to pull his car in on the right side of the road. Instead, the applicant started turning left towards another street. The police officer again issued him the order to pull his car in on the right side of the road. The applicant did not stop, but increased his speed and continued driving. Shortly after that, the police established the identity of the driver and went to his home address, where he was given a notice of the committed traffic-related minor offence. The applicant refused to sign the document.
On 14 January 2014 the Rijeka traffic police unit of the Primorsko-goranska police (Policijska uprava Primorsko-goranska, Postaja prometne policije Rijeka – hereinafter “the police”) issued a penalty notice (obvezni prekršajni nalog) which stated that the applicant had committed the minor offence of failing to comply with a police order to stop a car under section 32 of the Road Traffic Safety Act (Zakon o sigurnosti prometa na cestama, see paragraph 24 below), fining him with 3,000 Croatian kunas (HRK) and imposing a six-month driving ban as a precautionary measure. The statement of facts, which was printed on a form, stated that the offence had been established through the personal observations of Officer D.I., who had submitted a report on it.
On 28 January 2014 the applicant challenged the penalty notice before the Rijeka Minor Offences Court (Prekršajni sud u Rijeci), arguing that he had not committed the offence and asking to be allowed to make his case in the proceedings. He argued that during the event he had seen the police officer, who had signalled with the traffic paddle for him to pull his car over on the right side. However, after he had started turning right so as to comply with the police officer’s order, the same police officer had given him another order, indicating with the traffic paddle that he turn left. The police officer repeated the same order once more. Accordingly, he had complied with the given order and had turned left towards his neighbourhood and had continued driving until he had reached his house. Afterwards, two police officers had come to his house and informed him that he had committed the minor offence of failing to comply with a police order to stop a car. He had also been asked to take a breathalyser test for alcohol. One of those police officers had identified himself as Officer D.I. The applicant further argued that it was not true that he had been speeding on that occasion or running away from the police, because, as a lawyer, he had never acted contrary to official orders and he had known that the police had frequently checked traffic in the area, so he had been driving slowly.
On the basis of the applicant’s challenge to the penalty notice, summary minor-offence proceedings were opened before the Rijeka Minor Offences Court.
On 29 April 2014 the applicant made his case before a judge of the Rijeka Minor Offences Court in the presence of his lawyer. He denied the charges against him and reiterated his account of events (see paragraph 7 above). The applicant applied to the judge for the right to put questions to Officer D.I.
The trial court summoned D.I. to appear before the court as a witness. However, the next three hearings, scheduled for 3 June and 8 July 2014 and 4 March 2015, were adjourned, because D.I. failed to appear despite proper service of the summons. The applicant and his lawyer duly appeared at those hearings.
On 9 June 2014, the applicant’s lawyer filed a submission, in which she challenged the facts of the case. In particular, she reiterated that the applicant had not increased his speed, since that had not even been possible given the configuration of the intersection. Besides, the intersection had not been an appropriate location for the police officer to monitor vehicles and issue orders to drivers, as it had in the given circumstances obviously created ambiguity as to exactly how the applicant should have acted.
On 2 April 2015, the trial judge issued a warrant for the compulsory appearance of D.I. and ordered the Rijeka Police Department to bring him to the next hearing scheduled for 14 May 2015.
On 11 May 2015 the police informed the trial court that they could not execute the warrant, as D.I. had been transferred to another police force in Slavonski Brod, located approximately 350 km from Rijeka. At the next hearing, the trial judge informed the applicant and his lawyer of this fact.
On 21 May 2015 the applicant’s lawyer lodged a submission with the court, in which she stated that the applicant should have the opportunity to put questions to D.I. She noted that, if the trial court were to ask for D.I. to be questioned by another minor offences court by way judicial assistance, that would lead to a breach of the principle of adversarial hearing and the applicant’s right to examine that witness.
On 27 May 2015 the trial court sent the case file to the Slavonski Brod Minor Offences Court (Prekršajni sud u Slavonskom Brodu), requesting that it examine D.I. as a witness. The applicant and his lawyer were not informed of that request.
On 23 September 2015, D.I. was examined before the Slavonski Brod Minor Offences Court. The applicant and his lawyer were not informed of the hearing. D.I. stated that he recalled the event in question because the applicant had told him that he had been a lawyer. He further stated that the applicant had not complied with the police signal to pull his car in on the right side of the road. Instead, he had first slowed down, but then increased his speed. The police found him through his vehicle registration.
At the next hearing held on 11 November 2015, the trial judge read out D.I.’s witness statement (see paragraph 16 above). The applicant’s lawyer challenged D.I.’s testimony, stating that it had been obtained at odds with the applicant’s defence rights and applied for the applicant to be allowed to confront D.I.
On 28 January 2016, the trial court found the applicant guilty of failing to comply with the police order, imposed a fine in the amount of HRK 3,000 and ordered him to pay the costs and expenses of the proceedings in the amount of HRK 300.
In its reasoning, the court mentioned that the applicant’s lawyer had objected to D.I. being questioned before another court, claiming it would violate the applicant’s right to an adversarial hearing. The court also stated that it had dismissed the applicant’s request to be confronted with D.I. because the facts of the case had been sufficiently established on the basis of the evidence taken. The court based its reasoning entirely on the evidence given by D.I., stating that the offence had been established by his personal observations and that there had been nothing suggesting that his statement had not been credible.
The applicant’s appeal against the first-instance judgment was declared inadmissible on 15 February 2016, as there was no possibility of lodging an appeal in summary minor-offence proceeding. That decision was further upheld on 16 March 2016 by the High Minor Offences Court (Visoki prekršajni sud).
The applicant then lodged a constitutional complaint against the first-instance judgment, complaining, inter alia, of a breach of his right to a fair trial and of his defence rights.
On 7 April 2016, the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske) declared his constitutional complaint inadmissible as manifestly ill-founded, deeming that there was no constitutional-law issue in the case for the Constitutional Court to decide on.
The relevant provisions of the Minor Offences Act (Prekršajni zakon, Official Gazette no. 107/2007, with further amendments) are set out in the case of Marčan v. Croatia (no. 40820/12, §§ 21-22, 10 July 2014). Section 173 of that Act reads as follows:
Section 173(2)
“A witness or an expert witness who does not have residence or domicile in the geographical jurisdiction of the court conducting the proceedings may also, following and application for judicial assistance, be questioned before a court where the witness or expert witness has domicile or residence.”
Section 32 of the Road Traffic Safety Act (Zakon o sigurnosti prometa na cestama, Official Gazette no. 67/2008, with further amendments) provides that road users must comply with instructions on signs or with orders of police officers or other authorised persons who supervise and manage traffic on the roads. A fine in the amount of HRK 3,000 to HRK 7,000 may be imposed on a motor vehicle driver if he or she acts contrary to an instruction on a sign or an order of a police officer or other authorised person.