The case originated in an application (no. 70335/01) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Mehmet Şanar Yurdatapan (“the applicant”), on 1 December 2000.
The applicant was represented by Ms Nesrin Ulutürk-Keleş, a lawyer practising in Istanbul and Mr Kerim Yıldız, Ms Anke Stock and Ms Lucy Claridge from the Kurdish Human Rights Project in . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) did not designate an Agent for the purposes of the proceedings before the Court.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been tried and convicted by the General Staff Military Court, which was not an independent and impartial tribunal within the meaning of Article 6 of the Convention. He also complained that his right to freedom of expression had been violated in that he had been convicted for distributing a leaflet which contained statements from a conscientious objector.
On 8 January 2002 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1941 and lives in .
In 1995, a general civil disobedience movement, called the “Initiative for freedom of expression” () commenced following the trial of the famous writer, Yaşar Kemal, who was prosecuted for his article published in the German magazine “Der Spiegel”. One thousand and eighty intellectuals protested against Yaşar Kemal's prosecution by re-publishing his articles and other banned articles in a book entitled 'Freedom of Expression'. The aim of the  was the amendment of the provisions of the Turkish legislation concerning freedom of expression.
The members of the  continued their campaign by gathering in front of the  building once a month and distributing leaflets, which included shortened versions of previously banned articles.
On 23 July 1999 the applicant distributed the leaflet entitled “Freedom of Thought - No. 38” in front of the . This leaflet was a reproduction of the leaflet entitled “Freedom of Thought - No. 9”, which contained statements made by Osman Murat Ülke, who is a conscientious objector. The same day, the applicant filed a complaint against himself with the Public Prosecutor attached to the Istanbul State Security Court and maintained that he should be prosecuted for re-publishing the leaflet entitled “Freedom of Thought-No. 9”, banned by the .
On 5 October 1999 the military public prosecutor initiated criminal proceedings against the applicant in the , and charged him with seeking to dissuade persons from serving in the military contrary to Article 155 of the Turkish Criminal Code in conjunction with Article 58 of the Military Criminal Code.
During a hearing held on 23 November 1999, the applicant refused to answer any questions posed by the military court as regards the merits of the case. He maintained that the trial of a civilian by a military court breached Article 6 of the Convention, which guaranteed the fairness of proceedings. He argued that the military court could not provide him with a fair trial by an independent court and that such a prosecution would be against the Constitution. He further stated that Article 155 of the Criminal Code, which makes it an offence to seek to dissuade persons from serving in the military, was contrary to Article 10 of the Convention. The applicant maintained that he should have been tried by an ordinary criminal court. In this respect, he alleged that by republishing a previously banned article, he had breached Article 162 of the Criminal Code which provides that republication of banned materials is an independent felony and that its perpetrator is subject to the same punishment as the author of the impugned article.
The applicant further put forward a plea of unconstitutionality, stating that Article 155 of the Turkish Criminal Code breached Articles 90 and 152 of the Constitution. The , considering that the applicant's submissions were unsubstantiated, refused his request.
On 1 February 2000 the court recalled that Osman Murat Ülke had been convicted in 1997 for breach of Article 155 of the Criminal Code for holding a press conference at the Izmir War Resisters' Association. Accordingly it held that by re-publishing those statements, the applicant had acted with the intention to break the law. The court further quoted the following statements from the leaflet.
“Above all I am not a draft evader, but a conscientious objector. I intend neither to evade nor to accept conscription. I have no reason to evade conscription, because I am in favour of people using their right not to be conscripted without having to hide.
...
Even though I cannot be called a draft evader, I consider it meaningless to go of my own accord. On the contrary, here and now, I will burn this military pass against which my own will rebels. In addition, I will burn the notification paper and send back the rest of the documents to the state by mail. Perhaps they will need them. Also I will send back the money that was given to me by the Ankara Recruiting Office for transportation and food expenses. I am not a soldier and I will never be... But I want to stress that if I'm taken to the barracks by force, I will resist to the end and never perform military service.”
The military court held that, pursuant to Article 13 of the Constitution, fundamental rights and freedoms may be restricted by law, in conformity with the latter and the spirit of the Constitution, with the aim of safeguarding the indivisible integrity of the state with its territory and nation, national sovereignty, the Republic, national security, public order, general peace, the public interest, public morals and public health. Moreover, pursuant to Article 10 § 2 of the Convention, the exercise of freedom of expression may be subjected to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are described by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety.
Consequently, the military court found the applicant guilty under Article 155 of the Criminal Code, in conjunction with Article 58 of the Military Criminal Code, for seeking to dissuade persons from serving in the military. It further sentenced him to two months' imprisonment and a fine.
On 16 May 2000 the Military Court of Cassation, finding the reasoning of the first instance court in line with the domestic legislation, refused the applicant application for leave to appeal.
On 21 July 2000 the applicant was informed about the final decision of the Military Court of Cassation by the demand sent by the Üsküdar Public Prosecutor's Office that the applicant surrender to serve his sentence.
The relevant domestic law and practice in force at the material time are outlined in the following judgment: Ergin v.  (no. 6), no. 47533/99, §§ 15-18, 4 May 2006.
Following the amendment introduced on 30 July 2003 by section 6 of Law no. 4963, section 11 of the Constitution of Military Courts Act now reads:
“...Military courts shall not try civilians charged with committing the crimes and lesser offences referred to in Article 58 of the Military Penal Code in time of peace.”
The relevant provisions of the now defunct Criminal Code provides:
Article 155
“ Whoever, in circumstances other than those indicated in the aforementioned articles, publishes editorials to incite people to violate the laws of Turkey or endangers the security of the country, or makes publications or suggestions that seek to dissuade persons from serving in the military or makes speeches to that end in public meetings or gathering places, shall be imprisoned for a period of between two months and two years and punished with a heavy fine of between 4,500 and 36,000 Turkish liras.”
Article 162
“Republication of banned materials is an independent felony and its perpetrator is subjected to the same punishment as the author of the impugned article.”