The case originated in an application (no. 74759/13) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Uzbek national, Mr Fozil Akbarovich Nazarov (“the applicant”), on 28 November 2013.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr I. Vasilyev, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant maintained that if he were to be involuntarily returned to Uzbekistan, he would be at risk of ill-treatment.
On 29 November 2013 the Acting President of the Section to which the case was allocated indicated to the respondent Government that the applicant should not be expelled or otherwise involuntarily removed to Uzbekistan or any other country for the duration of the proceedings before the Court (Rule 39 of the Rules of Court).
On 13 February 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1986 and lives in the Moscow Region.
The applicant came to Russia from Uzbekistan in 2010. In 2012 he lost his Uzbek passport.
On 20 January 2013 the Karshi Town Interior Department of Uzbekistan put the applicant’s name on the list of wanted individuals, on account of criminal charges brought against him for membership of a religious extremist organisation, attempted overthrow of the constitutional order of Uzbekistan, and terrorism.
On 9 June 2013, at the request of the Uzbek authorities, the applicant’s name was added to the Russian federal list of wanted persons.
On 31 October 2013 the applicant was arrested in the Moscow Region, where he lived with his wife and two children.
On 2 November 2013 the Serpukhov Town prosecutor’s office noticed that the applicant was wanted by the Uzbek authorities and was therefore liable to extradition to Uzbekistan. At the same time, given that the applicant had violated immigration regulations in Russia, the prosecutor’s office ordered that the Serpukhov District Interior Department take measures to ensure his administrative removal to Uzbekistan.
On the same day the Serpukhov District Interior Department drew up a report on the commission of an offence under Article 18.8 of the Administrative Offences Code.
On 2 November 2013 the Serpukhov Town Court of the Moscow Region found that the applicant had infringed the immigration regulations and was therefore guilty of an offence under Article 18.8 of the Administrative Offences Code. The court ordered the applicant’s administrative removal to Uzbekistan and his detention pending such removal. The applicant was not assisted by counsel during the hearing before the Town Court.
On 12 November 2013 the applicant lodged an application for refugee status. He submitted that he was being persecuted in Uzbekistan for his religious beliefs and that he feared torture and ill-treatment in Uzbekistan in the criminal proceedings against him.
On 14 November 2013 counsel for the applicant appealed against the administrative removal order of 2 November 2013. He submitted, in particular, that the applicant had lodged an application for refugee status and could not therefore be removed to Uzbekistan as long as that application was pending. He further argued that the applicant would be exposed to a real risk of torture in Uzbekistan. To substantiate the risk of ill-treatment he relied on the Court’s case law and reports by United Nations institutions about widespread ill-treatment in detention facilities.
On 28 November 2013 the Moscow Regional Court upheld the administrative removal order on appeal. In reply to the applicant’s argument about pending refugee status proceedings it noted that, pursuant to the Refugees Act, a person who had applied for refugee status could not ‒ indeed ‒ be returned to his country of origin against his will. However, in the present case the applicant had not applied for refugee status immediately after his arrival in Russia. Given that the application for refugee status had been lodged after the administrative removal order had been made, the pending refugee status proceedings could not prevent the applicant’s administrative removal. The applicant’s allegations about the risk of illtreatment or persecution for religious beliefs were hypothetical and unsubstantiated.
On 22 January 2014 the Moscow Region Department of the Federal Migration Service rejected the applicant’s application for refugee status.
On 21 February 2014 the applicant challenged the decision of 22 January 2014 before the Federal Migration Service. He has not yet received any reply.
On 6 August 2014 the applicant lodged an application for temporary asylum. It appears that the proceedings are pending.
The applicant is currently in detention awaiting administrative removal to Uzbekistan.
Under Article 3.2 § 1 (7) of the Administrative Offences Code, administrative removal constitutes an administrative penalty. In Article 3.10 § 1, administrative removal is defined as the forced and controlled removal of a foreign national or a stateless person across the Russian border. Under Article 3.10 § 5, for the purposes of execution of the decision concerning administrative removal, a judge may order the detention of the foreign national or stateless person in a special facility.
Article 18.8 provides that any foreign national who infringes the residence regulations of the Russian Federation ‒ for example by living in the territory without a valid residence permit, or by non-compliance with the established procedure for residence registration ‒ will be liable to an administrative fine of 2,000 to 5,000 roubles (RUB) and possible administrative removal. Article 23.1 § 3 provides that any administrative charge that may result in removal from the Russian Federation must be determined by a judge of a court of general jurisdiction. Article 30.1 § 1 guarantees the right to lodge an appeal before a court or a higher court against a decision on an administrative offence.
For a summary of the relevant provisions on extradition proceedings, see Kasymakhunov v. Russia (no. 29604/12, §§ 7480, 14 November 2013).
For a summary of the relevant provisions of the Refugees Act, see Kasymakhunov v. Russia (cited above, §§ 83-87).
For a summary of the reports on Uzbekistan by the UN institutions and by NGOs published between 2002 and 2011, see Abdulkhakov v. Russia, no. 14743/11, §§ 99-107, 2 October 2012.
For a summary of the latest reports dating from the period 2012 to 2014, see Rakhimov v. Russia, no. 50552/13, §§ 64-73, 10 July 2014.