The case originated in an application (no. 40378/06) against the Russian Federation, lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Y.Y. (“the applicant”), on 9 September 2006. The President of the Section decided of her own motion that the applicant’s name should not be disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by Mr D.G. Bartenev, a lawyer practising in St Petersburg. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that her personal medical information had been obtained, examined and disclosed by one public authority to another without her consent.
On 17 January 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1966 and lives in St Petersburg.
In April 2003 the applicant gave birth prematurely to twins at a maternity hospital in St Petersburg (“the maternity hospital”). The first twin died nine hours after her birth. The second twin, who was transferred to a resuscitation and intensive therapy unit at one of the St Petersburg children’s hospitals (“the children’s hospital”) twenty hours after his birth, survived. The applicant was of the opinion that her daughter would also have survived had she been promptly transferred to a resuscitation and intensive therapy unit at a children’s hospital.
On 25 May 2003 the applicant’s mother, Mrs D., sent the following telegram to the President of the Russian Federation:
On 15 June and 1 August 2003 D. sent two more telegrams to the President of the Russian Federation, stating:
The Administration of the President of the Russian Federation forwarded the telegrams to the Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation (“the Ministry”) for examination. The Ministry asked the Committee for Healthcare at the St Petersburg City Administration (“the Committee”) to examine the allegations and take the necessary action.
.  The Committee ordered an examination, which was carried out by a panel consisting of the chief neonatologist of the Committee and the head of the paediatrics department at the advanced medical studies faculty of the St Petersburg State Paediatrics Medical Academy. The examination was carried out on the basis of the applicant’s and the twins’ medical records, which were obtained from the maternity hospital and the children’s hospital. The results of the examination were set out in a report (рецензия), which mainly concerned the development and treatment of the twin who had died. In particular, the report stated that the infant had been born prematurely in the thirty-first week of gestation of an eighth pregnancy and by a first delivery. Her blood test had indicated the possibility of a prenatal viral infection, and she had been clinically diagnosed as premature (at thirtyone weeks), with respiratory distress syndrome and atelectasis. A postmortem examination had revealed moderate interstitial emphysema of the lungs, which had explained the immediate cause of death. It was concluded that she had been born with severe respiratory distress syndrome complicated by an air leak syndrome, and that she had been provided with treatment which had been entirely appropriate, given the seriousness of the condition and the nature of the disease. Such cases carried a risk of death of not less than 80%, in addition to the risk of serious disabilities, and an early transfer to a children’s hospital did not guarantee survival or a favourable outcome. The report also noted that the second twin had suffered from respiratory distress syndrome as well, but to a much lesser extent. The experts did not make any significant observations about the treatment he had received at the maternity hospital or the children’s hospital.
On 5 September 2003 the acting head of the Committee sent the report to the Ministry with an accompanying letter.
On 12 September 2003, in reply to her telegrams, the Committee informed D. of the results of the experts’ examination of the twins’ medical records by briefly restating the conclusions in the report. The Committee noted that the results of the examination of her allegations had been communicated to the Ministry.
On the same day, the Committee forwarded to the Ministry a copy of its reply to D. and informed the Ministry that, according to the conclusion of a commission formed by the maternity hospital where the twins had been born, the reasons for the applicant’s premature delivery had been her compromised obstetricgynaecological history – in particular, seven artificial abortions – and her urogenital mycoplasmosis infection. The letter of 12 September 2003 was the subject of proceedings brought by the applicant against the Committee, about which no further information is available.
On 3 December 2003 the applicant received a letter from the Committee with similar contents to the letter of 12 September 2003 that it had sent to D., stating, in particular, that her children’s medical records had been examined by the panel of experts. It appears that a request by the applicant for a copy of the report was refused, and that that refusal was the subject of separate proceedings brought by the applicant against the Committee. In the course of those proceedings, on 30 November 2004, the applicant received a copy of the report and the Committee’s letter to the Ministry of 5 September 2003.
On 25 February 2005 she brought new proceedings against the Committee, seeking a declaration that its actions had been unlawful in that it had collected and examined her medical records and those of her children, and had communicated the report containing her personal information to the Ministry without obtaining her consent. She requested that the report and the letter of 5 September 2003 be declared invalid. She stated that she had not asked the Committee to examine the quality of the medical treatment she and her children had received or to establish the cause of her daughter’s death. She claimed that the Committee had interfered with her private life by disclosing – without her consent – confidential information to a considerable number of individuals, including staff at the Committee and the Ministry who dealt with correspondence and other employees. She relied on Article 61 of the Basic Principles of Public Health Law, which prohibited the disclosure of confidential medical information without a patient’s consent. She argued that the provisions of Article 61 contained an exhaustive list of exceptions to that general rule, and that the Committee’s impugned acts had not fallen under any of them.
On 14 December 2005 the Kuybyshevskiy District Court of St Petersburg dismissed her application. The chief neonatologist, who was examined as a witness, stated that: he had acted within his powers; he had not been able to verify D.’s allegations without obtaining the medical records in question; he had involved medical specialists in the examination of those records; and no disclosure of the information contained in those medical records had taken place. A representative of the Committee denied the applicant’s allegations.
The District Court found that the Ministry had asked the Committee to examine the allegations set out in D.’s telegrams. The Ministry had had the power to request material from the Committee, which in turn had had a corresponding duty to submit detailed information. The applicant’s medical records had been examined by doctors bound by confidentiality. It was the report prepared as a result of that examination, and not the applicant’s medical records per se, which had been transferred to the Ministry.
On the basis of the above considerations, the District Court held that the applicant’s rights, as guaranteed by Article 61 of the Basic Principles of Public Health Law, had not been violated.
The District Court also noted that the applicant had lodged her application on 25 February 2005, although she had learned that her children’s medical records had been obtained without her consent on 3 December 2003 from the Committee’s letter of that date. The District Court saw no reasonable excuse for her failure to lodge her application within the statutory timelimit. Lastly, it rejected her request for a separate ruling to denounce the Committee’s allegedly common practice of obtaining medical records without patients’ consent.
An application by the applicant for clarification of the judgment – in particular, for details as to whether her application had been dismissed on the merits or because it had been time-barred – was dismissed on 20 January 2006 by the District Court, which considered that the judgment had been clearly formulated and did not allow for different interpretations. The applicant did not appeal against that decision.
The applicant appealed against the judgment, relying on Article 61 and, in particular, the exhaustive list of exceptions to the general rule of non-disclosure of confidential medical information without a patient’s consent provided therein. She stated that her own medical records and those of her children had been collected and examined without her consent by Committee officials acting ultra vires, and not by her own doctors, who were bound by confidentiality. The report contained confidential medical information and its communication to the Ministry without her consent had been unlawful. The fact that her own personal medical records had been examined in addition to those of her children had become known to her at a later date than 3 December 2003. The threemonth timelimit for lodging her application had started running on 30 November 2004, when she had received a copy of the report. She had therefore complied with that time-limit.
On 14 March 2006 the St Petersburg City Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal against the judgment and fully endorsed the District Court’s findings.
.  The Constitution of the Russian Federation contains the following provisions:
.  In decision no. 300-O of 23 June 2005 the Constitutional Court stated, in particular, that Article 61 of the Basic Principles of Public Health Law of the Russian Federation had established a special system for the disclosure of confidential medical information, which removed the option of disclosure at the request of third parties, thereby protecting the constitutional right under Article 24 § 1 of the Constitution to confidentiality of information concerning a person’s private life.
.  Under the Basic Principles of Public Health Law (federal law no. 5487-1 dated 22 July 1993 – in force at the relevant time and until 2012), the Ministry for Healthcare of the Russian Federation and the healthcare authorities of republics, regions and the cities of Moscow and St Petersburg were all part of the State health-care system (Article 12). They were responsible for ensuring the rights of citizens to health care (Article 2).
.  Article 61 of the Basic Principles of Public Health Law read:
The review of the practice of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation for the third quarter of 2005, as approved on 23 November 2005 by the Presidium of the Supreme Court (Section: “Other legal issues”, Question 24 on whether confidential medical information could be provided to a justice of the peace, a lawyer or a member of parliament), reiterated the constitutional right to the inviolability of private life and the right to confidentiality of information concerning a person’s private life, guaranteed by Articles 23 and 24 of the Constitution respectively. It further referred to paragraphs 1 and 3 of Article 61 of the Basic Principles of Public Health Law and stated that the transfer of confidential medical information was only allowed with the consent of an individual or his legal representative. The exceptions to that general rule included, in particular, the transfer of confidential medical information in connection with an ongoing investigation or court proceedings at the request of various official investigating bodies, a prosecutor or a court (paragraph 4 (3) of Article 61 of the Basic Principles). It concluded that, in connection with an ongoing investigation or court proceedings, confidential medical information could be provided to a justice of the peace without the consent of an individual or his legal representative, but could not be provided to a lawyer or a member of parliament.
The Regulations on the Ministry of Healthcare (in force at the material time but repealed in 2005), approved by decision no. 284 of 29 April 2002 of the Government of the Russian Federation, provided for the following functions of the Ministry in respect of matters within its jurisdiction: examining individual requests (paragraph 6.3); coordinating the activities of federal authorities and authorities of the subjects (constituent entities) of the Russian Federation; and requesting data (in accordance with established procedures) from the authorities of the subjects of the Russian Federation, other authorities, State, municipal and private healthcare organisations, legal and physical persons in order to perform its functions (paragraphs 7.1 and 7.4).
According to the Regulations on the Committee for Healthcare, approved by order no. 46-r of the Governor of St Petersburg of 23 December 1996 and in force at the material time, the Committee was responsible for regulating the quality of the medical services provided to the city’s population (paragraph 2.2). It was also under a duty to cooperate with State authorities, organisations and citizens, and to examine applications lodged by individuals and take appropriate action.
Under decree no. 2534-VII of 12 April 1968 of the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR on the examination of complaints lodged by individuals (in force at the material time but repealed in 2006), all State authorities were to ensure that there were proper means by which citizens could exercise their rights to lodge applications and make complaints regarding the authorities’ actions. The authorities were obliged to accept and examine applications and complaints lodged by individuals, respond to them and take the necessary action (paragraph 1). They had to: thoroughly scrutinise the applications and complaints; obtain essential documents if necessary; carry out on-the-spot audits; take action in order to resolve the issues raised; make reasoned decisions and ensure their prompt and correct execution; and inform citizens of any decisions (paragraph 7).
According to the Regulations on the System of Departmental Control over the Quality of Medical Treatment (in force at the material time but repealed in 2007), approved by joint order no. 363/77 of the Ministry of Healthcare and the Federal Compulsory Medical Insurance Fund of 24 October 1996, expert examination of the quality of medical treatment was carried out on the basis of a patient’s medical records as a rule (paragraph 2.3). An expert examination was compulsory in cases of fatalities (paragraph 2.4).