The case was referred to the Court, as established under former Article 19 of the Convention3, by the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) on 17 March 1998, within the three-month period laid down by former Articles 32 § 1 and 47 of the Convention. It originated in two applications (nos. 23536/94 and 24408/94) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Commission under former Article 25 by two Turkish nationals, Mr Fikret Başkaya and Mr Mehemet Selim Okçuoğlu, on 22 February and 9 June 1994 respectively.
The Commission’s request referred to former Articles 44 and 48 and to the declaration whereby Turkey recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (former Article 46). The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Articles 6 § 1 and 10 of the Convention.
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 § 3 (d) of former Rules of Court A1, the applicants stated that they wished to take part in the proceedings and designated the lawyers who would represent them (former Rule 30). The lawyers were given leave by the President of the Court at the time, Mr R. Bernhardt, to use the Turkish language in the written procedure (former Rule 27 § 3).
As President of the Chamber which had originally been constituted (former Article 43 of the Convention and former Rule 21) in order to deal, in particular, with procedural matters that might arise before the entry into force of Protocol No. 11, Mr Bernhardt, acting through the Registrar, consulted Mrs D. Akçay, Co-Agent of the Turkish Government (“the Government”), the applicants’ lawyers, Mr A. Erdoğan and Ms E.E. Keskin, and the Delegate of the Commission on the organisation of the written procedure. Pursuant to the order made in consequence, the Registrar received the applicants’ and the Government’s memorials on 14 October 1998. On various dates between 6 December 1998 and 5 March 1999, the applicants and the Government submitted additional observations on the former’s claim for just satisfaction.
After the entry into force of Protocol No. 11 on 1 November 1998 and in accordance with the provisions of Article 5 § 5 thereof, the case was referred to the Grand Chamber of the Court. The President of the Court, Mr L. Wildhaber, decided that, in the interests of the proper administration of justice, a single Grand Chamber should be constituted to hear the instant case and twelve other cases against Turkey, namely: Karataş v. Turkey (application no. 23168/94); Arslan v. Turkey (no. 23462/94); Polat v. Turkey (no. 23500/94); Ceylan v. Turkey (no. 23556/94); Okçuoğlu v. Turkey (no. 24246/94); Gerger v. Turkey (no. 24919/94); Erdoğdu and İnce v. Turkey (nos. 25067/94 and 25068/94); Sürek and Özdemir v. Turkey (nos. 23927/94 and 24277/94); Sürek v. Turkey (no. 1) (no. 26682/95); Sürek v. Turkey (no. 2) (no. 24122/94); Sürek v. Turkey (no. 3) (no. 24735/94); and Sürek v. Turkey (no. 4) (no. 24762/94).
The Grand Chamber constituted for that purpose included ex officio Mr R. Türmen, the judge elected in respect of Turkey (Article 27 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 24 § 4 of the Rules of Court), Mr Wildhaber, the President of the Court, Mrs E. Palm, Vice-President of the Court, and Mr J.P. Costa and Mr M. Fischbach, Vice-Presidents of Sections (Article 27 § 3 of the Convention and Rule 24 §§ 3 and 5 (a)). The other members appointed to complete the Grand Chamber were Mr A. Pastor Ridruejo, Mr G. Bonello, Mr J. Makarczyk, Mr P. Kūris, Mrs F. Tulkens, Mrs V. Strážnická, Mr V. Butkevych, Mr J. Casadevall, Mrs H.S. Greve, Mr A.B. Baka, Mr R. Maruste and Mrs S. Botoucharova (Rule 24 § 3 and Rule 100 § 4).
On 19 November 1998 Mr Wildhaber exempted Mr Türmen from sitting after his withdrawal from the case in the light of the decision of the Grand Chamber taken in accordance with Rule 28 § 4 in the case of Oğur v. Turkey. On 16 December 1998 the Government notified the Registry that Mr F. Gölcüklü had been appointed ad hoc judge (Rule 29 § 1).
Subsequently Mr K. Traja, substitute, replaced Mrs S. Botoucharova, who was unable to take part in the further consideration of the case (Rule 24 § 5 (b)).
At the invitation of the Court (Rule 99), the Commission delegated one of its members, Mr D. Šváby, to take part in the proceedings before the Grand Chamber.
On 7 January 1999, having consulted the Co-Agent of the Government, the Delegate of the Commission and the representatives of the applicants, the Grand Chamber decided to dispense with a hearing in the case, being of the opinion that the discharging of its functions under Article 38 § 1 (a) of the Convention did not require one to be held (Rule 59 § 2).
On 22 January 1999 the first applicant submitted certain documents following a request by the Judge Rapporteur (Rule 49 § 2 (a)).
The applicants, Mr Fikret Başkaya and Mr Mehemet Selim Okçuoğlu, are Turkish citizens. The first applicant was born in 1940 and lives in Ankara. He is a professor of economics and a journalist. The second applicant was born in 1964 and lives in Istanbul. He is the owner of a publishing house, Doz Basin Yayin Ltd Sti.
In April 1991 Doz Basin Yayin Ltd Sti published a book written by the first applicant and entitled Batılılaşma, Çağdaşlaşma, Kalkınma – Paradigmanın İflası/Resmi İdeolojinin Eleştirisine Giriş (“Westernisation, Modernisation, Development – Collapse of a Paradigm/An Introduction to the Critique of the Official Ideology”).
The book was an academic essay of 219 pages, containing 370 references, which involved a description of the socio-economic evolution of Turkey since the 1920s and the analysis and criticism of the “official ideology” of the State. According to the titles listed in the table of contents, the author dealt with the following topics: Intelligentsia and Official Ideology; The Characteristics of the National Struggle; The Question of the National Character of the National Struggle; The Comintern and whether the National Struggle was Anti-Imperialist; Mustafa Kemal and the Individual’s Role in History; The Characteristics of the Kemalist Regime: an Original Form of Bonapartism; Productive Forces and Economic Policies; Bonapartist Regime and Accumulation of Capital; A Classless, Privilegeless, Populist Dictatorship; The Evolution of Socio-Economic Formation in the Neo-Colonialist Era; The Eighties: Strengthening of the Satellitisation Process; The Collapse of the Paradigm and the Science of Economics: Means to Legitimise Existing Tendencies. 
The impugned chapter of the book included the following passages:
“The Kurdish problem plays a significant role in the analysis of the evolution of Milli Mücadele [Turkish National Independence War (1919-1922)] and Turkish social formation. The Kurdish problem and the process of the colonisation of Kurdistan are indeed very important and, as such, should be the subject-matter of another book. Moreover, the problem is not only related to Turkey. The formation of the domestic politics of four States in the region (Turkey, Iran, Iraq, Syria) (type of political regimes) as well as the ‘unique’ nature of relationships between these four neighbouring States make it a complicated issue.
We have two reasons why we wish to discuss the problem, even if in limited form, within the plan and scope of this book. These are to indicate the ‘irrationality’ of official ideology and the real nature of Milli Mücadele. In other words, [we wish] to discuss whether what is presented as ‘Kurtuluş Savaşı’ [Independence War] is in reality an ‘Independence Movement’ or not. Without any doubt, the imprisonment of Kurdistan (if the small area within the borders of the Soviet Union is omitted) within the borders of four different States gives the imperialists too easily ‘control’ over these four States. Although the Kurdish problem is of great importance with regard to the protection of the imperialist status quo in the region, we shall not here go into an analysis of this aspect of the problem. [page 51]
...
On the other hand, the racist policy of denial which has been followed with regard to the Kurds since the foundation of the Republic [1923] has also been an important factor in the development of the fascist movement in Turkey. As a contradiction, even though ‘the assumption of non-existence’ of the Kurdish Nation constitutes an important element of the official ideology, this is at the same time the weakest point of the ideology in question. It is not possible ‘to eliminate with the mind’ a nation which exists and the objective reality continues to exist regardless of the nonsense and unfounded suspicions of the people. Of course, this does not mean that the nonsense, unfounded suspicions have no effect! There is never a lack of those who profit from it, acquire bureaucratic, academic careers, receive high salaries, go up the step ladder of the political arena ... [page 52]
...
It was believed that colonialism would come to an end with the abolishment of direct political-military-police control in the colonies. Today, however, the [natural] resources of the Third World are carried to imperialist countries in volumes which are much higher than those of the colonial period. Therefore, the relationship between the Turkish State and Kurdistan is not of an imperialist devouring category. One can speak of a situation which also directly embodies a political, military, cultural, ideological oppression. Thus, a direct colony status is in force. [page 59]”
It appears that the publication of the book came to the notice of the prosecution authorities on 3 May 1991.
On 2 August 1991 the public prosecutor at the Istanbul National Security Court (İstanbul Devlet Güvenlik Mahkemesi), having regard to the contents of the book in question, issued an indictment against the applicants. The first applicant, as the author of the book, was charged under section 8(1) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act 1991 (“the 1991 Act”) with disseminating propaganda against the indivisibility of the State. The second applicant, as the owner of the publishing company, was charged under section 8(2) of the 1991 Act. In the bill of indictment, the public prosecutor quoted extracts from the chapter of the book reproduced at paragraph 11 above.
In the proceedings before the National Security Court, the applicants denied the charges and sought their acquittal.
The first applicant submitted that his book had been an academic work that could not be viewed as propaganda. Being a professor he had had the duty to conduct research and publish his conclusions and could not be forced to accept the “official version of reality”. His book might be judged by academics, but not by the courts. It could not be permissible to try and convict someone for the expression of his or her opinion.
The second applicant submitted, inter alia, that it was not possible to make an assessment of the book as a whole solely on the basis of extracts from a single chapter. He alleged that section 8 of the 1991 Act was inconsistent with the Turkish Constitution and Turkey’s international obligations. There was a “Kurdish problem” in Turkey and commenting or expressing ideas on this problem could not constitute an offence. 
In a final statement dated 18 March 1992, the public prosecutor requested the conviction of the first applicant under section 8(1) of the 1991 Act and that of the second applicant under section 8(2), as well as the confiscation of all copies of the book. The public prosecutor considered that the offence had been committed on 3 May 1991.
On 14 October 1992 the court acquitted the applicants. It held that the book as a whole was an academic work containing no elements of propaganda.
The public prosecutor appealed. He submitted that the book alleged that a certain part of Turkish territory had belonged to “Kurdistan” which the Turks had annexed and colonised. Concluding that the book did indeed disseminate propaganda against the indivisibility of the State, he requested that the verdict be set aside.
On 4 February 1993 the Court of Cassation quashed the decision of the trial court and referred the case back for retrial. It gave the following reasons:
“In the writings on pages 51 to 59 of the book … it is stated that a part of the territory within the borders of the Turkish Republic is a part of Kurdistan which belongs to the Kurdish nation, and that this territory has been annexed by the Turks and is subject to colony status. The Istanbul National Security Court, without considering that [the above] statement, as such, exceeds the limits of criticism and constitutes dissemination of propaganda against the indivisible integrity of the State of the Turkish Republic with its territory and nation, found [both] accused ‘not guilty’.
The judgment … is contrary to the law and thus, the public prosecutor’s grounds of appeal are upheld. Accordingly, it is unanimously decided that the judgment be reversed …”
In a judgment dated 5 August 1993, the Istanbul National Security Court found the applicants guilty of the offences with which they had been charged. It sentenced the first applicant to two years’ imprisonment and a fine of 50,000,000 Turkish liras (TRL) and the second applicant to six months’ imprisonment and a fine of TRL 50,000,000. Considering the applicants’ good conduct during the trial, the court reduced the first applicant’s sentence to one year and eight months’ imprisonment and a fine of TRL 41,666,666 and the second applicant’s sentence to five months’ imprisonment and a fine of TRL 41,666,666. On the other hand, the court dismissed the public prosecutor’s request for an order of confiscation of the book.
In its reasoning supporting the convictions, the court stated: 
“After the examination of the book which is the subject of the offence, it is understood that the [following] statements 
on page 51 that ‘The Kurdish problem plays a significant role in the analysis of the evolution of Milli Mücadele [Turkish National Independence War (1919-1922)] and Turkish social formation. The Kurdish problem and the process of the colonisation of Kurdistan are indeed very important and, as such, should be the subject-matter of another book. Moreover, the problem is not only related to Turkey. The formation of the domestic politics of four States in the region (Turkey, Iran, Iraq, Syria) ...’, ‘to discuss whether what is presented as “Kurtuluş Savaşı” [Independence War] is in reality an “Independence Movement” or not. Without any doubt, the imprisonment of Kurdistan (if the small area within the borders of the Soviet Union is omitted) within the borders of four different States gives the imperialists too easily “control” over these four States ...’, 
on page 52 that ‘the racist policy of denial which has been followed with regard to the Kurds since the foundation of the Republic [1923] has also been an important factor in the development of the fascist movement in Turkey... It is not possible “to eliminate with the mind” a nation which exists ...’ 
and on page 59 that ‘the relationship between the Turkish State and Kurdistan is not of an imperialist devouring category. One can speak of a situation which also directly embodies a political, military, cultural, ideological oppression. Thus, a direct colony status is in force.’ 
identify a certain part of the Turkish Republic as Kurdistan, declare that the Turkish Republic rules this region with colony status and thus aim to disseminate propaganda against the indivisible integrity of the State of the Turkish Republic with its territory and nation. Therefore, the following sentence shall be drafted under the provisions of Law no. 3713 which is applicable to the proven acts of the accused.”
The applicants appealed to the Court of Cassation, which held a hearing in the case. The applicants, while reiterating the defence made before the National Security Court, emphasised that the latter had failed to consider the book as a whole and had erroneously based its decision on an assessment of one chapter. The first applicant maintained that section 8 of the 1991 Act was inconsistent with the Turkish Constitution and the Convention, and he could not therefore be tried and convicted under that provision. He also referred to his previous arguments concerning the lack of clarity of the relevant provisions of the 1991 Act. The second applicant asserted that his sentence to imprisonment had been unlawful in that section 8(2) only authorised the imposition of a fine.
In its decision of 16 December 1993, delivered on 22 December 1993, the Court of Cassation upheld the National Security Court’s findings and dismissed the appeals.
As of 18 March 1994 the first applicant was dismissed, under section 98(2) of the Civil Servants Act (Law no. 367), from his post as lecturer at the University of Ankara. The relevant decision referred to his conviction under the 1991 Act and to his being sentenced to twenty months’ imprisonment.
On 3 October 1997 the National Security Court granted a request by the prosecution for an order of seizure in respect of the sixth edition of the impugned book.
The applicants served their sentences in prison and paid the fines. After the amendments made by Law no. 4126 of 27 October 1995 to the 1991 Act, the Istanbul National Security Court re-examined the second applicant’s case. On 19 April 1996 the court held that these amendments could not be applied to his case as he had already served his sentence.
The relevant provisions of the Criminal Code read as follows:
Article 2 § 2
“Where the legislative provisions in force at the time when a crime is committed are different from those of a later law, the provisions most favourable to the offender shall be applied.”
Article 36 § 1
“In the event of conviction, the court shall order the seizure and confiscation of any object which has been used for the commission or preparation of the crime or offence …”
The relevant provisions of the Press Act 1950 read as follows:
Section 3
“For the purposes of the present Law, the term ‘periodicals’ shall mean newspapers, press agency dispatches and any other printed matter published at regular intervals.
‘Publication’ shall mean the exposure, display, distribution, emission, sale or offer for sale of printed matter on premises to which the public have access where anyone may see it.
An offence shall not be deemed to have been committed through the medium of the press unless publication has taken place, except where the material in itself is unlawful.”
The relevant provisions of the Prevention of Terrorism Act 1991 read as follows:
Section 8
(before amendment by Law no. 4126 of 27 October 1995)
“[(1)]  Written and spoken propaganda, meetings, assemblies and demonstrations aimed at undermining the territorial integrity of the Republic of Turkey or the indivisible unity of the nation are prohibited, irrespective of the methods used and the intention. Any person who engages in such an activity shall be sentenced to not less than two and not more than five years’ imprisonment and a fine of from fifty million to one hundred million Turkish liras.
[(2)]  Where the crime of propaganda contemplated in the above paragraph is committed through the medium of periodicals within the meaning of section 3 of the Press Act (Law no. 5680), the publisher shall also be liable to a fine equal to ninety per cent of the income from the average sales for the previous month if the periodical appears more frequently than monthly, or from the average sales for the previous month of the daily newspaper with the largest circulation if the offence involves printed matter other than periodicals or if the periodical has just been launched[]. However the fine may not be less than one hundred million Turkish liras. The editor of the periodical concerned shall be ordered to pay a sum equal to half the fine imposed on the publisher and sentenced to not less than six months’ and not more than two years’ imprisonment.”
Section 8
(as amended by Law no. 4126 of 27 October 1995)
“[(1)]  Written and spoken propaganda, meetings, assemblies and demonstrations aimed at undermining the territorial integrity of the Republic of Turkey or the indivisible unity of the nation are prohibited. Any person who engages in such an activity shall be sentenced to not less than one and not more than three years’ imprisonment and a fine of from one hundred million to three hundred million Turkish liras. The penalty imposed on a reoffender may not be commuted to a fine.
[(2)]  Where the crime of propaganda contemplated in the first paragraph is committed through the medium of periodicals within the meaning of section 3 of the Press Act (Law no. 5680), the publisher shall also be liable to a fine equal to ninety per cent of the income from the average sales for the previous month if the periodical appears more frequently than monthly. However, the fine may not be less than one hundred million Turkish liras. The editor of the periodical concerned shall be ordered to pay a sum equal to half the fine imposed on the publisher and sentenced to not less than six months’ and not more than two years’ imprisonment.
[(3)]  Where the crime of propaganda contemplated in the first paragraph is committed through the medium of printed matter or by means of mass communication other than periodicals within the meaning of the second paragraph, those responsible and the owners of the means of mass communication shall be sentenced to not less than six months’ and not more than two years’ imprisonment and a fine of from one hundred million to three hundred million Turkish liras …
…”
The Government have submitted case-law concerning the application of section 8, details of which may be found in Karataş v. Turkey [GC], no. 23168/94, § 22, ECHR 1999-IV.
Section 13
(before amendment by Law no. 4126 of 27 October 1995)
“The penalties for the offences contemplated in the present Law may not be commuted to a fine or any other measure, nor may they be accompanied by a reprieve.”
Section 13
(as amended by Law no. 4126 of 27 October 1995)
“The penalties for the offences contemplated in the present Law may not be commuted to a fine or any other measure, nor may they be accompanied by a reprieve.
However, the provisions of this section shall not apply to convictions pursuant to section 8.”
A summary of the relevant domestic law governing the organisation and procedure of the National Security Courts is contained in Karataş cited above, §§ 24-29.
Mr Başkaya and Mr Okçuoğlu applied to the Commission on 22 February and 9 June 1994 respectively. Both applicants alleged violations of Articles 9 (right to freedom of thought and conscience) and 10 (right to freedom of expression) of the Convention on account of their conviction for the publication of the impugned book. The applicants further complained of violations of Article 7 (prohibition of retrospective punishment) and of Article 6 § 1 (right to a hearing before an independent and impartial tribunal). The first applicant maintained that there had been a breach of this provision also on account of a lack of fairness of the proceedings and that there had been a violation of Article 6 § 2 (right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty). The second applicant in addition alleged that his conviction entailed a breach of Article 14 (prohibition of discrimination) taken in conjunction with Article 10.
The Commission declared the applications (nos. 23536/94 and 24408/94) admissible on 2 September and 14 October 1996 respectively. In its report of 13 January 1998 (former Article 31 of the Convention), it expressed the opinion that there had been violations of Article 10 on account of the applicants’ convictions (unanimously) and of Article 6 § 1 in that their case had not been heard by an independent and impartial tribunal (thirty-one votes to one). It further concluded that there had been no violation of Article 7 with respect to the first applicant (thirty-one votes to one) but that there had been a violation of that provision with respect to the second applicant (unanimously). It found that it was not necessary to examine the other complaints made by the first applicant under Article 6 (unanimously) and that no separate issue arose with regard to the second applicant’s complaint under Article 14 taken in conjunction with Article 10 (unanimously).
Extracts from the Commission’s opinion are reproduced as an annex to this judgment1.
In their memorials, the applicants requested the Court to find the respondent State in breach of its obligations under Articles 6 § 1, 7, 9 and 10 of the Convention. The first applicant also invited the Court to find violations of Articles 3 and 14. Both applicants requested the Court to award them just satisfaction under Article 41.
The Government for their part invited the Court to reject the applicants’ complaints.