The case originated in an application (no. 22000/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Valentin Valentinovich Raylyan (“the applicant”), on 21 May 2003.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, the Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant complained about the interference with his right to peaceful enjoyment of his possessions and his right to respect for his private and family life.
On 2 December 2005 the Court decided to give notice of the first complaint to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1964 and lives in Maykop, the .
The applicant is a businessman. In 1996 he purchased a saw-mill with the intention of operating it as a going concern.
In March 1998 the local authority ordered him to shut the saw-mill down because it was situated in the vicinity of sewage disposal installations and threatened the town's sanitation.
The applicant brought proceedings against the Maykop municipal maintenance company (муниципальное жилищно-коммунальное хозяйство города Майкопа) and the Maykop municipal water supply company (муниципальное унитарное предприятие «Водоканал», hereinafter “the water supply company”), in which he sought an order requiring them to lift the ban on the operation of the saw-mill and damages.
On 17 December 1999 the Maykop Town Court of the  ordered the water supply company not to prevent the applicant from carrying on his activity. The judgment was not appealed against and became final.
However, it was not enforced. Instead, the water supply company blocked the road leading to the saw-mill and switched off the electricity supply.
The applicant was not issued with a warrant of execution until 28 April 2002 pending a decision in another case in which a third party was trying to challenge his title to the saw-mill.
On 14 May 2002 the enforcement proceedings were set in motion.
Three months later the bailiff suspended the enforcement proceedings and applied for clarification of the judgment of 17 December 1999.
On 29 October 2002 the  held that the judgment of 17 December 1999 had to be enforced exactly as it was worded.
On 8 January 2003 the bailiff brought the enforcement proceedings to an end. However, the access road remained blocked and the electricity supply was not restored.
The applicant appealed against the decision to discontinue the enforcement proceedings.
On 21 February 2003 the  quashed that decision.
On 25 March 2003 the Supreme Court of the  upheld the above judgment on appeal.
On 13 January 2006 the enforcement proceedings were resumed.
On 18 January 2006 the director of the water supply company issued access passes to the applicant and his nominees.
On 19 January 2006 free access to the saw-mill was restored, and the obstacles preventing the applicant from using it were removed. He was invited to collect the passes, but failed to do so. When the bailiffs went to the applicant's home to serve him with papers concerning the enforcement, they were unable to find him, but were met instead by his father, who refused to look at the papers and explained that the applicant had moved to another city.
On 26 January 2006 the enforcement proceedings were discontinued. The applicant did not appeal against that decision.