The case originated in an application (no. 44658/12) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Russian nationals, Ms Ezira (also spelled Yezira) Vatsayeva (“the first applicant”), Mr Usman Dushayev (“the second applicant”) and Mr Sayfulla Vatsayev (“the third applicant”) on 6 July 2012.
The applicants were represented by the Stichting Russian Justice Initiative, in partnership with another non-governmental organisation, Astreya (“SRJI/Astreya”). The Russian Government (“the Government”) were initially represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 26 August 2015 the Government were given notice of the application. The Government did not object to the examination of the application by a Committee.
The first applicant is the widow of Mr Khalid Dushayev, who was born in 1951. She is also the sister of Mr Said-Magomed Vatsayev, who was abducted and killed by State agents (see Esambayeva and Others v. Russia [CTE], no. 2660/12 and 4 others, 4 June 2019). The second and third applicants are Mr Khalid Dushayev’s children.
The account below is based on the statements provided by the applicants and witnesses to the events in question to the domestic investigating authorities and the Court.
In 2009 Mr Khalid Dushayev was convicted of running an illegal armed group. In prison, he met Mr A.A. and Mr I.A. (both of whom had been convicted of participating in an illegal armed group and/or illegal possession of firearms and ammunition). By 2011 all three men had been released.
At around 9 p.m. on 24 June 2011 Mr Khalid Dushayev, Mr A.A. and Mr I.A. were walking through the town of Gudermes in Chechnya. According to the applicants, two officers from the Chechen President’s security service approached them and asked them to show their identity documents. As none of the men had their identity papers on them, they could not comply with the officers’ instructions. The officers then took their mobile telephones and examined their contents, before returning them and leaving. Mr Khalid Dushayev, Mr A.A. and Mr I.A. continued walking.
Several minutes later a group of ten to fifteen armed men stopped the three men in the vicinity of the “Leader” petrol station and apprehended them. The attendant, Mr Ab.Ats., saw the incident and asked the armed men to leave the premises. According to his initial statement (see paragraph 20 below), the armed men did not allow him to approach them and said that they had arrested a “shaitan” (member of an illegal armed group). During the incident, Mr I.A. asked the armed men to telephone officer A. from the Chechen President’s security service. One of the armed men happened to know that officer and made the call himself. After a short conversation with officer A. Mr I.A. was released, whereas Mr Khalid Dushayev and Mr A.A. were taken to the Tsentaroy district police station in Chechnya (“the Tsentaroy ROVD”).
Subsequent events
The following day, 25 June 2011, Mr I.A. contacted the first applicant and told her that Mr Khalid Dushayev and Mr A.A. had been arrested by a group of men in camouflage uniforms armed with automatic weapons. Later that day two men in camouflage uniforms armed with automatic weapons arrested Mr I.A. as he was leaving the Benoy settlement with his brother and one of his cousins. The armed men forced Mr I.A. into a Lada car with a registration number containing the characters 130 TT 95 and took him away to an unknown destination.
In early January 2012 the investigators informed the first applicant and the relatives of the two other men’s families that on 8 January 2012 several members of an illegal armed group, allegedly including their relatives, had been killed by State agents in an exchange of fire.
On 10 January 2012 the investigators showed the bodies to the first applicant, Mr A.A.’s father and Mr A.I.’s uncle for identification.
According to the applicants, all three men’s bodies were abnormally pale and skinny. Their hair and beards were unusually long. They had been in summer uniforms, which were placed next to the bodies. Mr Khalid Dushayev’s body had missing upper front teeth and electric and cigarette burns. His right leg was broken. The applicants submitted photographs to the Court of Mr Khalid Dushayev’s face taken prior to his abduction and after his death.
The body of Mr Khalid Dushayev was released to the applicants a week later in exchange for RUB 5,000 (about EUR 123). They were told not to take it to his home village for burial, but to bury it as soon as possible. According to the applicants, the individuals who prepared the body for burial noted gunshot wounds that had been inflicted after death.
On 24 or 25 June 2011 Mr Khalid Dushayev’s relatives tried to go to the Tsentaroy ROVD, but law-enforcement officers stopped them at the checkpoint at the entrance to the village and told them that for Mr Khalid Dushayev’s safety they should not lodge complaints of abduction.
On 25 June and 5 July 2011 respectively Mr I. A.’s brother and Mr Khalid Dushayev’s uncle lodged abduction complaints with the Chechen investigative authorities.
On 6 and 19 July 2011 respectively the Gudermes inter-district investigative committee opened criminal investigations into the abduction of Mr I.A. and Mr Khalid Dushayev (case nos. 53041 and 53050) under Article 126 of the Russian Criminal Code (abduction).
On 18 August 2011 the investigations in the two criminal cases were joined (case no. 53047) on the assumption that the offences had been committed by the same perpetrators.
In the meantime, on 26 June and 5 July 2011 respectively the investigators examined the crime scenes in Benoy and Gudermes. No evidence was collected. No photographs were added to the crime scene examination report of 5 July 2011.
On 8 July 2011 Mr I.A.’s brother was granted victim status in the criminal proceedings and questioned. He submitted that on 24 June 2011 Mr I.A. had told him that Mr A.A. and Mr Dushayev had been arrested. The following day Mr I.A. had been arrested by armed men in a Lada car with a registration plate containing the characters 130 TT 95.
On 20 July 2011 the investigators questioned Mr Ab.Ats. He stated that at about 9 p.m. on 24 June 2011 he had seen a group of ten to fifteen men in camouflage uniforms, who had told him that they had arrested “a shaitan” (member of an illegal armed group). About ten minutes later they had driven off the forecourt.
On 21 July 2011 the investigators granted victim status to Mr. A.A.’s father and the first applicant and questioned them. Mr. A.A.’s father submitted that he had learned of his son’s abduction from his wife (Mr A.A.’s mother) on 25 June 2011. She had spoken to Mr A.A. on the telephone at around 9 p.m. on 24 June 2011. He had been with Mr I.A. and Mr Khalid Dushayev in Gudermes at the time. Mr A.A. had not returned home or answered any telephone calls since. The first applicant submitted that she had learned of Mr Khalid Dushayev’s arrest from Mr I.A., who had telephoned her on 25 June 2011.
On various dates between 21 July and 1 August 2011 the investigators questioned several other relatives of the abducted men, who confirmed the statements given by the other family members.
On 1 August 2011 the investigators took the shirts worn by Mr Khalid Dushayev and Mr A.A. for forensic examination.
On 5 August 2011 the investigators questioned Mr I.A.’s cousin, whose submissions were similar to those made by Mr I.A.’s brother.
On 5 and 30 August 2011 the Gudermes Town Court allowed the investigators to intercept and record for a period of two months the telephone calls made from the mobile telephone numbers belonging to the abducted men and their relatives (the first applicant, Mr A.A.’s mother, Mr Khalid Dushayev’s uncle, and Mr I.A.’s brother and cousin).
On 6 September 2011 the investigation was suspended for failure to identify the perpetrators.
On 7 November 2011 that decision was overruled by the Gudermes district deputy prosecutor as premature and unlawful. The deputy prosecutor noted that the investigators had questioned Mr Ab.Ats. superficially, had not added photographs to the crime scene examination report of 5 July 2011, had not analysed the telephone data obtained with the court’s authorisation, and had not followed up the information concerning the registration plate seen on the abductors’ vehicle by Mr I.A.’s brother.
On 14 November 2011 Mr A.A.’s father wrote to the Chechen prosecutor, seeking his assistance in solving the crime committed against his son. In his letter he described the events of 24 June 2011, stating that armed men in camouflage uniforms had not arrested Mr I.A. because one of them had been his neighbour. That letter was forwarded to the investigators and joined to the case file.
On 30 November 2011 the investigation was resumed.
On 23 and 24 December 2011 respectively the investigators questioned the owners of the cars with the registration numbers T 130 TT 95 and B 130 TT 95. Both of them had sold their vehicles to third parties, who had not registered the cars in their own names in a timely fashion.
On 26 December 2011 the investigators questioned Mr Ab.Ats. again. He changed his initial statement, saying that the men in camouflage uniforms had not said anything about arresting a member of an illegal armed group (see paragraph 20 above). After he had asked them to leave, they had promised to go in ten or fifteen minutes. When asked about the discrepancies in his statements, Mr Ab.Ats. stated that he had been misunderstood by the investigator during the first interview. He also added that he had been unable to see the faces of the men and would therefore be unable to identify them.
On 30 December 2011 the investigation was suspended again.
On 10 January 2012 the investigators were informed that there had been an exchange of gunfire between members of an illegal armed group and law-enforcement officers in the Vedeno district of Chechnya on 8 January 2012 as a result of which several members of the illegal armed group had been killed.
On the same day the investigators showed the bodies of the men killed on 8 January 2012 to the first applicant, Mr A.A.’s father and Mr A.I.’s uncle for identification. The relatives of the missing men confirmed that the bodies belonged to Mr Khalid Dushayev, Mr A.A. and Mr I.A.
On 18 January 2012 the investigation was resumed.
On 21 January, 25 January and 1 February 2012 respectively the investigators questioned Mr A.A.’s father, Mr I.A.’s uncle and the first applicant. They were all asked whether it was possible that their relatives had left home to join an illegal armed group and had therefore staged their alleged arrest. All of the men interviewed dismissed that possibility. They each stated that, on the contrary, the circumstances in which their relatives had been killed had been staged. They stressed that the men had been abnormally skinny, pale and had had summer uniforms, even though the exchange of fire had taken place in winter. The abducted men had not joined an illegal armed group, but had been kept in detention in dark cells before being killed and their bodies planted at the supposed location of the exchange of fire.
On 20 February 2012 the investigation was suspended again.
On 23 March 2012 the first applicant asked the NGO Stichting Russian Justice Initiative to assist in the investigation. She described the circumstances of the abduction and stated that her husband’s body had shown visible signs of torture and that his right leg had been broken. She also submitted that the people who had seen his gunshot wounds while preparing the body for burial concluded that they had been inflicted after death.
On 11 September 2012 the Gudermes acting district prosecutor overruled the suspension decision as premature and unlawful. He pointed out that the investigators had failed to analyse the abducted men’s telephone data and follow up the information alleging that one of the perpetrators had been Mr I.A.’s neighbour.
On 6 November 2012 the investigation was resumed and on 6 December 2012 suspended again. It appears that the investigation is still ongoing.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law and international and domestic reports, see Makayeva v. Russia (no. 37287/09, §§ 67-77, 18 September 2014); Aslakhanova and Others v. Russia (nos. 2944/06, 8300/07, 50184/07, 332/08 and 42509/10, §§ 80-84, 18 December 2012); and Akhmadova and Sadulayeva v. Russia (no. 40464/02, §§ 67-69, 10 May 2007).