The case originated in an application (no. 27473/11) against the Kingdom of Norway lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Norwegian national, Ms N.A. (“the applicant”), on 3 May 2011. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have her name disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by Mr P. Henriksen, a lawyer practising in Oslo. The Norwegian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Emberland of the Attorney General’s Office (Civil Matters) as their agent, assisted by Mr J. Vangsnes, Attorney.
The applicant alleged a violation of her right to the presumption of innocence under Article 6 § 2 of the Convention on account of the national court’s decision, despite her acquittal on criminal charges, to order her to pay compensation to the victim. She further complained that in breach of the Article 6 § 1 fair hearing guarantee the decision had not been sufficiently reasoned.
On 25 January 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant, Mrs N.A., was born in 1986 and lives in Norway.
On 16 September 2009 the applicant and her former husband Mr U.A., a Pakistani national who was born in 1985, were indicted (I) under Article 229, third alternative, cf. Article 232 of the Penal Code (straffeloven), of having caused under particularly aggravating circumstances injury to the body and health of their daughter A entailing serious damage, or of having aided and abetted in this, by having exposed her at least on two occasions to violence causing the following damage:
“- Two instances of fraction to her cranium;
- bleeding under the hard membrane of the brain;
- bleeding between the hard membrane of the brain and scull;
- oedema changes in the brain;
- bleedings in the retina in both eyes;
- blue marks and miscolouring on the body;
- elbow out of joint.
The last-mentioned injury had been discovered in December 2007 and the remainder in January 2008. The injuries to her head had been life-threatening and had led to permanent brain injury. The violence had been caused by the child’s parents, Mr U.A. and Mrs N.A., directly by, amongst other things, blows and/or pushes against a hard surface and forceful shaking and/or by aiding and abetting the perpetration of the violence by not intervening and seeking to prevent the actions carried out against the child, in respect of whom both parents assumed the care.”
They were also indicted (II) under Article 219 (2), cf. (1), of having seriously and repeatedly exerted violence or otherwise infringed or illtreated someone in their household – in an aggravated manner because the abuse had been carried out over a long period, had been committed against a defenseless person and had been unprovoked. During the period from 17 August 2005 until 26 January 2008, their son B had a number of times been exposed to violence resulting, inter alia, in the following injuries:
“-  A fracture in the upper arm caused by twisting;
-  blue nails on both of his big toes;
-  several wounds, scars and miscolouring to the body, including scars after scratching on the throat.
The violence had been caused by the child’s parents, Mr U.A. and Mrs N.A., either directly and/or by aiding and abetting the perpetration of the violence by not intervening and seeking to prevent the actions carried out against the child, in respect of whom both parents assumed the care.”
On 13 January 2010 the Oslo City Court (tingrett) convicted the applicant and her former husband of the charges and sentenced them to terms of imprisonment of two years and a half and three years and a half, respectively. It was not in doubt that the two children had been subjected to gross ill-treatment by adults but concluded that it was not possible from the evidence taken from the defendants and witnesses in the case to identify one or more perpetrators. The statements given had been contradictory to such a degree that this could not be explained as being due to misunderstandings. Several of the statements ought to be considered as untrue leaving no possibility to distinguish between lies and truth on different points. On the other hand the City Court found it established that the damage to the children had mainly occurred while the children had been in the flat. It was further proven that the accused Mr U.A. had been present in the tiny flat occupied by the family while the ill-treatment occurred, as had also been the case of the applicant. The City Court also found it proven that each of the parents had aided and abetted in the commission of the violence by not having interfered or sought to prevent the acts of violence carried out against the children in regard to whom they had a duty of care. The parents were ordered to pay the children 300,000 and 100,000 Norwegian kroner (NOK) (approximately 36,000 and 12,000 euros (EUR)) in compensation for non-pecuniary damage.
The applicant and her former husband appealed to the Borgarting High Court (lagmannsrett), which, sitting with a jury, held a hearing for twelve days between 17 August and 3 September 2010). It took evidence from the defendants and eighteen witnesses and two court appointed experts. After the jury had answered all the questions put to it in the negative, the professional judges decided to accept the jury’s verdict of acquittal.
In the same judgment of 3 September 2010, the High Court (without the participation of any members of the jury) examined the children’s claims for compensation of non-pecuniary damage under section 3-5 (1) (a) of the Damage Compensation Act 1969. It held:
“According to this provision a person who with intent or gross negligence has caused personal injury may be required to pay compensation to the victim. The High Court observes that such infringements as described in Article 219 of the Penal Code can constitute a ground for awarding compensation for non-pecuniary damage under section 3-5(1)(b), cf. section 3-3, even if no damage has occurred in the sense of the Act. The assistance lawyer representing the children [‘bistandsadvokaten’] has argued on their behalf that Mr [U.A.] and Mrs [N.A.], with intent or gross negligence, have caused or aided and abetted [‘medvirket’] in causing serious injury to [A]’s head, her elbow getting out of joint and in seriously and repeatedly exposing [B] to violence.
The victims’ claims for non-pecuniary damage has its basis in the same acts as those in respect of which Mr [U.A.] and Mrs [N.A.] has been acquitted in the criminal proceedings. The acquittal in the criminal proceedings does not hinder making an award of compensation for nonpecuniary damage to the victims, since less stringent evidentiary requirements applies to the latter than to criminal punishment. When a judgment of acquittal has been given in the criminal case, the presumption of innocence in Article 6 § 2 of the Convention will set limits to what could constitute the basis for a decision on the civil claims. According to the European Court’s case-law, the national courts cannot justify their decision in a manner calling into doubt the acquitted person’s innocence for criminal law purposes (see the Norwegian Supreme Court’s case-law reports Norsk Retstidende – Rt. 2003 p. 1671).
A condition for establishing liability to pay compensation is that it was clearly probable that the damage had been caused by intent or by gross negligence (Rt. 2003 p. 1671).
Considering the evidence in the case as a whole, the High Court finds it clearly probable that Mr [U.A.] and Mrs [N.A.] have ill-treated their children or have aided and abetted in doing so by consent or by incitement to the acts, over a long period until 26 January 2008. The High Court further finds it clearly probable that the parents had inflicted or have aided and abetted in inflicting great injuries to A’s head and have inflicted or aided and abetted in inflicting injuries to B through repeated violence, including a fracture to his arm by twisting it.
In its assessment of the evidence, the High Court emphasises that several of the injuries ascertained are not compatible with accidental occurrences but on the contrary show that they have been inflicted by strong violence. The High Court also points to the children’s later reactions, including that [B] was in 2008 diagnosed as suffering from post-traumatic stress syndrome. It further refers to witness statements from neighbours about noise in the form of screams of anxiety and painful cries from children in the apartment over a longer period.
The High Court is of the view that the physical and psychological injuries sustained by the children are a direct consequence of the illtreatment to which they have been exposed. In the High Court’s view it was further foreseeable for Mr [U.A.] and Mrs [N.A.] that serious injuries, including serious brain damage, could occur in the case of such small children.
Accordingly, the conditions for making an award of non-pecuniary damage have been fulfilled.
The lawyer representing the children had filed a claim for compensation of non-pecuniary damage in an amount of up to NOK 300,000 in respect of [A] and up to NOK 100,000 in respect of [B].
An award of compensation for non-pecuniary damage is to be evaluated on the basis of a wide discretionary assessment of what would constitute a reasonable amount. Factors which are central in the assessment are the objective seriousness of the act, the extent to which the wrongdoer (‘skadevolder’) is to be blamed and the damaging effects.
This case concerns injury on very small children, from they were babies until [A] was fourteen months old and [B] was two years and a half. The ill-treatment has occurred during a considerable part of the children’s lives until it was revealed. At present [B] apparently manage well physically and has no physical ailments. However, in 2008 he was diagnosed as suffering from post-traumatic stress syndrome. [A] was in part paralysed on one side and her development is far behind compared to that of other children of her age. Her injuries can be said to be permanent.
Compensation for non-pecuniary damage in respect of [A] is to be awarded in an amount of NOK 300,000 [approximately 40,000 euros (EUR)] and in respect of [B] in an amount of NOK 100,000 [approximately EUR 13,500].
The decision on the civil claims is based on the less stringent evidentiary requirements than those applicable to criminal punishment. Thus, the decision on the civil claim does not contradict [‘rokke ved’] the correctness of the acquittal.”
The applicant and her former husband appealed to the Supreme Court (Høyesterett), complaining inter alia of the High Court’s assessment of the evidence and that the reasoning for the award on compensation in this regard had failed to satisfy requirements of national law and entailed a violation of Article 6 § 2 of the Convention.
On 4 November 2010 the Appeals Leave Committee of the Supreme Court (Høyesteretts kjæremålsutvalg) refused them leave to appeal, finding that such leave was warranted neither by the general importance of the case nor by other considerations.
Article 229 of the Penal Code 1902, as in force at the relevant time, read:
“Any person who injures another person in body or health or reduces any person to helplessness, unconsciousness or any similar state, or who aids and abets thereto, is guilty of occasioning bodily harm and shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years, but not exceeding six years if any illness or inability to work lasting more than two weeks or any incurable defect or injury is caused, and not exceeding eight years if death or considerable injury to body or health results.”
Article 232 provided:
“If any felony mentioned in Articles 228 to 231 is committed with intent in a particularly painful manner ..... or under especially aggravating circumstances, a sentence of imprisonment shall always be imposed ... In deciding whether other especially aggravating circumstances exist, particular importance shall be attached to whether the offence has been committed against a defenseless person, ... whether it was committed by several persons jointly, and whether it constitutes ill-treatment.”
Article 219 stated:
“Any person who by threats, duress, deprivation of liberty, violence or any other wrong grossly or repeatedly ill-treats
...
(d) any person in his or her household, or
(e) any person in his or her care
shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years.
If the ill-treatment is gross or the aggrieved person ... sustains considerable harm to body or health as a result for the treatment, the penalty shall be imprisonment for a term not exceeding six years. In deciding whether the ill-treatment is gross, particular importance shall be attached to whether it has endured for a long time and whether such circumstances as are referred to in Article 232 are present.
Any person who aids or abets such an offence shall be liable to the same penalty.”
Under Norwegian criminal law there are four basic conditions that must be met in order to establish criminal liability:
(1)  the accused has committed the proscribed act or omission (actus reus) which is contrary to a provision of the Penal Code or to a special statutory penal provision in force at the time when the act was committed;
(2)  there are no exonerating circumstances (e.g. self-defence);
(3)  the accused has acted with intent (mens rea), unless otherwise expressly stated in the relevant penal provision; and
(4)  the accused was of sound mind at the time of the commission of the offence.
As a general rule, the prosecution has to prove these four elements beyond reasonable doubt. Any reasonable doubt shall benefit the accused (in dubio pro reo).
In so far as is relevant, Article 376A of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1981 reads:
“If the jury’s verdict is that the person is not guilty, but the court finds that he is undoubtedly guilty, the court may unanimously decide that the case shall be retried before other judges. At the new trial the High Court shall be constituted as a composite court [‘meddomsrett’] ...”
Article 376 of the same Code provides:
“If the jury’s verdict is that the accused is not guilty and if the court does not take a decision pursuant to Article 376A, it shall render a judgment of acquittal.”
No reasons are given for an acquittal.
Under the Code of Criminal Procedure, a civil claim may be pursued in connection with a criminal trial, provided that the claim arises from the same set of facts. The claim is decided by the three professional judges who have taken part in the criminal case, without the participation of the jury.
Article 3 reads:
“Any legal claim that the aggrieved person or any other injured person has against the person charged may, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 29, be pursued in connection with such cases as are mentioned in Article 1 or Article 2, provided that the said claim arises from the same act that the case is concerned with. ...
The claims specified in the first and second paragraphs are deemed to be civil claims and shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 29 ...”.
The court will determine the claim on the basis of the evidence adduced during the trial. However, it may receive further evidence. Article 144 of the Code of Civil Procedure, then in force (tvistemålsloven – Law of 13 August 1915 no. 6; replaced with effect from 1 January 2008 by a new Code) required that the professional judges, precisely and exhaustively, state the facts on which they base their decision on the alleged victim’s civil claim.
Other provisions concerning civil compensation claims may be found in Chapter 29 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, notably the following:
“In a public prosecution, the prosecuting authority may on application pursue such civil legal claims as are specified in Article 3. ...
When civil claims are pursued against a person other than the person charged, the person concerned assumes the position of a party to the case in so far as this issue is concerned. ...”
“Any person who has any such civil claim as is specified in Article 3 may himself pursue it in connection with a public prosecution if a main hearing is held. ...”
“A separate appeal against a decision of civil claims shall be brought in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure. The same shall apply to a reopening of the case.”
Under the Damage Compensation Act 1969, the alleged victim may, regardless of the outcome of the criminal proceedings, claim compensation for pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage.
Section 3-5, as in force at the relevant time, read as follows:
“Anyone who, with intent or gross negligence has
Caused personal injury or
Committed an infringement or an act of misconduct as mentioned in section 33, may ... be obliged to pay the victim such a lump sum as the court deems would constitute reasonable compensation [‘oppreisning’] for the pain and suffering and other non-pecuniary damage caused thereby. ...
A person who with intent or gross negligence has caused the death of another person, may be ordered to pay such compensation to the deceased’s ... parents.”
Section 3-3, referred to in the above provision, expressly applies to misconduct mentioned in, amongst others, Article 219 of the Penal Code.
A claim for compensation for nonpecuniary damage submitted by a victim under section 3-5 of the Act is subject to his or her showing that the alleged perpetrator, with intent or gross negligence, committed the wrongful act. The test is normally the balance of probabilities and the burden of proof lies with the claimant. However, in a landmark ruling of 1996 concerning civil liability for forced sexual intercourse (Rt. 1996, p. 864, at p. 876; Ringvold v. Norway, no. 34964/97, §§ 16-19, ECHR 2003II) the Norwegian Supreme Court held that the requirement as to the strength of the evidence had to be stricter than that which applied to the test of the balance of probabilities, bearing in mind the burden which an allegation of reprehensible conduct might have for the defendant and the serious consequences it might have for his or her reputation. In a case of the kind under consideration, the test had to be whether on the balance of probabilities it was clearly probable that the alleged abuse had been committed (“klar sannsynlighetsovervekt”). This burden was heavier where liability may have serious consequences for the respondent’s reputation, though it was less than for criminal liability.
The objective constitutive elements of acts which may give rise to both criminal liability and civil liability to pay compensation are not always the same. The subjective constitutive elements in principle differ: normally criminal liability requires intent whereas liability to pay compensation requires gross or simple negligence. There may be exonerating circumstances – such as self-defence, necessity, provocation or ignorance – which exclude criminal liability but which do not exclude liability to pay compensation (see Norges Offentlige Utredninger (Official Norwegian Reports) 2000:33 “Erstatning til ofrene hvor tiltalte frifinnes for straff” (Compensation to Victims in Cases where the Accused has been Acquitted of the Criminal Charge), study by Mr J. T. Johnsen, Professor of Law, Chapter 1, subchapter 1.3.2).
According to that study, the purposes of the criminal law and the law on compensation are not identical. While deterrence and restoration are important considerations in both areas of law, the former places emphasis on retribution and the latter on the spreading of financial loss. The two systems also supplement one another in important respects. While criminal law sanctions are particularly designed to deter the actual and potential offenders from committing offences, those of the law of compensation are particularly designed to meet the aggrieved person’s need for economic redress (ibid., Chapter 1, subchapter 1.2.1).
The above-mentioned study identified several justifications for maintaining the possibility to award compensation in connection with criminal proceedings even after an acquittal. It may serve the interests of economy of procedure, and also psychological stress may be saved by treating criminal charges and compensation claims in joint proceedings. In comparison with civil proceedings, such joint proceedings were cheap both for the accused and for the victim who would be able to benefit from free legal aid for the handling of the civil claims. If the compensation proceedings had to await a final outcome in the criminal case (at three levels of jurisdiction), it could take years before they could start. For the victim, and also for the acquitted, this could involve a considerable extra psychological burden. Moreover, in joint proceedings, the demands for thoroughness that were inherent in the criminal process would contribute to increasing the quality of the examination of the civil claim. Furthermore, the exonerating effect of an acquittal was not likely to be greater in split proceedings than in joint ones. On the contrary, in view of the problems related to examining the criminal evidence twice, the effect would tend to be more consistent under the latter. Finally, in criminal cases giving rise to more than one civil claim, deciding them all at the same time in connection with the criminal process would ensure a greater degree of “procedural equality” and coherence (ibid., Chapter 6, sub-chapter 6.3.1 and 6.3.2).