The case originated in two applications (nos. 7614/09 and 30863/10) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Russian nationals, Mr Andrey Viktorovich Volkov and Mr Aleksandr Mikhailovich Adamskiy (“the applicants”), on 25 January 2009 and 12 May 2010, respectively.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants alleged that they had been convicted of distributing counterfeit software and copyright infringement following entrapment by the police in violation of Article 6 of the Convention.
Mr Volkov also complained that he had not been afforded free legal assistance during the appeal proceedings in his case.
On 23 November 2010 the applications were communicated to the Government.
The applicants were each targeted in undercover operations conducted by the police in the form of a test purchase of counterfeit software under sections 7 and 8 of the Operational-Search Activities Act of 12 August 1995 (no. 144-FZ). The operations led to their criminal conviction for distribution of counterfeit software.
On 6 December 2007 an undercover police officer V called the applicant on the number advertised by him on a job-advertisement site on the Internet and asked him to perform some computer repairs, including the installation of software. The applicant agreed, bought several compact discs with counterfeit software on them and installed the software on V’s computer for 3,300 roubles (RUB) (about 45 euros (EUR)). The relevant part of the recording of the applicant’s conversation with V in the course of the repairs read as follows:
“...
V: how much will [the installation] cost approximately?
Mr Volkov: I don’t know exactly, [it] depends on the programmes to be installed.
V: [I need] Photoshop, [Windows] XP etc.
Mr Volkov: with Photoshop, it is 200 roubles more.
V: We called other companies; they said it would cost about twenty thousand. Why are the prices so different? ...
Mr Volkov: [other companies] are probably being careful, unlike me, I come instantly. They are probably afraid of getting caught; they may have done it before and run into some inspection.
V: What kind of inspection?
Mr Volkov: [Licensing] inspection, if I installed a licensed programme for you, it would cost a lot.
V: How much does the licensed programme cost?
Mr Volkov: Photoshop is 500 dollars.
V: To install?
Mr Volkov: No, the programme itself. ... if it is done like now, in a semi-legal way, the price is obviously lower ...”
Following the above, the applicant was charged with copyright infringement. The applicant retained a lawyer during the pre-trial proceedings but could no longer afford paying for legal representation in court. He was therefore provided with a legal aid lawyer.
On 3 July 2008 the Golovinskiy District Court of Moscow (District Court) examined the applicant’s case. The applicant testified that he had agreed to help V because he had already performed similar services for his relatives and acquaintances. He also testified that V had asked him to have some programmes installed but did not indicate whether V had specifically asked for unlicensed software. V testified that the police had launched an undercover operation after they had received information incriminating the applicant in the distribution of counterfeit software. The applicant pleaded not guilty to copyright infringement and claimed that the police had incited him to commit the crime. The court found the applicant guilty of copyright infringement and imposed a suspended sentence of one year and three months’ imprisonment with one year’s probation.
The applicant lodged an appeal (кассационная жалоба) asking the appellate court (кассационный суд) to examine the case in his presence. In his appeal, he did not request to have a lawyer appointed for the hearing of his case.
On 6 August 2008 the Golovinskiy District Court of Moscow informed by post and telephone Ms D., the applicant’s lawyer in the proceedings before the District Court, that the hearing of the applicant’s appeal had been scheduled for 20 August 2008. The court’s call log indicated that the applicant had no retainer agreement with Ms D. for representation in the appeal proceedings.
On 20 August 2008 the Moscow City Court dismissed the applicant’s arguments on appeal and upheld his conviction. The applicant was present at the hearing. However, Ms D. did not appear and the applicant did not have any other lawyer to represent him during the appeal hearing. It is not clear whether the applicant requested to have the hearing adjourned or to have replacement counsel appointed.
On 10 December 2008 an undercover police officer M called the number advertised by the applicant in the computer-repairs section of a newspaper and asked him to install several computer programmes. The applicant, who was in financial need at the time, downloaded several unlicensed programmes from the Internet and installed them on M’s computer the next day for RUB 3,000 (about EUR 40). The relevant part of the recording of the applicant’s conversation with M in the course of the repairs read as follows:
“...
M: how much does [this programme] cost?
Mr Adamskiy: I did not buy it.
M: You did not?
Mr Adamskiy: To buy means to go bankrupt.
M: [did you get it] from the Internet? Or some other way?
Mr Adamskiy: Got it through my peers, [it was] cracked ...
M: I don’t really understand this stuff ... If I install it at work, will I get arrested?
Mr Adamskiy: I think it is obvious. I would not let any inspections in while the data is downloading.
M: ...why? What can happen?
Mr Adamskiy: just warning, I personally would not [let anyone inspect].
M: what would happen? ... Do they inspect more often?
Mr Adamskiy: yes ...
M: will we get jailed?
Mr: Adamskiy: No, if it is kept quiet ...”
Following the above, the applicant was charged with copyright infringement. On 28 September 2009 the Timiryazevskiy District Court of Moscow examined the applicant’s case. At the trial, the applicant did not claim that M had asked him to have unlicensed software installed. He also confirmed that he had informed M in the course of the installation that the software had been counterfeit. M testified that the police had received information implicating the applicant in the distribution of counterfeit software and had decided to verify that information. The applicant pleaded guilty to copyright infringement but claimed that the police had incited him to commit the crime. The court convicted the applicant and imposed a suspended sentence of one year and six months’ imprisonment with one year’s probation.
On 16 November 2009 the Moscow City Court upheld the applicant’s conviction and sentence on appeal.
Article 146 (Copyright Infringement) of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation as in force at the material time provided that the unlawful use of copyright and derivative works or the wilful purchase, storage or transfer of counterfeit copies or phonorecords thereof for commercial distribution carried a fine of up to RUB 200,000 (about EUR 2700) or eighteen months’ salary or other income of the convicted person, or compulsory community service of between 100 and 240 hours, or correctional work of up to two years, or a term of imprisonment of up to two years.
For a summary of the relevant provisions on undercover operations and evidence in criminal proceedings in Russia, see Lagutin and Others v. Russia (nos. 6228/09, 19123/09, 19678/07, 52340/08 and 7451/09, §§ 6266, 24 April 2014).
Article 373 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation (CCP, as in force at the material time) provided that the appellate court examined appeals with a view to verifying the lawfulness, validity and fairness of judgments.
Article 379 read as follows:
“1.  A judgment may be quashed on appeal on the following grounds:
(1)  a discrepancy between the findings made in the judgment and the factual circumstances of the case established by the first-instance ... court;
(2)  a breach of criminal procedural law;
(3)  incorrect application of the criminal law;
(4)  injustice of the judgment.”
Under Article 377 §§ 4 and 5 of the CCP an appellate court could directly examine evidence, including additional material submitted by the parties
The Constitution of the Russian Federation guarantees a defendant in criminal proceedings the right to qualified legal assistance (Article 48) and to a determination of the criminal charge against him in accordance with the principles of adversarial proceedings and equality of arms (Article 123).
Article 51 § 1 of the CCP provides for mandatory legal representation if, inter alia, the defendant has not waived his right to legal representation in accordance with Article 52 of the CCP. Unless counsel is retained by the defendant, it is the responsibility of the investigator, prosecutor or the court to appoint a lawyer to represent him.
As provided for in Article 52 of the CCP, the defendant may refuse legal assistance at any stage of criminal proceedings. Such a waiver can only be accepted if made on the defendant’s own initiative. The waiver must be filed in writing and recorded in the official record of the relevant procedural act. The investigator, prosecutor or the court may decide not to accept the waiver. The defendant does not forfeit the right to subsequently ask for the appointment of a lawyer to represent him in the criminal proceedings.
Examining the compatibility of Article 51 of the CCP with the Constitution, the Constitutional Court ruled as follows (decision no. 497-O of 18 December 2003):
“Article 51 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which sets out the circumstances in which the participation of defence counsel is mandatory, does not contain any indication that its requirements are not applicable in appeal proceedings or that the convicted person’s right to legal assistance in such proceedings may be restricted.”
That position was subsequently confirmed and developed in seven decisions delivered by the Constitutional Court on 8 February 2007. It found that free legal assistance for the purpose of appeal proceedings should be provided on the same conditions as during the earlier stages in the proceedings and was mandatory in the situations listed in Article 51. It further underlined the obligation of courts to secure the participation of defence counsel in appeal proceedings.
In a number of cases (decisions of 13 October 2004 and 26 January, 6 April, 15 June and 21 December 2005) the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation quashed judgments of appeal courts and remitted the cases for fresh consideration on the ground that the courts had failed to secure the presence of defence counsel in the appeal proceedings despite it being obligatory for the accused to be legally represented.
Article 413 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides for the possibility of reopening criminal proceedings as a result of the finding by the European Court of Human Rights of a violation of the Convention.