The case originated in an application (no. 32849/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Marian Mucha (“the applicant”), on 17 June 2004.
The Polish Government were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the length of his detention on remand had been unreasonable.
On 13 September 2005 the Court declared the application partly inadmissible and decided to communicate the complaint concerning the unreasonable length of the applicant's pre-trial detention to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1954 and lives in .
On 8 April 2002 the  further prolonged the applicant's detention reiterating the grounds originally given for his detention and adding that the measure was necessary to secure the proper conduct of the investigation.
On 27 November 2002 the pre-trial detention of the applicant and 14 other persons was further extended. The  considered the risk of the accused tampering with evidence high, basing itself on the fact that they had been charged with being members of an organised criminal gang.
As the length of the applicant's detention had reached the statutory timelimit of 2 years laid down in Article 263 § 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Kodeks postępowania karnego) the District Court made several applications to the Katowice Court of Appeal (Sąd Apelacyjny) for the applicant's detention to be prolonged beyond that term. On 6 August 2003 the Court of Appeal granted the application. The court noted, however, that although the bill of indictment had been lodged eight months previously, the trial court had not yet started to examine the merits of the case. As regards the need to prolong the applicant's detention, the court noted as follows:
“...The [Regional Court] rightly pointed to Articles 249 § 1 and 258 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to justify the continuation of the detention on remand in order to secure the proper conduct of the proceedings, and there is no need to discuss that further.
It should be underlined that, given the number of co-accused and the type of offences they had been charged with, the present case is particularly complex. Therefore, it is necessary to prolong further the detention in order to carry out the proceedings, in particular to take evidence from 16 accused and 11 witnesses...
It should also be noted that, as the proceedings advance, the  should consider whether it was still necessary to extend the [detention on remand] with respect to all the accused.”
The Code of Criminal Procedure of 1997, which entered into force on 1 September 1998, defines detention on remand as one of the socalled “preventive measures” (środki zapobiegawcze).
A more detailed rendition of the relevant domestic law provisions is set out in the Court's judgment in Kudła v. Poland [GC], no. 30210/96, § 75, ECHR 2000XI, Celejewski v. Poland, no. 17584/04, §§ 22 and 23, 4 May 2006.