The case originated in an application (no. 47166/09) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Ms Svitlana Ivanivna Ilchenko (“the applicant”), on 31 August 2009.
The applicant was represented by Ms A. Ilchenko, a lawyer practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the demolition of her garage amounted to a deprivation of property and breached her rights under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
On 3 November 2017 notice of the above complaint was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1951 and lives in Kyiv.
The applicant resided in a flat on Saksaganskogo Street, in Kyiv city centre, and had used a one-car brick garage in the courtyard of her house since 1980.
In April 1983 the executive committee of the Kyiv Leninsky District Council issued a decision authorising the applicant to use her garage.
From 1993 to 1998 the applicant rented from the district executive committee (виконавчий комітет), under a signed lease, the part of the courtyard occupied by the garage.
In January 1995 the district executive committee issued a letter to the applicant indicating that it had no objection to her registering the garage in her name.
In February 1995 the Kyiv Technical Inventory Bureau, which at the time was responsible for registering rights in real property, registered the garage in the applicant’s name, on the grounds of the executive council decision of April 1983 and its letter of January 1995 (see paragraphs 7 and 9 above).
In the course of the 1990s she bought her flat, taking it into private ownership.
The applicant submitted a certificate, dated October 2002 and issued by the municipal housing management agency, indicating that the applicant owned a brick garage measuring 34 sq. m in the courtyard of her house.
In 2002 the city and a private developer started planning a new housing project in the vicinity of the applicant’s house, on the site where the applicant’s garage was located. The Kyiv City Council allocated land for that purpose to the city’s Housing Directorate (the Directorate) in April 2003. The lease was signed in July 2003.
On 29 November 2002 a municipal company involved in the development project wrote to the applicant’s husband. It informed him that the development project would involve the need to move the garage and invited him to discuss possible ways forward.
On 29 May 2003 the Directorate wrote to the applicant informing her that the land where the garage was located had been designated for new housing development. It stated that the applicant was using the garage without legal grounds and that her registration of the garage was invalid. The garage, therefore, would have to be demolished. There was neither available space nor grounds to propose an alternative placement for the garage. Therefore, the city was proposing monetary compensation. The applicant was invited to the Directorate with her paperwork to enter into the compensation agreement. In the event of refusal of compensation, the Department would sue.
According to the material in the case file the applicant failed to follow up on the offers to negotiate.
On 3 July 2003 the Directorate instituted civil proceedings against the applicant, seeking demolition of her garage.
The applicant filed a counterclaim, seeking acknowledgment of her title to the plot of land under the garage (“the plot of land”) and the annulment of the documents authorising the new development.
On 3 February 2004 the Brovary Court of Kyiv Region dismissed the Directorate’s main claim and found for the applicant. The court found that the applicant was the owner of the garage, had used the land openly since 1980 and had thus acquired title to the land by adverse possession. She could also apply to get private title to it, free of charge, under the Land Code (see the relevant legislative provisions in paragraphs 36 and 37 below).
The court held that there had been irregularities in approving the development project. In particular: (i) more land had been allocated than the City Council had decided; (ii) the land had been allocated without resolving the matter of the applicant’s conflicting rights to a part of it; (iii) the land under the applicant’s garage could not be expropriated for public needs since the development project was of a commercial nature.
On 7 July 2005 the Kyiv Regional Court of Appeal quashed the first-instance court’s judgment, finding for the Directorate and against the applicant. The court of appeal found that the applicant had not proved her right to the land. It also established that the provision of the 2001 Land Code concerning adverse possession (see paragraph 37 below) did not apply to the applicant since the fifteen-year period required by that provision had to be counted from 2002 when the Code had come into force. The right to use the land had never been properly granted to the applicant. The first-instance court’s findings concerning the irregularities in the documents authorising the development project were unsubstantiated. Referring to the Land Code provision concerning unauthorised occupation of land (see paragraph 38 below), the Court of Appeal ordered the applicant to vacate the land she was occupying without authorisation, by demolishing her garage (звільнити самовільно зайняту земельну ділянку... шляхом знесення гаражу).
On 8 August 2005 the applicant applied for the suspension of enforcement of the Court of Appeal’s judgment, arguing that she had appealed against it on points of law and that enforcement at that stage would have an irreversible effect.
On 12 August 2005 the State bailiffs demolished the garage.
The applicant instituted proceedings against the bailiffs seeking to declare their actions unlawful (see paragraph 32 below).
On 19 August 2005 the Brovary Court granted the applicant’s suspension application on the grounds that there were circumstances which may complicate or render impossible the enforcement of the eventual decision in the case.
On 16 February 2006 the Supreme Court quashed the first-instance court’s judgment of 3 February 2004 and the Court of Appeal’s judgment of 7 July 2005 and remitted the case for fresh examination to the first-instance court. The Supreme Court noted that the applicant was the owner of the garage, had paid land tax and had thus used the land openly. Contrary to what the Court of Appeal had held, the provision of the 2001 Land Code concerning adverse possession applied to her. The lower courts had to clarify the status of the land and, in particular, whether the applicant had applied to the local authorities, as the Land Code required, to formalise her right to the land by adverse possession.
There is no indication in the case file that the applicant ever applied for formalisation of her rights acquired by adverse possession prior to the institution of proceedings against her.
On 21 May 2007 the Kyiv Shevchenkivsky District Court found for the Directorate and against the applicant. The court found that the applicant had had no right to the land underneath as it had not been granted to her according to the procedures set forth in land legislation. The 1983 decision (see paragraph 7 above) had not been a decision giving her the right to use land but merely provided a temporary permission for the construction of a garage on it. In fact, no decision granting her right to land had been taken. In addition, the court held that, under domestic law as it had stood at the time the applicant had registered her garage, the applicant had not possessed documents which could have allowed her lawfully to register her garage as her property. Referring to the article of the Land Code concerning unauthorised occupation of land (see paragraph 38 below), the court ordered the applicant to vacate the land. As to the applicant’s counterclaim, the District Court decided that there was no indication of any illegality in the documents authorising the development project.
On 24 June 2008 the first-instance court dismissed the applicant’s additional counterclaims which it had neglected to dismiss in the original judgment of May 2007. These concerned the applicant’s claim to be provided with an alternative garage in the new development, to have the new development pushed back at least 15 m from her house, to have access to her house facilitated and to restore the greenery destroyed by the development project. It held that its judgment of May 2007 and the grounds underpinning it also meant dismissal of those additional claims.
On 29 October 2008 the Kyiv City Court of Appeal upheld the judgments of the first-instance court of May 2007 and June 2008. Among other matters, it found it established that the garage had been registered as the applicant’s property. Nevertheless, it endorsed the lower court’s findings to the effect that she had never properly obtained the right to use the land.
On 3 March 2009 the Supreme Court upheld the lower courts’ decisions, holding that there was no indication of error in them.
On 22 August 2005 the applicant lodged her claim against the State bailiffs seeking to have their actions in demolishing her garage declared unlawful.
She argued, in particular, that she had not been given sufficient opportunity to comply with the judgment ordering her to vacate the land (see paragraph 21 above).
On 3 April 2007 the Brovary Court dismissed her claim. It held that, even though the bailiffs had notified her of the obligation to comply with the Court of Appeal’s judgment with a delay, on 8 August 2005, the garage had not been demolished until 12 August (see paragraph 23 above).
The courts dismissed an appeal by the applicant as lodged out of time.
Article 118 of the Land Code of 2001 allows individuals to apply for privatisation of land which they use and sets forth a procedure for doing so.
Article 119 of the Code provides that individuals that have used land openly and without interruption for fifteen years can apply to the State or municipal authorities to obtain rights of ownership or use of such land.
Article 212 of the Code provides that land occupied without permission (самовільно зайняті земельні ділянки) must be returned by court order to the lawful owners or users without reimbursement of any costs incurred during the period of unlawful occupation. The land must be restored to its original state, including through the demolition of any structures, at the expense of the squatter.