The case originated in two applications (nos. 52160/13 and 52165/13) against the Republic of Malta lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Somali nationals, Ms Saamiyo Moxamed Ismaaciil and Ms Deeqa Abdirahman Warsame (“the applicants”), on 13 August 2013.
The applicants were represented by Dr M. Camilleri and Dr. K. Camilleri, lawyers practising in Valletta. The Maltese Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Dr P. Grech, Attorney General.
The applicants alleged that they had suffered a breach of Article 3 on account of the conditions of their detention, and violations of Article 5 § 1 and 4 on account of their detention and the lack of judicial review.
On 28 August 2014 the applications were communicated to the Government.
The applicants were born in 1988 and 1992 and were at the time of the introduction of the application detained in Hermes Block, Lyster Barracks Detention Centre, in Hal Far.
Ms Moxamed Ismaacil, the first applicant, entered Malta in an irregular manner by boat on 16 August 2012. Upon arrival, she was registered by the immigration police and given an identification number (12U-007).
At that point she was presented with two documents, one containing a Return Decision and the other a Removal Order (no copies available). According to the first applicant, the contents of the decision in English were not explained to her, although she could not understand the language. According to the Government, in practice the immigration police inform the migrants verbally in English about their right to appeal and the migrants translate for each other.
The first applicant was further provided with an information leaflet entitled “Your entitlements, responsibilities and obligations while in detention”. She claimed that the document was provided in a language she could not understand. According to the Government she did not request a booklet in another language.
In accordance with Article 14 (2) of the Immigration Act (see Relevant domestic law), the first applicant was detained. She was initially detained in Zone D and later moved to an unspecified Zone in Lyster Barracks.
Ms Abdirahman Warsame, the second applicant, also entered Malta in an irregular manner by boat on 16 August 2012. Upon arrival, she was registered by the immigration police and given an identification number (12U-009).
She was then presented with two documents in English, one containing a Return Decision and the other a Removal Order. The Return Decision stated that she was a prohibited immigrant by virtue of Article 5 of the Immigration Act (Chapter 217 of the Laws of Malta) because she was in Malta “without means of subsistence and liable to become a charge on public funds”. The Return Decision also informed the applicant that her stay was being terminated and of the possibility to apply for a period of voluntary departure. The Removal Order was based on the consideration that the applicant’s request for a period of voluntary departure had been rejected. It informed the second applicant that she would remain in custody until removal is affected and that an entry ban would be issued against her. The two documents further informed her of the right to appeal against the Decision and Order before the Immigration Appeals Board (“the IAB”) within three working days. According to the Government, in practice the immigration police inform the migrants verbally in English about their right to appeal and the migrants translate for each other.
She was further provided with an information leaflet entitled “Your entitlements, responsibilities and obligations while in detention”. None of these documents, in English, were explained to Ms Abdirahman Warsame who could not understand the language. According to the Government the second applicant did not request a booklet in another language.
In accordance with Article 14 (2) of the Immigration Act (see Relevant domestic law), the second applicant was detained. She was detained in Lyster Barracks (Zone unspecified).
A few days following their arrival both the applicants were called for an information session provided by the Staff of the Office of the Refugee Commissioner. They were assisted in submitting the Preliminary Questionnaire (PQ), thereby registering their wish to apply for asylum under Article 8 of the Refugees Act, Chapter 420 of the Laws of Malta (see Relevant domestic law below).
Two months later, on 2 and 9 November 2012 respectively, they were called for a refugee status determination interview. By decisions of 19 January 2013, communicated to the applicants on 31 January 2013, the Refugee Commissioner (RC) rejected their applications on the basis that they had failed to substantiate their claim that they were born and lived in Halane village, in Qoryooley district, in Lower Shabelle Region, in southern Somalia. Thus, they did not fulfil the eligibility criteria for either refugee status or subsidiary protection.
On 7 February 2013, with the aid of lawyers from the Jesuit Refugee Service (JRS) the applicants appealed against the decisions. The Refugee Appeals Board (RAB) informed the applicants that they had until 18 March 2013 to present submissions. This time-limit was extended and appeal submissions were lodged in April 2013.
By the date their application was lodged with this Court, that is eleven months and three weeks from the date of their arrival, no decision had been issued. The applicants were hoping to be released on the lapse of twelve months from their arrival as per normal domestic practice.
Ms Moxamed Ismaacil, the first applicant, was initially detained in Zone D and later moved to an unspecified Zone in Lyster Barracks, in conditions which she considered prison-like and basic, although she considered Zone D to be better than the latter unspecified Zone. She explained that the place was overcrowded and noisy, and it was hard to keep it clean. There were twenty people in one dormitory and ninety-five people in the zone, with only one fridge. In summer the heat was unbearable and in winter it was too cold. They were fed the same food every day, and only allowed one hour of sunshine per day. She maintained that male detainees held in the upper floors often abused them verbally. Other factors which she considered had to be taken into consideration were her young age, her inability to communicate in any language except for Somali, and the fact that the detention centre was staffed exclusively by men. She further noted the absence of access to effective medical care, given that no interpreters were available. She had visited the clinic in the detention centre several times because she was sick, and was repeatedly told to drink water and take paracetamol tablets. Often no doctors were available and it was the soldiers at the detention centre who decided whether the issue warranted emergency treatment.
Ms Abdirahman Warsame explained that she endured the same circumstances mentioned above by Ms Moxamed Ismaacil. She added that she was depressed and that she often felt upset and agitated, at times she would stop drinking and eating and then lose consciousness. Despite her gastric pains, no special diet was provided for her and the doctors only administered paracetamol, to the extent that she started vomiting blood. In June 2013 she was hospitalized for a week. She alleges that she had become very weak physically and started suffering from memory loss.
Ms Moxamed Ismaacil was released from detention on 14 August 2013. At the time she was still waiting for the outcome of her appeal before the RAB. Her appeal was eventually rejected on 15 October 2013.
Ms Abdirahman Warsame was also released from detention on 14 August 2013. At the time she was still waiting for the outcome of her appeal before the RAB. Her appeal was eventually rejected on 14 July 2014.
The relevant domestic law concerning the case is to be found in Suso Musa v. Malta (no. 42337/12, §§ 23-32, 23 July 2013) and Aden Ahmed v. Malta (no. 55352/12, §§ 31-39, 23 July 2013).
The Report to the Maltese Government on the visit to Malta carried out by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) from 26 to 30 September 2011, published on 4 July 2013, in so far as relevant in connection with Lyster Barracks, reads as follows:
“44. At the time of the visit, Lyster Detention Centre was accommodating 248 foreign nationals (including 89 women), in five different detention units.
...
More generally, the CPT has serious misgivings about the fact that female detainees at Lyster Detention Centre were frequently supervised exclusively by male detention officers, since only one female officer was employed by the Detention Service at the time of the visit.
The CPT recommends that the Maltese authorities take steps as a matter of priority to ensure the presence of at least one female officer around the clock at Lyster Detention Centre.
As was the case in 2008, a number of detainees complained about disrespectful behaviour and racist remarks by detention officers (in particular in the Warehouses at Safi Detention Centre). The CPT reiterates its recommendation that the Maltese authorities remind all members of staff working in detention centres for foreigners that such behaviour is not acceptable and will be punished accordingly.
At both Lyster [and Safi Detention Centres], material conditions have improved since the 2008 visit. In particular, at Lyster Barracks, these improvements are significant: the Hermes Block, which had been in a very poor state of repair at the time of the 2008 visit, had been completely refurbished and the Tent Compound, which had also been criticised by the Committee in the report on the 2008 visit, had been dismantled. At Safi Barracks, additional renovation work had been carried out in Block B. It is noteworthy that all foreign nationals received personal hygiene products on a regular basis and were also supplied with clothes and footwear.
...
At Lyster Detention Centre, the situation had clearly improved as regards activities. Each zone comprised a communal room, and groups of detainees could attend English-language courses which were organised by an NGO (usually, three times a week for two hours per group). Further, single women and couples were provided with food so that they could prepare meals themselves in a kitchenette. Every day, detainees could go outside and play football or volleyball in a rather small yard for a total of two hours.
...
As regards contact with the outside world, the CPT welcomes the fact that, in both detention centres visited, foreign nationals could receive telephone calls from the outside. They were also were provided with telephone cards free of charge on a regular basis, although these were limited to a total of 5€ every two months.
That said, at Lyster Detention Centre, a number of detainees who had family members or friends in Malta complained about the fact that they were not allowed to receive any visits, but that “visitors” could only come to the centre on Sundays to deliver parcels to staff at the gate for the attention of a detainee. This state of affairs was subsequently confirmed by staff.
The CPT calls upon the Maltese authorities to take steps to ensure that foreign nationals are allowed to receive visits on a regular basis and that specific facilities are set up for that purpose. Relevant information on the visiting arrangements should also be included in the information brochure “Your Entitlements, Responsibilities and Obligations while in Detention” which is given to detainees.
In the report on the 2008 visit, the CPT invited the Maltese authorities to consider adding the Committee to the list of international bodies to/from which detainees could send/receive letters confidentially (and without bearing the cost of postage). Regrettably, the authorities had not taken any steps to this end, despite their commitment given in their response to the above-mentioned report. During consultations with the delegation, the Commander of the Detention Service affirmed to the delegation that appropriate steps would be taken without delay. The Committee would like to receive updated information on this point.”
The 9th General report of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment (the “CPT”) on the CPT’s activities covering the period 1 January to 31 December 1998, at point 26, reads as follows:
“Mixed gender staffing is another safeguard against ill-treatment in places of detention, in particular where juveniles are concerned. The presence of both male and female staff can have a beneficial effect in terms of both the custodial ethos and in fostering a degree of normality in a place of detention.
Mixed gender staffing also allows for appropriate staff deployment when carrying out gender sensitive tasks, such as searches. In this respect, the CPT wishes to stress that, regardless of their age, persons deprived of their liberty should only be searched by staff of the same gender and that any search which requires an inmate to undress should be conducted out of the sight of custodial staff of the opposite gender; these principles apply a fortiori in respect of juveniles.”
Rule 53 of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, reads as follows:
“(1) In an institution for both men and women, the part of the institution set aside for women shall be under the authority of a responsible woman officer who shall have the custody of the keys of all that part of the institution.
(2) No male member of the staff shall enter the part of the institution set aside for women unless accompanied by a woman officer.
(3) Women prisoners shall be attended and supervised only by women officers. This does not, however, preclude male members of the staff, particularly doctors and teachers, from carrying out their professional duties in institutions or parts of institutions set aside for women.”
The report “Not here to stay: Report of the International Commission of Jurists on its visit to Malta on 26 – 30 September 2011”, May 2012, pointed out, inter alia, that:
“The ICJ delegation found a lack of leisure facilities in all three detention facilities visited. ... In the Lyster Barracks there was also a small recreation yard, but without direct access from the detention section. Detainees had two hours per day of “air” in the courtyard. They reportedly seldom received visits from outside, apart from the occasional NGO.”
Bridging Borders, a JRS Malta report on the implementation of a project to provide shelter and psychosocial support to vulnerable asylum seekers between June 2011 and June 2012, highlights the fact that not all medication prescribed by medical personnel in detention is provided free by the Government health service. In fact the said report notes that during the lifetime of the project the organisation purchased medication for 130 detainees.
Care in Captivity, a more recent JRS Malta report on the provision of care for detained asylum seekers experiencing mental health problems (research period December 2013 to June 2014), documented several obstacles to quality healthcare including: lack of availability of interpreters; lack of attendance for follow-up appointments following discharge to detention (in seven out of seventy-four cases); and failure to dispense prescribed psychotropic medication in some cases. It held that:
“In this regard, the current system where, after discharge from the ASU ward, the responsibility for continuity of care, in terms of attendance of hospital appointments and dispensation of medication, falls under detention health care providers and custodial staff appears not to be operating effectively.”