The case originated in an application (no. 32036/13) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Croatian nationals, Ms Draginja Treskavica (“the first applicant”), Ms Nataša Treskavica (“the second applicant”) and Ms Valentina Treskavica (“the third applicant”), on 18 April 2013.
The applicants were represented by Mr H. Alajbeg, a lawyer practising in Split. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the investigation into the death of their respective husband and father, J.T., had not been effective and had not taken into account that he had been killed only because of his Serbian ethnic origin.
On 10 April 2014 the complaints under the procedural aspect of Articles 2 and 14 of the Convention as well as the complaints under Article 6 § 1 and Article 13 of the Convention were communicated to the Government, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The applicants were born in 1943, 1975 and 1969, respectively, and live in London, the United Kingdom.
During 1991 and 1992 Serbian paramilitary forces gained control of about a third of the territory of Croatia and proclaimed the “Serbian Autonomous Region of Krajina” (Srpska autonomna oblast Krajina, hereinafter “Krajina”). At the beginning of August 1995 the Croatian authorities announced their intention to take military action with the aim of regaining control over Krajina. The operation was codenamed “Storm” (Oluja) and took place from 4 to 7 August 1995. Before the military action, the vast majority of the population of Krajina fled Croatia. Most of them went to Bosnia and Herzegovina, and also to Serbia. Some returned to Croatia after the war. The number of people who fled is estimated at between 100,000 and 150,000.
On 5 November 1997 Croatia ratified the Convention.
The documents submitted by the parties reveal the following facts.
The applicants lived in Knin, within the territory of Krajina. During Operation Storm the town of Knin was shelled by the Croatian army. During the shelling the applicants hid in the basement of their building. J.T. was found dead near a petrol station in Knin after one of the shelling attacks. It appears that he was buried at a cemetery in Knin.
On 25 April 2001, during the exhumations at the “New Cemetery” (Novo groblje) in Knin, the first applicant approached the police and said that her husband, J.T., had been buried at that cemetery. The Šibenik-Knin Police Department, Knin Police Station (Policijska uprava šibensko-kninska, Policijska postaja Knin), then interviewed the first applicant about the circumstances of the death of her husband. She stated that her husband had died on 5 August 1995 near a petrol station in Knin. Given that Knin had been under artillery attack, the first applicant assumed that her husband had been killed by a shell. She further stated that she had seen her husband’s dead body lying on the pavement near the above-mentioned petrol station. She gave a detailed description of his appearance and of the clothes he had been wearing. Members of the Croatian army appeared at the crime scene and took the first applicant to a UNPROFOR (United Nations Protection Force) camp in Knin. She had obtained no further knowledge of the whereabouts of her husband’s body. She assumed that he was buried at a cemetery in Knin.
A number of remains were exhumed during May and June 2001 at the cemetery in Knin. The process was conducted under the auspices of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (Međunarodni kazneni sud za bivšu Jugoslaviju) and the County State Attorney’s Office in Šibenik (Županijsko državno odvjetništvo u Šibeniku). After they were exhumed, the remains were examined at the Institute for Forensic Medicine in Zagreb (Zavod za sudsku medicinu i kriminalistiku) but J.T.’s remains were not identified at that time. On 20 June 2001 the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia issued an autopsy report which concluded that the probable cause of the death for the remains which were only in 2010 identified as being those of J.T., was a gunshot to the neck.
On 26 November 2001 the Knin Police Station submitted to the Šibenik-Knin Criminal Police Department (Odjel kriminalističke policije, Policijska uprava šibensko-kninska) its official notes of the interviews which it had conducted with the families of the people killed during and after Operation Storm. The above-mentioned interview with the first applicant was also submitted.
On 28 November 2003 the Institute for Forensic Medicine in Zagreb extracted a genotype from J.T.’s remains and compared it with DNA samples from its database. However, they failed to find a match and could not establish the identity of the remains.
After the applicants on 26 February 2007 filed with the State Attorney’s Office a claim for damages in connection with the killing of J.T. (see paragraph 25 below), the Knin police opened an inquiry into the circumstances of his death.
On 5 December 2007 the Knin Police Station interviewed M.T., who stated that the first applicant had told her about the events in Knin during Operation Storm and the death of her husband, J.T. She had no further useful information.
On 13 February 2008 the Šibenik-Knin Criminal Police Department interviewed Lj.M. She described the events of 5 August 1995 as follows. During the artillery attack on Knin she and her family had hidden in a basement. After the attack they had left the basement. The Croatian army had led the civilians to a furniture shop, from where they had been taken to the barracks known as “southern camp” (južni logor). The first and the second applicants had also been in this group of civilians. As they had been passing through Knin, the witness had seen the dead body of J.T. He had been dressed in civilian clothes and had had no visible injuries. Lj.M indicated that she had no recollection of seeing J.T. wearing the military uniform of the Republic of Serbian Krajina (RSK: Republika Srpska Krajina). Lj.M’s statement was confirmed by her mother-in-law, Z.M.
On 19 February 2008 the Šibenik-Knin Criminal Police Department interviewed I.M., a neighbour of the Treskavica family. She stated that J.T. had not been a member of the army or the police of the Republic of Serbian Krajina and that she had never seen him wearing a military uniform. During Operation Storm her family and the Treskavica family had been hiding in the basement of their residential building. J.T. had occasionally come to the basement, but he had not been present all the time. The last time that I.M. had seen him alive had been on 5 August 1995, between 10 and 11 a.m. After they had all left the basement, she had seen the dead body of J.T. lying on the street. She had no further information.
On 20 February 2008 the Šibenik-Knin Criminal Police Department informed the County State Attorney’s Office in Šibenik that the case had not yet been registered and that it had failed to determine whether J.T. had been a member of the army or the police of the Republic of Serbian Krajina. The police indicated that they had conducted interviews with Lj.M. and I.M. However, it was not possible to conduct an interview with the first applicant, since she resided in England. The police indicated that J.T. had most likely been buried at the cemetery in Knin. His remains had been exhumed and transferred to the Institute for Forensic Medicine in Zagreb, where they were still being identified.
On 13 November 2009 P.T., J.T.’s brother, provided information about J.T.’s ante-mortem physical features to the Red Cross of Serbia (Crveni Krst Srbije) in order that his post-mortem remains might be identified. On the same day P.T. requested that a search be undertaken for the post-mortem remains of J.T.
On 14 February 2010 family members provided blood. After a DNA analysis was conducted, the Institute for Forensic Medicine in Zagreb issued a report dated 16 April 2010, which stated that the post-mortem remains were those of J.T.
On 24 May 2010 the family of J.T. was invited to the final identification of the post-mortem remains. On 16 June 2010 the first applicant confirmed the preliminary identification of the remains.
On 8 July 2010 the Šibenik-Knin Criminal Police Department submitted a list of missing persons to the Knin Police Station, together with a request for an inquiry into their disappearance and for interviews to be conducted with their families and neighbours. J.T. was listed as one of those missing persons.
On 19 July 2010 the remains of J.T. were buried at the local cemetery in Knin, in accordance with the wishes of the applicants.
On 10 August 2010 the Knin Police Station issued an official note about the inquiry into J.T.’s disappearance. After interviewing the first applicant, the police determined that J.T. had died on 5 August 1995 and had been buried on 19 July 2010 at the cemetery in Markovac. On 6 September 2010 the Knin Police Station notified the Šibenik-Knin Criminal Police Department of those findings.
On 7 July 2014 the Ministry of War Veterans (Ministarstvo branitelja) replied to a request of the War Crimes Department of the Ministry of the Interior (Ministarstvo unutarnjih poslova, Služba ratnih zločina) concerning the case of J.T. The Ministry of the Interior notified the police of the exhumation and identification of J.T.’s remains.
On 26 February 2007 the applicants submitted a claim for damages with the State Attorney’s Office in respect of the death of J.T. The request was refused.
On 14 June 2007 the applicants brought a civil action against the State in the Knin Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Kninu), seeking damages in respect of the death of J.T. under the 2003 Liability Act.
On 17 December 2008 the municipal court dismissed the claim on the ground that there was “no evidence that J.T.’s death had been a result of terror or violence aimed at gravely disturbing public order.” That judgment was upheld by the Šibenik County Court (Županijski sud u Šibeniku) on 1 March 2010 and by the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske) on 21 February 2012.
The applicants’ subsequent constitutional complaint was dismissed on 3 October 2012 by the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske).
The relevant provisions of the Act on Liability for Damage Resulting from Terrorist Acts and Public Demonstrations (Zakon o odgovornosti za štetu nastalu uslijed terorističkih akata i javnih demonstracija, Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia no. 117/2003 of 23 July 2003 – “the 2003 Liability Act”), which entered into force on 31 July 2003, provides as follows:
“(1)  This Act regulates liability for damage caused by acts of terrorism or other acts of violence committed with the aim of seriously disturbing public order by provoking fear or stirring up feelings of insecurity in citizens ...
(2)  A terrorist act within the meaning of this Act is in particular an act of violence committed for political reasons [motives] with a view to stirring up fear, terror or feelings of personal insecurity in citizens.”
“The Republic of Croatia shall be liable for damage referred to in section 1 of this Act ...”
“The obligation to compensate damage under this Act exists irrespective of whether the perpetrator has been identified, criminally prosecuted or found guilty.”
“The victim shall have the right to compensation for damage resulting from death, bodily injury or impairment of health”
The applicants further complained, relying on Article 13 of the Convention, that the civil proceedings could not be considered an effective remedy in their attempt to obtain damages from the State. The Court, being master of the characterisation to be given in law to the facts of the case, considers that the complaint concerns the applicants’ right of access to a court, as guaranteed under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. The relevant part of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention reads as follows:
“In the determination of his civil rights and obligations ... everyone is entitled to a fair ... hearing ... by [a] ... tribunal ...”
The applicants argued that the ineffectiveness of the civil proceedings had been due to the fact that their claim for damages had been dismissed on the ground that they had not proved that their relative had been killed by members of the Croatian army or that his death had not been “war-related”.
The Government argued that the applicants had been able to bring their civil claim at several judicial instances before a regular civil court, where their claim had been decided on the merits.
Article 6 § 1 secures to everyone the right to have any claim relating to his civil rights and obligations brought before a court or tribunal. That provision embodies the “right to a court”, of which one aspect is the right of access – that is to say, the right to institute proceedings before a court in civil matters. The “right to a court” is not absolute. By its very nature it calls for regulation by the State. Contracting States enjoy a certain degree of discretion in that respect but the ultimate decision as to the observance of the Convention’s requirements rests with the Court (see Golder v. the United Kingdom, 21 January 1975, §§ 34 in fine and 35-36, Series A no. 18, and Z and Others v. the United Kingdom [GC], no. 29392/95, §§ 9193, ECHR 2001-V).
Furthermore, it is in the first place for the national authorities, and notably the courts, to interpret domestic law. The Court’s role is limited to that of verifying compatibility with the Convention of the effects of such interpretation. Furthermore, the Court must make its assessment in each case in the light of the particular features of the proceedings in question and by reference to the object and purpose of Article 6 § 1 (see, mutatis mutandis, Miragall Escolano and Others v. Spain, nos. 38366/97, 38688/97, 40777/98, 40843/98, 41015/98, 41400/98, 41446/98, 41484/98, 41487/98 and 41509/98, § 36, ECHR 2000 I).
Croatian law undoubtedly afforded the applicants the possibility of bringing judicial proceedings. They availed themselves of that possibility by bringing a civil action against the State in the Knin Municipal Court (see paragraph 26 above), seeking compensation for the damage they had allegedly sustained on account of the death of J.T. After their claim was dismissed by the first-instance court, they appealed to the Šibenik County Court, and subsequently to the Supreme Court.
The national courts examined the applicants’ claim on the merits and found that the circumstances of the death of their relative remained unknown. They concluded that the applicants had failed to prove that J.T.’s death had been the “result of an act of terror or violence aimed at gravely disturbing public order”, as required under the 2003 Liability Act (see paragraph 30 above). On those grounds the applicants’ claim was dismissed.
It appears that the applicants are essentially dissatisfied with the outcome of the case and the burden of proof placed on them.
However, under Article 19 of the Convention, the duty of the Court is to ensure the observance of the engagements undertaken by the Contracting Parties to the Convention. In particular, it is not its function to deal with errors of fact or law allegedly committed by a national court unless and in so far as they may have infringed rights and freedoms protected by the Convention (see, inter alia, Tamminen v. Finland, no. 40847/98, § 38, 15 June 2004).
Therefore, the Court will not in principle intervene unless decisions reached by domestic courts appear arbitrary or manifestly unreasonable, and provided that the proceedings as a whole were fair, as required by Article 6 § 1 (see Khamidov v. Russia, no. 72118/01, § 170, 15 November 2007, and Anđelković v. Serbia, no. 1401/08, § 24, 9 April 2013).
In the Court’s view, it is a normal feature of civil proceedings that the plaintiff must prove his or her claim. Since the national courts found that the applicants had not satisfied the burden of proof, their conclusions when dismissing the applicants’ claim do not appear arbitrary or manifestly unreasonable.
It follows that this complaint is manifestly ill-founded and must be rejected, in accordance with Article 35 §§ 3 (a) and 4 of the Convention.