The case originated in an application (no. 56716/09) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Finnish national, Ms Anu Orvokki Harju (“the applicant”), on 21 October 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr Markku Fredman, a lawyer practising in . The Finnish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Arto Kosonen of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that her right to respect for home under Article 8 of the Convention had been violated and that she had had no access to a court or an effective remedy in this respect under Articles 6 and 13 of the Convention.
On 12 January 2010 the President of the Fourth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1967 and lives in .
The applicant was under suspicion of having organised illegal immigration (laittoman maahanmuuton järjestäminen, ordnande av olaglig inresa). The pre-trial investigation in her case was conducted by the criminal investigators of the Finnish Border Guard (Rajavartiolaitos, Gränsbevakningsväsendet) who, inter alia, conducted a search at her domicile on 9 July 2009 at 10 p.m. The applicant was not at home at the time of the search. She was not contacted about the search nor was her counsel informed about the search. During the search her computer, among other items, was seized.
When the applicant returned home later that night, she found a handwritten note indicating that the Finnish Border Guard criminal investigators had searched her apartment and that some items had been seized.
According to the records of the search and seizure, dated 11 July 2009, the seized materials, with the exception of the computer, were returned to the applicant on that same date.
The applicant was later questioned as a suspect.
According to Article 10 of the Finnish Constitution (perustuslaki, grundlagen, Act no. 731/1999), the sanctity of everyone's home is guaranteed. Measures derogating from this right, and which are necessary for the purpose of guaranteeing basic rights and liberties or for the investigation of crime, must be laid down by an Act.
According to section 41, subsection 1, of the Border Guard Act (rajavartiolaki, gränsbevakningslagen; Act no. 578/2005), the Border Guard is a pre-trial investigation authority under the Pre-Trial Investigation Act. According to subsection 2, with the exception of undercover activities, undercover transactions, telecommunications interception and telecommunications monitoring, the provisions of the Police Act, the Pre-Trial Investigation Act, the Coercive Measures Act or any other Act on the powers of police officers to prevent and investigate offences and to bring charges apply to border guards within their competence to prevent and investigate offences and to bring charges.
Under section 42, of the Border Guard Act, facilitation of illegal entry within the meaning of Chapter 17, section 8, subsection 1, of the Penal Code (rikoslaki, strafflagen, Act no. 563/1998 as modified by Act no. 650/2004) is among the offences that may be investigated by the Border Guard.
Chapter 5, section 1, subsection 1, of the Coercive Measures Act (pakkokeinolaki, tvångsmedelslagen, Act no. 646/2003) provides that a search may be conducted, inter alia, if there is reason to suspect that an offence has been committed and provided the maximum sentence applicable exceeds six months' imprisonment.
According to Chapter 5, Section 3, of the Coercive Measures Act, an official with the power of arrest shall decide on a search of premises. However, a police officer may carry out a search of premises without a warrant when the purpose of the search is to locate a person to be apprehended, arrested, detained, brought to court or subjected to a bodily search, or to seize an object, when continuously followed or monitored since the commission of the offence. A police officer may carry out a search of the premises also in other urgent cases.
The person whose domicile is being searched, or in his or her absence someone else, must be given the opportunity to be present at the search and to call a witness, unless this causes delay. If none of the above-mentioned persons was present at the search, the person whose domicile has been searched must be immediately informed (Chapter 5, section 4, subsection 2).
A search at domicile cannot be conducted between 9 p.m. and 6 a.m. unless there are special reasons (Chapter 5, section 5, subsection 4).
According to Chapter 17, section 8, subsection 1, of the Penal Code, a person can be sentenced for organising illegal immigration to a fine or imprisonment for a maximum of two years.
Chapter 4, section 13, of the Coercive Measures Act provides that, at the request of a person whom the case concerns, the court shall decide whether the seizure of any materials shall remain in force. A request which has been submitted to the court before its examination of the charges shall be considered within a week of its reception by the court. The court shall provide those with an interest in the matter an opportunity to be heard, but the absence of any such person shall not preclude a decision on the issue. A decision reviewing a seizure is subject to a separate appeal (Chapter 4, section 16, subsection 1).
According to section 118, subsection 3, of the Constitution everyone who has suffered a violation of his or her rights or sustained loss through an unlawful act or omission by a civil servant or other person performing a public function shall have the right to request that the civil servant or other person in charge of the public function be sentenced to a punishment and that the public organisation, official or other person in charge of a public function be held liable for damages, as provided in more detail by an Act.
Chapter 40, section 9, subsection 1, of the Penal Code (as modified by Act no. 604/2002) provides that if a public official, when acting in office, intentionally in a manner other than that provided above in this Chapter violates or neglects to fulfil his official duty based on the provisions or regulations to be followed in official functions, and the act, when assessed as a whole, taking into consideration its detrimental and harmful effect and the other circumstances connected with the act, is not a petty offence, he shall be sentenced for violation of official duties to a fine or to imprisonment for a maximum of one year.
Chapter 40, section 10, of the Penal Code (as modified by Act no. 604/2002) provides that if a public official, when acting in office, through carelessness or lack of caution, in a manner other than that referred to in section 5, subsection 2, violates or neglects to fulfil his or her official duty based on the provisions or regulations to be followed in official functions, and the act, when assessed as a whole, taking into consideration its detrimental and harmful effect and the other circumstances connected with the act, is not a petty offence, he shall be sentenced for negligent violation of official duties to a warning or to a fine.
According to Chapter 1, section 14, of the Criminal Procedure Act (laki oikeudenkäynnistä rikosasioissa, lagen om rättegång i brottmål, as modified by Act no. 647/2003), an injured party may bring a private prosecution only if the public prosecutor has decided not to press charges.
Under Chapters 3 and 4 of the Tort Liability Act (vahingonkorvauslaki, skadeståndslagen, Act no. 412/1974) proceedings may be brought against the State in respect of damage resulting from fault or neglect by its employees in the performance of their duties.