The case originated in two applications (nos. 44309/06 and 39973/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Russian nationals, Ms Olga Vitalyevna Kustova and Mr Aleksandr Andreyevich Bibanin (“the applicants”), on 5 October 2006 and 17 June 2008 respectively.
The first applicant was represented by Ms N. Shcherbatyuk, a lawyer practising in Krasnoyarsk. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that they had not been properly notified of court hearings in administrative-offence cases against them.
On 19 September 2016 notice of the complaints under Article 6 of the Convention was given to the Government and the remainder of the applications was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born on 6 August 1979 and lives in Krasnoyarsk.
On 22 January 2006 the police stopped the applicant’s car and she tested positive for alcohol. A police officer compiled an administrativeoffence record, mentioning the applicant’s home address (her registered residence address) and indicating that the case would be examined by a justice of the peace of the Leninskiy District Court on 10 February 2006.
It appears that on an unspecified date a summons for a hearing on 10 February 2006 before the Sovetskiy District Court was sent to the applicant’s registered address (the address that was also indicated on the offence record) (see also the findings in paragraph 12 below).
On 10 February 2006 the applicant sought an adjournment, but the Leninskiy District Court informed her that they had no administrativeoffence case pending in respect of her. It then emerged that on the same day a justice of the peace of the Sovetskiy District Court had examined the case and suspended the applicant’s driving licence for eighteen months.
The judgment of 10 February 2006 reads as follows:
“[The defendant] did not appear at the trial hearing, having been promptly and properly notified of the time and place of this hearing, as confirmed by her signature on the administrative-offence record; she has not informed this court of the reasons for her absence.”
On 18 February 2006 the applicant received a letter (apparently at her registered address) enclosing a copy of the judgment. The applicant appealed, indicating her registered address for the purpose of correspondence in the case. The applicant argued that the offence record referred to a different court rather than the court that had actually examined the charge against her. Thus, she had not been properly summoned and had been deprived of any opportunity to attend the trial hearing or lodge an application for an adjournment on the grounds of illness at the relevant time.
On 11 April 2006 the Sovetskiy District Court of Krasnoyarsk upheld the judgment of the justice of the peace. The appeal court stated as follows:
“[The defendant] did not appear before the appeal court, having been properly notified, by registered mail, of the time and place of the appeal hearing ...
The case file contains [evidence of] the defendant having been properly notified of the time and place of the trial hearing; however, she did not attend it.”
It appears that the appeal decision was then sent to the applicant’s registered address. Having received it, the applicant applied for supervisory review. By a letter of 3 July 2006 the Krasnoyarsk Regional Court dismissed that application. It stated as follows:
“The case file contains court summonses regarding the hearing on 10 February 2006 and the [appeal] hearing that were sent to your [the defendant’s] residential address well in advance (pages 7-10 [and] 21-24 of the case file) ... The postal notifications that were returned to the court bear notes stating that the summonses were not handed over to you because you did not reside at that address. In those circumstances, the court rightly decided to examine the case despite your absence from the hearing.”
The applicant was born on 28 February 1959 and lives in Divnomorskoye.
On 24 January 2008, in administrative-offence proceedings, a justice of the peace heard the applicant, convicted him of a traffic offence under Article 12.15 of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”) and banned him from driving for four months. The justice of the peace held as follows:
“... Driving down the opposite side of the road against traffic amounts to an offence under Article 12.15 § 4 of the CAO. This is confirmed by the offence record, written statements from traffic police officers, the diagram of the traffic offence and the casefile material taken as a whole.”
The applicant instructed a lawyer, who lodged a statement of appeal with the Gelendzhik Town Court.
On 5 February 2008 the justice of the peace who had convicted the applicant forwarded the applicant’s appeal and the case file to the Gelendzhik Town Court. A cover letter attached to this correspondence bore a handwritten note containing the following instruction (apparently from a judge of that court to a court clerk) “Bibanin to be summoned for a hearing at 3 p.m. on 15 February 2008”.
On 15 February 2008 the Gelenzhik Town Court upheld the judgment in a summary manner. The appeal court did not hear any testimonies, and no party attended the appeal hearing.
The applicant received a copy of the appeal decision on an unspecified date. He then sought review of the lower courts’ judgments before the Krasnodar Regional Court.
The applicant also complained that he had not been properly notified of the appeal hearing. On 11 April 2008 the President of the Gelendzhik Town Court acknowledged that the case file contained no evidence showing that the applicant had been duly summoned, and that for this reason a court clerk had been issued with a reprimand.
The prosecutor’s office of the Krasnodar Region also lodged an appeal, indicating that the applicant’s guilt had not been properly established on the strength of incriminating evidence. In particular, in view of the nature of the offence and the facts held against the defendant, it would have been appropriate to interview the driver whose vehicle the applicant’s vehicle had overtaken. The diagram of the traffic offence was inadmissible evidence because, inter alia, it did not indicate essential elements such as road signs and had not been signed by the defendant or attesting witnesses.
On 25 April 2008 the Krasnodar Regional Court examined the appeals and upheld the judgment of 24 January 2008.
On 11 July 2008 the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation dismissed a further application for review by the applicant.