The case originated in an application (no. 8211/10) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Mr Mehmet Canlı (“the applicant”), on 28 December 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr İ. Akmeşe, a lawyer practising in Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged , in particular, that he had not had a fair trial on account of the absence of a lawyer when making statements to the police and the subsequent use by the trial court of those statements to convict him.
On 12 October 2015 notice of the above complaints were given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The applicant was born in 1961 and lives in Istanbul.
On 5 August 2004 D.T. was arrested and interviewed as a suspect. D.T. stated, inter alia, that on 5 or 6 July 2004 he had been sent to Istanbul to carry out acts of terrorism in line with his training by the PKK and its instructions to him. Ten or fifteen days following his arrival in Istanbul he had sent the applicant to the countryside as a courier. The applicant had gone back and forth to the countryside in July 2004, during which time he had communicated with D.T. through his mobile number, which had been saved as “Memiş” in his mobile telephone. The applicant had brought back eight electric detonators and a written note which had contained the terrorist organisation’s command to carry out an act between 14 July and 15 August 2004 at a military or police facility or a touristic site. He further stated that he had handed the electric detonators to another individual, Ş.K.
At 8.40 a.m. on 6 August 2004 the applicant was arrested in Antalya on suspicion of membership of an illegal organisation, namely the PKK, following statements given by another co-accused, D.T. Subsequently, at 9.20 a.m. the applicant was examined at the Antalya Forensic Medicine Institute by a doctor, who concluded that there were no signs of ill-treatment on the applicant’s body.
On the same day the applicant was taken for questioning to the antiterrorism branch of the Istanbul Security Directorate and at 7.30 p.m. he was examined at the head office of the Forensic Medicine Institute in Istanbul by a doctor, who concluded that there were no signs of ill-treatment on the applicant’s body.
On 7 August 2004 the applicant’s statements to the police were transcribed on printed forms, the first page of which was filled in to indicate, inter alia, that the applicant was suspected of aiding and abetting and acting as a “courier” to the members of the illegal organisation. The same page also included a printed message, which stated, inter alia, that the person being questioned had the right to remain silent and the right to have a lawyer present during questioning. It appears from the form that the applicant refused legal assistance, since the first page of the record included a printed phrase stating “No lawyer sought” and a box next to it that was marked with a printed “X”. Moreover, according to the record, he also stated that he did not want a lawyer and waived his right to silence. In his statement, which was three pages long, the applicant stated that D.T. had asked him to collect things from a certain Murat in his village. Murat, accompanied by three PKK members, had threatened him with a gun so the applicant had felt obliged to carry 300 million Turkish liras (TRY) to D.T. in Istanbul. When the applicant had arrived at Elazığ bus station, another person unknown to him had handed him a packet of cigarettes after having confirmed his name and surname. When the applicant had arrived in Istanbul, D.T. had called him. The applicant had met D.T. at a bus stop, where he had handed D.T. the money and the packet of cigarettes. The applicant alleged that he had not known what had been inside the cigarette packet. Towards the end of his statements, the applicant also stated that he had told Murat that D.T., who had sent him to the countryside as a courier, had been harassing him by telephone in Istanbul.
On 9 August 2004 the applicant had another medical examination at the Beşiktaş branch of the Forensic Medicine Institute in Istanbul at 9.40 a.m. The doctor who examined the applicant noted that there were no new signs of ill-treatment on his body. The applicant told the doctor that he had been subjected to psychological pressure, but not to physical violence.
On 9 August 2004 the applicant was brought before the public prosecutor. He gave statements in the presence of his lawyer. The applicant partially accepted his police statements, stating, however, that they had included the notion that D.T. had sent him to the countryside as a courier, which was incorrect. His statements to the public prosecutor were essentially the same as his police statements. The applicant’s lawyer submitted that the mens rea elements of the offence had been missing as the applicant had simply carried out a request from his friend. In any event, the applicant had acted under threats from armed men.
On the same day the applicant was brought before the investigating judge, where he gave statements in the presence of his lawyer. The applicant essentially repeated his statements that he had given before the public prosecutor. When asked whether he accepted his statements made to the public prosecutor and the police, the applicant confirmed that he did, while mentioning once again that he had not stated to the police that D.T. had sent him to the countryside as a courier. At the end of the hearing, the investigating judge ordered the applicant’s pre-trial detention.
On 1 September 2004 the public prosecutor prepared a bill of indictment, charging the applicant with aiding and abetting the PKK and providing explosives to that organization, under Articles 169 and 264 § 2 of the now defunct Criminal Code, Law no. 765.
On 2 December 2004 the Istanbul Assize Court held its first hearing, where the applicant gave evidence in the presence of his lawyer. The applicant essentially reiterated the content of his previous statements and submitted that he had absolutely not aided and abetted any illegal organisations knowingly and intentionally. The applicant further maintained that his sister had also witnessed three armed men threatening him. When asked whether he confirmed his statements to the public prosecutor and the investigating judge, the applicant stated that they had been accurate. When asked whether he confirmed his statements to the police, the applicant stated that they had been generally accurate although some parts had been written against his will. The applicant’s lawyer stated that he had nothing to add to the applicant’s submissions.
At a hearing held on 31 March 2005 the trial court heard evidence from the applicant’s sister in her capacity as a witness. She stated, among other things, that the applicant had been threatened by three armed men. At the end of the hearing, the trial court ordered the applicant’s release.
On 15 October 2009 the Istanbul Assize Court convicted the applicant as charged and sentenced him to three years and nine months’ imprisonment for aiding and abetting the PKK and to two years and six months’ imprisonment for possession of explosives. The applicant was also ordered to pay a fine of TRY 366 for providing explosives to the PKK. The Istanbul Assize Court referred to the statements made by D.T. to the police and part of the statements the applicant had made to the police when convicting him. The trial court held that, according to the detailed statements D.T. had given to the police, on 5 or 6 July 2004 – that is to say ten to fifteen days after his arrival in Istanbul – D.T. had contacted the applicant and sent him as a courier to the organisation member with the code name “Murat”, who had been in the countryside at that time. The applicant had gone to the countryside and after that D.T. had met him to get the letter from “Murat” and eight electric detonators, following which he had handed over the detonators to another co-accused, Ş.T. After pointing out that D.T. had confirmed this part of his statements throughout the proceedings, the trial court stated that the applicant’s mobile number had been saved as “Memiş” in the mobile telephone found on D.T and furthermore noted that electric detonators had been found in Ş.T.’s office.
Then, it went on to assess the content of the applicant’s police statements. It held that the applicant had stated that he had known D.T. for the last seven or eight years, that he had not seen him between 1998 and 2007, but that D.T. had come to his house one day and when he had learnt that the applicant would go to his home town. D.T. had told him that Murat would come and visit him. The applicant further stated that Murat had come to his village in a guerrilla uniform and had given him TRY 300 million in the name of D.T. and that another person, unknown to him, had given him a packet of cigarettes and told him to hand it over to the person who had sent him here and that he had given them to D.T. on arrival in Istanbul. The trial court also noted that before the public prosecutor, the applicant partially accepted his police statements while denying that D.T. had sent him to the countryside as a courier, stating that a person had given him the abovementioned items when he had been in his village so that he could give them to D.T. According to the court records, the applicant made similar statements in the rest of the criminal proceedings.
In the light of the statements made by D.T. throughout the proceedings, the police statements of the applicant which corroborated them and his other statements concerning this incident, the police reports establishing the ownership of the mobile-telephone numbers and the content of the case file as a whole, the trial court found it established that the applicant had acted as a courier between D.T. and Murat, carrying explosives, written orders and money.
On 22 December 2009 the applicant lodged an appeal against the trial court’s judgment, arguing, among other things, that his police statements had been taken without a lawyer present and that his conviction had been based “entirely” on the statements which he had made to the police officers.
On 15 June 2011 the Court of Cassation upheld the applicant’s conviction for aiding and abetting the PKK under Article 169 but quashed the conviction for providing explosives to the PKK under Article 264 § 2. The case was remitted to the Istanbul Assize Court in respect of the charge of providing explosives.
Following remittal, on 31 January 2012 the Istanbul Assize Court held that there was no separate issue to examine concerning whether the applicant had provided explosives or not because it was a means to aid and abet the terrorist organisation, for which the applicant had already been convicted. Ultimately, the applicant was convicted only of aiding and abetting the PKK and sentenced to three years and nine months’ imprisonment.
This judgment became final in the absence of an appeal either by the applicant or the public prosecutor.
The relevant domestic law in force at the material time, as well as case-law of the Constitutional Court on the issue of waiver of the right to a lawyer, may be found in Ruşen Bayar v. Turkey, (no. 25253/08, §§ 416, 19 February 2019).