The case concerns the ban of a demonstration the applicant intended to hold. The ensuing court scrutiny removed the legal basis of the ban, but only at a time when the reason for the demonstration had already become obsolete.
The applicant was born in 1979 and lives in Budapest. He was represented by Mr D.A. Karsai, a lawyer practising in Budapest.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr Z. Tallódi, Ministry of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 11 March 2013 Parliament adopted the Fourth Amendment to the Basic Law. The Amendment pertains to numerous, often controversial, issues of fundamental rights.
Under the law, the President of Hungary then had five days to assent to the Amendment.
The applicant and other individuals intended to hold a demonstration in front of the President’s residence, calling on him not to assent to the Amendment but to refer it to the Constitutional Court. The applicant informed the Budapest Police Department of his intention, in the form of a notification, on 11 March 2013.
The same evening, the Police Department dismissed the applicant’s notification without examining it on the merits. It pointed out that the AntiTerror Centre had closed down the area in question from 8 to 16 March 2013, for which reason it was no longer a public area available for demonstrations during that period.
On 13 March 2013 the President announced that he was to assent to the Amendment.
On 14 March 2013 the applicant challenged the Police Department’s decision in court.
On 18 March 2013 the Budapest Administrative and Labour Court quashed the Police Department’s decision. It held that the Police Department had failed to provide in its decision the precise reasons why the Anti-Terror Centre had closed down the area in question, and that it had erroneously characterised the applicant’s intended demonstration as one outside the scope of the law on peaceful demonstrations.
The applicant submitted that he had subsequently filed an official liability action against the Budapest Police Department. The Government submitted that on 8 April 2013 the applicant had brought a claim for damages against the Police Department, and that the claim had subsequently been dismissed on 14 May 2013.