The case originated in eleven applications (nos. 66650/13, 24749/16, 43327/16, 62775/16, 68722/16, 76071/16, 8051/17, 8702/17, 12870/17, 21246/17 and 37696/17) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by eleven Azerbaijani nationals (“the applicants”), on various dates (see Appendix).
The applicants were represented by various lawyers practising in Azerbaijan (see Appendix). The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Asgarov.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that their right to leave the country had been violated by travel bans imposed on them by the domestic authorities.
On 11 September 2017 the Government were given notice of the complaints concerning Article 2 of Protocol No. 4 to the Convention in respect of all the applications, Article 13 of the Convention in respect of all the applications, except application no. 24749/16, and Article 8 in respect of application no. 76071/16. The remainder of applications nos. 68722/16 and 37696/17 was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. Third-party observations were received from the Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights, a non-governmental organisation, following the granting of leave to intervene as a third party in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The applicants’ dates of birth and places of residence are listed in the Appendix.
On different dates between 2012 and 2016 (see Appendix) the applicants learned that their right to leave the country had been restricted and that they were no longer allowed to leave Azerbaijan.
It appears from the documents in the case files that in all the cases the restriction in question was imposed by the investigating authorities, in the absence of any judicial decision, within the framework of various criminal proceedings in which the applicants were not convicted, accused or suspected persons, but were only questioned as witnesses.
The travel bans imposed in respect of the applicants in applications nos. 62775/16 and 43327/16 were lifted by the investigating authorities on 29 January and 21 April 2016 respectively.
On various dates the applicants brought an action claiming that the restriction imposed on them was unlawful, either by lodging a complaint with the administrative courts or applying to the ordinary courts for a review of the lawfulness of procedural actions or decisions by the prosecuting authorities under the Code of Criminal Procedure (hereinafter “judicial review”). Some of the applicants used both of the above-mentioned remedies.
The applicants claimed, in particular, that the domestic law did not provide for the imposition of travel bans on witnesses in criminal proceedings and that the restriction on their right to leave the country was not justified.
In the domestic proceedings relating to all the applications, except application no. 66650/13, the domestic courts refused to examine the applicants’ complaint on the merits. Final decisions were adopted on various dates, by the Supreme Court in the administrative proceedings and the Baku Court of Appeal in the proceedings for judicial review (see Appendix). In their decisions, both the administrative and ordinary courts declared that they did not have competence to examine a complaint relating to the lawfulness of travel bans imposed by the investigating authorities.
As regards the applicant in application no. 66650/13, by a decision dated 1 April 2013, a judge at the Sabail District Court dismissed his complaint after examining it on the merits. The relevant part of the decision reads as follows:
“Having assessed all the examined evidence, I conclude that the actions of the Prosecutor General’s Office of the Republic of Azerbaijan restricting the right of Mursaliyev Azad Oktay oglu to leave the country are lawful, that the procedure for judicial review as defined in the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Republic of Azerbaijan does not provide for a [decision] on the payment of pecuniary or non-pecuniary damages, [and] that, for these reasons, the complaint should not be allowed.”
On 5 April 2013 the applicant in application no. 66650/13 appealed against that decision, reiterating that there was no legal basis for restricting his right to leave the country under domestic law.
On 12 April 2013 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal, finding the first-instance court’s decision justified. The appellate court repeated the reasoning provided by the first-instance court and made no mention of the complaint concerning the legal basis for the imposition of the travel ban.
Article 28 § III of the Constitution provides:
“Everyone lawfully within the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall freely move, choose his residence and leave the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan.”
In accordance with Article 1 of the Passports Act, as in force until 17 October 2014, the right of a person to leave the country could be temporarily restricted within criminal proceedings only if he was a suspected or accused person, was convicted, or was subject to compulsory medical measures.
The relevant part of Article 9 of the Migration Code, which entered into force on 1 August 2013, provides as follows:
“9.1. A citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan (hereinafter referred to as “the citizen”) has the right to leave and enter the country freely, by crossing the border checkpoints of the country.
2. The citizen shall not be deprived of his right to leave and enter the country.
3. The right of the citizen to leave the country may be temporarily restricted only in the following cases:
3.1. If [the citizen is] arrested in accordance with the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Republic of Azerbaijan or if a preventive measure is taken in respect of him ...;
3.2. If [the citizen is] convicted ...;
3.3. If [the citizen is] subject to compulsory medical measures in accordance with the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Republic of Azerbaijan ...;
3.4. If [the citizen is] conditionally sentenced with the imposition of obligations provided for by the Criminal Code of the Republic of Azerbaijan or conditionally released from serving his sentence early ...”
Article 449 of the CCrP provides for the lodging of a judicial complaint against procedural measures or decisions taken by a prosecuting authority. It provides, in the relevant part, as follows:
“449.2.  The following persons shall have the right to lodge a complaint against procedural steps or decisions taken by a prosecuting authority:
2.1.  the accused (suspected) person and his defence counsel;
2.2.  the victim and his legal representative;
2.3.  other persons whose rights and freedoms are violated as a result of the procedural decision or measure.
3.  The persons referred to in Article 449.2 ... shall have the right to lodge a complaint with a court concerning the procedural steps or decisions taken by the prosecuting authority in connection with the following matters:
3.1  a refusal to accept an application concerning a criminal offence;
3.2.  arrest and pre-trial detention;
3.3.  a violation of the rights of an arrested or detained person, or a person placed under house arrest;
3.3-1.  the transfer of a detained person from a pre-trial detention facility to a temporary detention facility;
3.4.  torture or other cruel treatment of a detained person;
3.5.  a refusal to institute criminal proceedings, or suspension or discontinuation of criminal proceedings;
3.6.  the compulsory conduct of an investigative step, the application of a coercive procedural measure or the conduct of a search operation measure without a court decision;
3.7.  the removal of defence counsel of the accused (or suspected) person from the criminal proceedings ...”
Article 2 of the CAP sets out the procedural rules relating to administrative law disputes, including those concerning the decisions, actions or inactions of administrative bodies affecting individuals’ rights and liberties. Under the CAP, an action may be lodged to dispute the lawfulness of an administrative decision (Article 32), request the court to require an administrative body to adopt an administrative decision (Article 33), or request the court to require an administrative body to take action other than the adoption of an administrative decision or refrain from taking certain action (Article 34).