The case originated in an application (no. 72916/10) against Georgia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Georgian national, Ms Manana Gelenidze (“the applicant”), on 5 November 2010.
The applicant was represented by Ms R. Gabodze, a lawyer practising in Tbilisi. The Georgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr B. Dzamashvili of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged in particular that the legal requalification by an appeal court of her acts under the Criminal Code after the decriminalisation of the initial offence of which she had been convicted had breached her rights under Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (a) and (b) and Article 7 of the Convention.
On 14 March 2016 the Government were given notice of the above complaints under Article 6 §§ 1 and 3 (a) and (b) and Article 7 of the Convention, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1962 and lives in Tbilisi. At the material time she was a judge at the Tskaltubo District Court.
On 27 June 2005 a preliminary investigation was initiated under Article 336 § 1 of the Criminal Code of Georgia into circumstances whereby the applicant had allegedly delivered an unlawful court decision in her capacity as a judge. According to official charges brought against her by the Chief Prosecutor of Georgia on 26 October 2005, the applicant had delivered a judgment miscalculating the prison term of a person whom she had convicted. Thus, he had been sentenced to one year and ten days in prison, but he had left prison fifteen days before he should have done. The applicant fled Georgia and took refuge in Kazakhstan.
On 8 August 2006 the Tskaltubo District Court convicted the applicant of the offence under Article 336 § 1 of the Criminal Code (Delivery of an unlawful judgment or other court decision) in absentia. She was sentenced to two years’ imprisonment. The first instance court concluded that she had deliberately miscalculated the start date of the prison term of the person concerned, which had led to his early release from prison. The reasoning of the first instance court was reviewed and fully upheld by the Kutaisi Court of Appeal on 30 November 2006. On 11 July 2007 the Supreme Court of Georgia rejected an appeal on points of law by the applicant as inadmissible. At the same time it was noted in the inadmissibility decision that, when arrested, the applicant could file an appeal against her conviction.
In the meantime, on 4 July 2007 the Parliament of Georgia annulled Article 336 § 1 of the Criminal Code (see the relevant explanatory note in paragraph 18 below).
On 27 July 2009 the applicant was arrested upon her arrival at the Tbilisi International Airport. Following her arrest she appealed, requesting the quashing of her conviction in view of the fact that the offence of which she had been convicted had been decriminalised.
The appeal proceedings started on 8 October 2009 at the Kutaisi Court of Appeal. The proceedings were adjourned three times at the prosecutor’s request. Eventually, at the hearing on 30 October 2009 the prosecutor asked the Kutaisi Court of Appeal to requalify the applicant’s offence as abuse of office, an offence under Article 332 of the Criminal Code. The prosecutor submitted that although Article 336 had been decriminalised, the act of delivering an unlawful court decision had not lost its criminal nature and was detrimental to public interests. The prosecutor emphasised that the two offences at issue had key elements in common, such as abuse of power by a public official and damage caused as a result. Thus, the act falling under the scope of the former Article 336 § 1 had constituted a lex specialis to the offence under Article 332 § 1, and therefore had not been decriminalised as such.
In reply, the applicant claimed that the prosecution’s application was unlawful, as the proposed requalification of her acts amounted to new charges and went beyond the scope of the case presented before the Kutaisi Court of Appeal. She emphasised that such a course of action had no basis in law, particularly because the appeal proceedings had been triggered by her own appeal and not that of the prosecution. She further reiterated that the proceedings against her ought to have been discontinued, in view of the decriminalisation of Article 336 of the Criminal Code and having regard to the requirements of Article 28 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 20 below).
On the same date, while rejecting the applicant’s appeal, the Kutaisi Court of Appeal amended her conviction, finding her guilty of abuse of office, an offence under Article 332 § 1 of the Criminal Code. The appeal court fully accepted the prosecution’s argument that neither the criminal nature of the act previously criminalised under Article 336 of the Criminal Code nor the risk which it posed to society had disappeared as a result of the decriminalisation of the acts the subject to that provision. The relevant paragraphs of the decision read as follows:
“On 4 July 2007 an amendment was introduced into the Criminal Code of Georgia, according to which Article 336 of the ... Code (delivery of an unlawful judgment or other court decision) was repealed. While it is true that the current version of the Criminal Code no longer incorporates the specific elements of the offence provided for in the [above] provision, this does not imply that the criminal nature of the act [as such] or the danger it posed to society has disappeared, since the act provided for in the first paragraph of Article 336 is in fact currently covered by the relevant provisions incorporating public office offences.
In the present case the criminal act committed by the convicted person M. Gelenidze – the delivery of an unlawful judgment or other court decision – qualified under Article 336 § 1 of the Criminal Code, comprises all the features of an offence provided for in Article 332 of the Criminal Code, notably: the abuse of office by a public official, the damage caused, [and] the substantive breach of legal interests of the State. Accordingly, the act [committed] by M. Gelenidze ... corresponds in substance to Article 332 § 1, and thus merits requalification under the first paragraph of Article 332 ... the sentence should remain the same.”
In the resolution part of its decision the Kutaisi Court of Appeal ruled to amend the decision of the Tskaltubo District Court of 8 August 2006, by reformulating the legal qualification of the acts committed by the applicant from Article 336 § 1 of the Criminal Code under Article 332 § 1. It thus convicted the applicant of an offence under Article 332 § 1 of the Criminal Code and sentenced her to two years’ imprisonment.
The applicant filed an appeal on points of law. She claimed that the decision of the Kutaisi Court of Appeal was unlawful: firstly, the court did not have jurisdiction to requalify her offence; secondly, the new legal qualification of her acts had been proposed by the prosecutor at the final stage of the proceedings, and she had been deprived of the opportunity to defend herself vis-à-vis the new charges; and lastly, the de facto outcome of the second set of proceedings had been her conviction for acts which had in the meantime been decriminalised.
By a decision of 7 May 2010 the Supreme Court of Georgia rejected the applicant’s appeal on points of law as inadmissible.
For a summary of the relevant international texts and documents on the principle of lex mitior see the case of Scoppola v. Italy (no. 2) ([GC], no. 10249/03, §§ 35-41, 17 September 2009).
The relevant provisions of the Criminal Code of Georgia, as in force at the time of the applicant’s conviction in absentia on 8 August 2006 read as follows:
“1. A criminal law that decriminalises an act or reduces a sentence shall have retroactive application. A criminal law that criminalises an act or introduces a heavier sentence, shall not have retroactive application.
...”
“1. Abuse of office by an official or person of equivalent status, to the detriment of public interests and in order to gain any personal benefit or privilege, or any benefit or privilege for another person, which has substantially affected the rights of a natural or legal person, or the legal interests of society or the State, shall be punishable by a fine or a term of up to three years’ imprisonment, and a bar on holding public office or engaging in professional activities for a period of up to three years.
...”
“1. Delivery of an unlawful judgment or other court decision shall be punishable by a fine or prison term of four to six years, and a bar on holding public office or engaging in professional activities for a period of up to three years.
...”
On 8 June 2007 the legal committee of the Parliament of Georgia initiated a draft law proposing to decriminalise Article 336 of the Criminal Code. According to the explanatory note of the draft law, the purpose of the decriminalisation was to reinforce the principle of judicial independence. The note provided for the rationale of the proposed amendment in the following terms:
“The draft law envisages the decriminalisation of an offence provided for by the Criminal Code of Georgia. In particular, Article 336, which criminalises the delivery of an unlawful judgment or other court decision, shall be removed from the Code. We consider that the examination of the lawfulness of a judgment or another court decision is the prerogative of a higher judicial court, and should not serve as a basis for initiating criminal proceedings against a judge. The adoption of the current draft law shall contribute to the strengthening of judicial independence.”
The Parliament of Georgia adopted the above amendment on 4 July 2007, with immediate effect.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure of Georgia (“the CCP”), as in force at the material time, read as follows:
“...
...When amending charges in court, the prosecutor is obliged to submit a new formulation of charges in written form.”
“1. [A] criminal prosecution shall not commence, or [an] already initiated prosecution and preliminary investigation shall be discontinued:
(a) if the act is not provided for by criminal law;
(b) if the act is not wrongful;
(c) if a new law decriminalises the act;
...
If the circumstances provided for in points (a) and (b) of the first paragraph of this Article are revealed at the stage when a court is examining a case, the court shall conclude the examination of the case and deliver an acquittal.
...
In the circumstances provided for in point (c) ... of the first paragraph of this Article, the criminal prosecution and/or pre-trial investigation shall not be discontinued if the accused is against it. In such a case, the criminal prosecution and/or pre-trial investigation shall continue in a standard way and will end with either an acquittal or a conviction, and the convicted person shall be released from serving a sentence.”
“1. When modifying or supplementing charges brought at the pre-trial investigation stage, a prosecutor, or an investigator with the consent of a prosecutor, is authorised to bring a new charge against a person in accordance with the rules provided for in ... the current Code. ... When there is a need to modify or supplement charges brought at the pre-trial investigation [stage], the prosecutor shall include the new charge directly in the bill of indictment, in accordance with the rule provided for in Article 415 of the current Code.
...”
“The examination of a case in a court shall only be conducted within the scope of the charges brought against the accused, unless a prosecutor has amended a charge in favour of the accused.”
“...
During their oral submissions, parties have a right to express their position regarding the guilt or innocence of the defendant, the qualification of an action, the [relevant] sanction, or any other issue that is to be decided by a judgment.”
Article 540 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, as in force at the material time, provided for a prohibition of any change to an appellant’s circumstances for the worse (reformation in peius) in the following terms:
“1. An appeal court may not deliver a judgment of conviction instead of a judgment of acquittal, apply a stricter provision of the Criminal Code, impose a heavier sentence, increase the value of a civil claim, or take any other decision that is more unfavourable to the convicted person, if a review of the case is carried out based on an appeal lodged by the convicted person ... and in the absence of an appeal lodged by a prosecutor, a victim, or any other person representing the prosecution.”
...An appeal court may not to go beyond the scope of the charges brought against the defendant during the pre-trial investigation and maintained in the first-instance court proceedings.”