The case originated in an application (no. 6857/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Ruslan Aleksandrovich Stadukhin (“the applicant”), on 29 June 2001.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged that he had not been apprised of an appeal hearing in criminal proceedings against him.
By a decision of 8 December 2005, the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1970 and lives in the Stavropol Region.
By a judgment of 5 December 2000 following a guilty verdict delivered by a jury, the Stavropol Regional Court convicted the applicant and his codefendant of murder, robbery and the illegal acquisition, storage and carrying of arms. The applicant was sentenced to sixteen years' imprisonment and confiscation of property and ordered to pay pecuniary and non-pecuniary damages to the victim.
The applicant, who was being held in custody, appealed against the judgment to the Supreme Court of Russia. He submitted, inter alia, that the judgment had been based on evidence which had not been thoroughly examined, that the investigating authority had failed to verify his codefendant's statements by way of a scene-of-crime reconstruction, that the court had dismissed his request for examination of additional witnesses, that no psychiatric and psychological examination had been conducted and that he had had no motive to commit the murder and robbery. He requested the appeal court to quash the judgment and order a fresh examination of the case.
On 21 February 2001 the Supreme Court examined the applicant's appeal. It heard a public prosecutor who requested that the judgment should be upheld. The applicant, who had not been apprised of the hearing, was not present. He was not represented by counsel at the hearing.
By a decision of 21 February 2001 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant's appeal and upheld the judgment. It found that the trial court's presiding judge had conducted the trial impartially and ensured that the case had been thoroughly examined. There had been no need for a scene-of-crime reconstruction by the investigating authority, as the evidence collected in the case had been sufficient. The applicant's unsuccessful request for examination of evidence had not concerned evidence which could have had a significant impact on the outcome of the case. The applicant's submission that he had had no motive to commit the murder and robbery could not serve as a ground for quashing a jury-based judgment, and the applicant had been informed of this by the trial court. The applicant's complaint about the authorities' failure to order a psychiatric and psychological examination had not been based on law, as neither the investigating authority nor the trial court had had doubts about the applicant's mental health and no request for such an examination had been made before or during the trial.
Under Article 335 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1960 (“CCP”), in force at the material time, the public prosecutor would give a conclusion at an appeal hearing on whether a judgment was lawful and well-founded. Defence counsel could participate in the hearing. A decision about the defendant's participation in the hearing was taken by the appeal court. A defendant who appeared before the court was always entitled to give explanations.
In Decision no. 27-P of 10 December 1998, the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation declared Article 335 § 2 of the CCP incompatible with the Constitution on the ground that this provision enabled appeal courts to take a final decision where a defendant's request to attend the appeal hearing had been rejected and where a defendant had not been given an opportunity to study the materials of the hearing and communicate in writing his or her opinion on the issues raised before the appeal court.
Article 336 of the CCP provided that persons who had submitted appeals were to be apprised of the appeal hearing if it was held before courts lower than the Supreme Court of Russia. If an appeal was to be examined by the Supreme Court, an appellant would be apprised of the appeal hearing if he or she had requested the court to do so in their appeal or observations on the appeal. Notification of the time of the hearing on appeal was to be placed in the court not later than three days before the hearing.
In Decision no. 200-O of 17 October 2001, the Constitutional Court held that the provisions of Article 336 of the CCP could not serve as a basis for failing to inform persons entitled to appeal against judgments about the date of examination of their appeals by a court of any level.
Article 338 of the CCP required that, at the beginning of an appeal hearing, the presiding judge should verify who was present and the court should decide whether to proceed with the hearing.
Rules set out in Articles 332, 335, 336 and 338 of the CCP concerning appeals against judgments delivered by courts in their ordinary composition also governed the procedure in respect of appeals against judgments delivered by a jury court (Article 420 of the CCP).
Appeal courts considered, on the basis of the materials in the case file and newly submitted materials, whether a first-instance judgment was lawful and well-founded. They were not bound by the grounds of the appeal and exercised a full review of the case (Article 332 of the CCP).
Under Article 465 of the CCP, in cases decided by a jury the appeal court could change or quash the judgment on the following grounds:
(i)  incomplete court examination as a result of the trial court's failure or refusal to examine admissible evidence, or examination of inadmissible evidence, where the evidence in question could have had a significant impact on the outcome of the case;
(ii)  grave violations of the criminal procedural law;
(iii)  improper application of law;
(iv)  unfair punishment.
Appeal courts could quash or vary the judgment provided that the changes were not to the detriment of the defendant. They could not quash an acquittal or a decision to terminate the proceedings or another decision in the defendant's favour on the grounds of a grave violation of his or her rights (Article 465 of the CCP).