The case originated in an application (no. 1285/03) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Ms M.B. (“the applicant”), on 4 November 2002. The President of the Chamber decided of his own motion that the applicant’s identity should not be disclosed (Rule 47 § 3 of the Rules of Court).
The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Ciută, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the procedures by which she had been admitted to psychiatric institutions and her children had been taken into care had been unlawful.
On 9 November 2010 notice of the application was given to the Government. The initial application was supplemented by letters from the applicant, which were received at the Court between late 2002 and 2010. The Chamber also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1 of the Convention).
Corneliu Bîrsan, the judge elected in respect of Romania, withdrew from sitting in the case (Rule 28). The President of the Chamber accordingly appointed Kristina Pardalos to sit as an ad hoc judge in his place (Article 26 § 4 of the Convention and Rule 29 § 1).
The applicant, Ms M.B., is a Romanian national who was born in 1958 and lives in Bacău. She was not represented by a lawyer before the Court or before the domestic authorities at any time.
She has been eligible for welfare benefits since 1996 as a disabled person who is unfit to work.
On 14 September 2000 she was diagnosed as suffering from “paranoid schizophrenia”. Since then, she has been registered in the files of several psychiatric institutions.
The applicant is the mother of three children, two of whom, C.-L. and C.-I., born in 1992 and 1994 respectively, were minors at the material time. Her eldest daughter was above the age of majority.
A letter dated 18 January 2011 from the Bacău City Council Guardianship Authority to the Agent of the Romanian Government before the Court states that “according to checks carried out in the database of the Guardianship Authority Section (Compartimentul Autoritate Tutelară) at Bacău City Council, no measures to protect the interests of Ms [M.B.] – who has been diagnosed as suffering from paranoid schizophrenia – have been put in place (nu s-a instituit), either by means of partial or full guardianship”. The letter adds that “likewise, no temporary guardianship arrangements have been made to assist her two children or to protect their interests during their mother’s detention”.
On several occasions since 2000 the applicant has been taken, usually by the police, to the psychiatric department of Bacău Hospital or the Socola psychiatric clinic and admitted for treatment. This happened between 14 September and 13 October 2000, 1 and 15 May 2002, 21 January and 17 February 2003, 12 May and 2 June 2004, 26 October and 4 November 2005, 18 and 31 March 2006, 21 July and 8 August 2006, 25 August and 13 September 2006, and 8 and 22 October 2007.
For example, in a letter dated 11 January 2003 the Izvoru Bereheciului police asked Bacău Hospital to admit the applicant on the grounds that she had been “found undernourished (subnutrită), living in a room without heating and with no material support”. The letter concluded as follows: “We would be grateful if you could take medical action as her behaviour is antisocial”.
The form for the applicant’s admission to the hospital’s psychiatric department, dated 12 May 2004, included a note in the “type of admission” section indicating that the police had taken her to the hospital as a matter of emergency. A letter from the police dated the same day stated that the reason for taking her to the hospital was that she “represented a danger to her neighbours in the village by habitually starting fires in the courtyard of her house, entering local authority premises and frightening children in the street through her aggressive conduct”.
Similarly, a hospital discharge form dated 8 August 2006 stated that the applicant had been “readmitted to hospital after being brought there by the police (se reinternează adusă de poliţie)” on 21 July 2006. An undated letter signed by the applicant requesting admission to the hospital was filed together with her admission form dated 21 July 2006. The letter stated that, should the need arise, her children could be contacted at their care home, the address of which was indicated.
A similar note indicating “type of admission: police” appears on the admission form dated 25 August 2006. A letter from the police dated the same day gave the same reasons as those set out in the letter of 12 May 2004, adding that the applicant had apparently “also been raped during the night of 24 to 25 August 2006”. These events formed the subject of the B. v. Romania case (no. 42390/07, 10 January 2012).
The documents sent to the Court indicate that each time she was admitted to hospital, the applicant left after stays of varying lengths.
According to information supplied by the Government, the applicant was admitted to hospital four times in 2008, spending a total of five months in the psychiatric department for patients with chronic disorders.
In 2009 she was admitted to Buhuşi Hospital six times, spending a total of ten and a half months in the psychiatric department for patients with chronic disorders. In 2010 she was admitted a further seven times, spending a total of more than eleven months in hospital.
The applicant considers that she has been “permanently detained” by the authorities. She has not informed the Court whether she has challenged these measures under Law no. 487/2002 on mental health and the protection of individuals with mental disorders.
In a letter of 31 January 2011 to the Agent of the Romanian Government, the director of Buhuşi Hospital gave assurances that the applicant was being kept in good conditions in the hospital. The other relevant parts of the letter read as follows:
“In reply to your letter no. 319 of 21 January 2011 concerning the case of [M.B.] we wish to provide the following clarifications: ...
[M.B.] is a chronically ill patient who has been admitted to psychiatric clinics since 2000; she has delusions of persecution and prejudice.
She has the right to receive information, as is demonstrated by her correspondence with the ECHR over several years.
In our view, it is surprising that her bizarre, delirious, incoherent allegations – the work of a patient with chronic mental disorders – should be taken into account, thus constantly obliging us to produce replies and official letters running to tens of pages, including archived documents, and to make a sustained effort to refute her blatant lies.
... [M.B.] is not a victim of the Romanian State but rather of the condition from which she is suffering.”
From 2000 the applicant’s two minor children no longer lived with her and, on account of her illness, were placed in a care home for abandoned children by a decision of the Bacău Child Welfare Board.
Two articles published on 9 and 12 September 2000 in the local newspaper Deşteptarea described the unhealthy conditions in which the applicant and her two minor children were living.
The day after the articles were published, the authorities were informed that the two children were being fed “grass, chestnuts, plantain leaves and mushrooms gathered in parks” and that their mother had also refused to enrol them in school.
On 12 September 2000, at the urging of social workers – as is apparent from a report of 13 September 2000 – the children’s maternal grandmother sought assistance from the Bacău County Social Welfare and Child Protection Department (Direcţia Generală de Asistenţă Socială şi Protecţia Copilului – “the DGASPC”) in having the applicant admitted to a specialist hospital on account of her mental illness and violent behaviour. The grandmother stated that the two children did not attend school and sometimes went without food and were left unsupervised, and gave her consent for them to be taken into care. The children were aged eight and six at the time.
Later that day, four welfare officers, two of them from the DGASPC and the other two from a care home for children, went to the applicant’s house accompanied by a police officer. According to a report of 13 September 2000, drawn up following the visit, it was “plain to see” that the applicant was ill, that there was a lack of food in the house and that the living conditions were inadequate; for example, there was no heating or electricity. The report proposed that the children be taken into care as a matter of urgency because “their mother posed a danger to them”.
The social services obtained statements from three of the applicant’s neighbours, who described the appalling conditions in which the two children were living with their mother.
On the same day, the social workers took the children to the care home, after obtaining their grandmother’s written consent.
Two psychosocial assessment reports were drawn up. They described the children’s family situation and social, material and emotional well-being, highlighting their dangerous living conditions. The reports noted that since 15 September 2000 the applicant had been detained in a psychiatric hospital.
In decisions nos. 978 and 979 of 26 September 2000 the Bacău Child Welfare Board ordered the children’s placement in the Centrul Lalelelor (“Tulips”) care home.
The applicant did not appeal against those decisions.
In decisions nos. 1374 and 1375 of 5 December 2000 the same board transferred the children to the Poiana Florilor (“Flower Meadow”) care home in Humeiuş.
The applicant did not appeal against that decision.
On an application by the DGASPC, the Bacău County Court ordered in judgments of 14 December 2005 and 27 January 2006 that the children should remain in care. It also decided that the exercise of parental rights was to be delegated to the director of the care home.
The applicant was neither present nor represented in court.
The children were interviewed by the court in the presence of a social worker from the home.
The court observed that in September 2000 the children had been found in their mother’s house in a state of destitution, without any lighting or food, and that they had not been enrolled in school. It added that their maternal grandmother was too old to look after them. The court concluded that the children’s placement in care was in their interests, while also noting that since they had been in the home they had received regular visits from their mother.
The applicant did not appeal against those judgments.
She subsequently contacted various authorities in an attempt to regain custody of her children.
In two judgments of 17 August 2007 the Bacău County Court transferred the two children to the SOS Satul Copiilor (“SOS Children’s Village”) care home in Humeiuş, following the reorganisation of care homes. It held that their continued placement in care was justified by the fact that they had been emotionally abused by their mother at the time when they had initially been taken into care on 12 September 2000.
The applicant did not appeal against those judgments.
Reports issued by the DGASPC and periodic reports by representatives of Izvorul Berheciului District Council indicate that the children have often been visited by their mother.
The legislation in force on the date of the application in the present case and the relevant domestic practice concerning the protection of people with mental disorders are partly outlined in the following judgments: V.B. v. Romania (no. 21207/03, § 37, 20 April 2010); Parascineti v. Romania, (no. 32060/05, §§ 25 and 29, 13 March 2012); and Cristian Teodorescu v. Romania (no. 22883/05, §§ 30-40, 19 June 2012).
Psychiatric detention is governed by the provisions of Law no. 487 of 11 July 2002 on mental health and the protection of people with mental disorders (“the Mental Health Act – Law no. 487/2002”), published in Official Gazette no. 589 of 8 August 2002. The Act makes a distinction between voluntary and compulsory admission to a psychiatric institution.
Sections 12 and 13 of the Act provide that the assessment of a person’s mental health, with a view to making a diagnosis or determining whether the person is of sound mind, requires a direct examination by a psychiatrist at the request of the person concerned in the case of voluntary admission, or at the request of an appropriate authority or authorised person in the case of compulsory admission.
Pursuant to section 29 of the Act, the psychiatrist is required to obtain the person’s consent for the treatment and to respect the person’s right to receive assistance when giving his or her consent (dreptul acestuia de a fi asistat în acordarea consimţământului). Consent may be withdrawn at any time by the patient or his or her representative (section 30). Where the psychiatrist suspects that there is a conflict of interests between the patient and the representative, he or she must refer the matter to the public prosecutor’s office in order to initiate the procedure for the appointment of a legal representative (section 31).
Anyone who is admitted to a psychiatric institution must be informed of his or her rights as soon as possible and must be given explanations he or she can understand as to how they are to be exercised. If the person is unable to understand the information, it must be provided to his or her legal or personal representative (section 38).
Any patient admitted voluntarily is entitled to leave the psychiatric institution at his or her own request at any time (section 43). The procedure outlined above concerning compulsory admission is also applicable where a person who had initially consented to admission withdraws the consent at a later stage (section 55).
Sections 44-53 of the Act govern the various circumstances in which compulsory admission may take place, following a psychiatric examination, and the relevant procedure (a request stating reasons, submitted by the family, the police or the person’s doctor, among others; notification of the psychiatrist’s decision to the patient, his or her representative and family, and also to the public prosecutor’s office and a medical panel, for confirmation).
An appeal against a decision on compulsory admission may be lodged “with the competent court according to the law” by the patient or his or her representative (section 54).
The authorities, in particular the Ministry of Health, were required to take the necessary steps to apply the Act (section 63); the Ministry did so by issuing implementing regulations in a decree of 10 April 2006. The decree provided, inter alia, that the hospitals authorised to admit patients compulsorily were to be designated within a period of thirty days (Article 27). It also laid down the obligation for the psychiatrist to provide the patient, his or her family and his or her representative with information about the right to challenge the decision on admission and about the applicable procedure (Article 28), and contained standard forms for notification of the decision, as required by Law no. 487/2002.
Law no. 487/2002 was amended by Law no. 600/2004, published in Official Gazette no. 1228 of 21 December 2004, and subsequently by Law no. 129/2012, published in Official Gazette no. 487 of 17 July 2012.
Law no. 129/2012 has added a new section 381, which provides that anyone with full legal capacity who is admitted for psychiatric treatment is entitled to appoint an agreed representative free of charge to assist or represent him or her throughout the duration of the treatment.
Pursuant to this new provision, if the patient does not have a legal representative and has been unable to appoint an agreed representative because of mental incapacity, the hospital is required to give notice of this fact immediately (de îndată) to the guardianship authority for the patient’s place of residence or, if the patient’s place of residence is unknown, to the guardianship authority for the municipality in which the hospital is located, so that measures can be taken for the patient’s legal protection.
This decree, which came into force on 2 May 2006, governs the procedure for implementing the Mental Health Act (Law no. 487/2002). Article 29 provides that an application for compulsory admission must be made at the hospital itself by one of the individuals or authorities authorised by section 47 of Law no. 487/2002; the application must be made in writing and signed by the person submitting it, who must indicate the reasons why it is justified.
Article 28 states that if the psychiatrist considers that the conditions for compulsory admission are satisfied, he or she is required to inform the person concerned of his or her right to challenge the decision, explaining the procedure for doing so.
Article 33 requires psychiatric institutions to keep a dedicated register containing information about people who have been admitted against their will, including all decisions taken in relation to them. Article 34 outlines the formal requirements which the psychiatrist taking the decision on compulsory admission and the panel approving it must observe when notifying the public prosecutor’s office of their decisions.
The Protection of People with Disabilities Act (Legea privind protecţia şi promovarea drepturilor persoanelor cu handicap – Law no. 448/2006) was published in Official Gazette no. 1006 of 18 December 2006. It was subsequently amended, the revised version being published in Official Gazette no. 1 of 3 January 2008.
Under section 25 of the Act as amended, people with disabilities are protected against negligence and abuse, and against any discrimination based on their location. People who are entirely or partially incapable of managing their affairs are afforded legal protection in the form of full or partial guardianship, as well as legal assistance.
If a person with disabilities does not have any parents or any other person who might agree to act as his or her guardian, a court may appoint as guardian the local public authority or private-law entity that provides care for the person concerned.
A report on observance of the rights of people detained in psychiatric institutions, issued in October 2009 by a non-governmental organisation, the Centre for Legal Resources (Centrul de Resurse Juridice), noted that the authorities had still not designated the hospitals that were authorised to admit patients compulsorily, which – coupled with the shaky knowledge among medical personnel of the procedures outlined above – meant that Law no. 487/2002 had been difficult to apply properly and consistently (for the relevant part of the report, see Parascineti, cited above, § 30).
In reply to a memorandum by Amnesty International, published on 4 May 2004, alleging that Romania was in breach of international standards concerning admission to and conditions in psychiatric institutions, the Romanian Government issued a press release the same day disputing the claim that Law no. 487/2002 would not be applicable until rules for its implementation had been adopted. According to the Government, several sets of proceedings in which people had challenged orders for their compulsory admission to a psychiatric institution were pending at the time before the domestic courts.
The same memorandum stated that during a visit in November 2003 to a closed male psychiatric ward at Obregia Hospital in Bucharest, an Amnesty International representative had been told that many of the people who were taken to the hospital had initially refused to be admitted but had then been “persuaded” that this was in their best interests, before signing a form consenting to the treatment. Thus, twenty men in a locked ward were regarded as “voluntary” patients. Some of them had complained that they would like to leave the hospital but had not been allowed to.
The relevant provisions of the Family Code, as in force at the material time and until 1 October 2011 (when the new Civil Code came into force), concerning the general powers of the guardianship authority in relation to children are outlined in Amanalachioai v. Romania (no. 4023/04, §§ 54-56, 26 May 2009).
The relevant provisions of the Family Code, as in force at the material time, read as follows:
“Parents shall exercise their parental rights in the child’s interests.”
“Measures concerning the child’s person and property shall be taken by joint agreement between the parents.
...”
“Children below the age of majority shall live with their parents ...
In the event of a disagreement between the parents, the court, after consulting the guardianship authority and the child, if the latter is aged ten years or more, shall determine the matter, taking into account the child’s interests.”
“Parents shall be entitled to request that their child be returned to them by any person having unauthorised custody of the child.
The courts shall refuse to grant such a request if it would not be in the child’s interests. The child shall be consulted if he or she is aged ten years or more.”
“The guardianship authority [autoritatea tutelară] must continuously and effectively supervise the manner in which the parents discharge their obligations concerning the person and property of the child.
The delegates of the guardianship authority shall be entitled to visit children in their homes and to inform themselves by all available means about the manner in which the persons in charge of them look after them, about their health and physical development, their education ...; if need be, they shall give the necessary instructions.”
The guardianship authority may be assisted in its work by support groups made up of figures such as members of parliament, teachers, lawyers and Red Cross officials.
The county child protection departments are public institutions at county level enjoying legal personality, under the authority of the county council. Their role is to provide children in difficulty with the necessary protection and assistance to enjoy their rights, and to support and advise them with a view to preventing any situations that might endanger their safety and development.
The provisions of the Family Code concerning deprivation of legal capacity, as in force at the material time, read as follows:
“Anyone lacking the discernment to defend his or her own interests on account of mental disturbance or deficiency shall be deprived of legal capacity. ...”
“The guardian shall be required to take care of the person who has been deprived of legal capacity in order to expedite the person’s recovery and improve his or her living conditions ...
The guardianship authority, with the agreement of the appropriate public health service and according to the circumstances, shall decide whether the incapacitated person is to be cared for at home or in a medical institution.”
“Besides the other cases specified by law, the guardianship authority shall appoint a temporary guardian in the following circumstances:
...
(b)  where, on account of illness or for other reasons, a person – even if he or she retains legal capacity – is unable, either personally or through a representative, to take the necessary measures in situations requiring urgent action.”
The new Civil Code was published in Official Gazette no. 511 of 24 July 2009 and subsequently republished in Official Gazette no. 505 of 15 July 2011. It came into force on 1 October 2011.
Part III of the new Civil Code includes provisions on measures to protect adults who are unable to look after their own interests.
Article 164 largely reproduces former Article 142 of the Family Code. It provides that “anyone lacking the discernment to defend his or her own interests on account of mental disturbance or deficiency shall be deprived of legal capacity by a judicial decision [interdicţie judecătorească]”.
Article 170 provides that the guardianship court (instanţa de tutelă) must appoint a guardian in the decision depriving a person of legal capacity.
Article 178 governs temporary guardianship, which must be introduced, among other circumstances, where, on account of illness, a person, even though retaining legal capacity, is unable to defend his or her own interests adequately and, for objective reasons, is unable to appoint a representative himself or herself.
Government Emergency Ordinance no. 26 of 9 June 1997 on the protection of children in difficulty was published in the Official Gazette on 12 June 1997. It has been repealed and replaced by Law no. 272/2004, published in the Official Gazette of 23 June 2004. The relevant provisions of the Emergency Ordinance, as in force when the applicant’s two minor children were first taken into care, read as follows:
“In order to ensure the best interests of a child in difficulty, the Child Welfare Board may order:
...
(e)  the placement of the child in the care of a specialist public welfare institution or a licensed private institution.”
“If the child has been declared to have been abandoned in a final judicial decision ... parental rights shall be exercised by the county council, through the Child Welfare Board.”
Section 14 of the Emergency Ordinance cited above stated that the authorities were required to encourage the continuation of family relations, to the extent that these were in the child’s best interests.
Pursuant to section 14 of the Emergency Ordinance, the parents retained their parental rights and duties throughout the child’s placement in care, except those which were incompatible with that protective measure.