The case originated in an application (no. 4902/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Mr Rolandas Čiapas (“the applicant”), on 31 July 2001.
The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms E. Baltutytė.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the censorship of his correspondence with private persons at the Šiauliai Remand Prison during the period from 19 November 2001 to 1 April 2003 had breached Article 8 of the Convention.
By a decision of 24 November 2005 the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1966.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 13 November 2000 the applicant was arrested in the context of criminal proceedings for robbery and blackmail. His detention was subsequently authorised and extended by a court.
On 19 November 2001 a prosecutor adopted a decision to censor (cenzūruoti) the applicant's letters in accordance with Article 15 of the Detention on Remand Act. In order to justify the decision, the prosecutor referred to the danger that the applicant might attempt to influence witnesses and victims of the criminal proceedings.
On 22 April 2002 the Panevėžys City District Court convicted the applicant of robbery and blackmail. The final decision in this regard was taken by the Supreme Court on 24 December 2002.
A further decision on the censorship of the applicant's correspondence was taken by a prosecutor on 7 February 2003 on the same grounds, in the context of another criminal case concerning a fresh episode of alleged robbery and blackmail.
On 1 April 2003 the prosecutor decided to discontinue the censorship in that the investigation had been concluded.
For most of the above period the applicant was held at the Šiauliai Remand Prison - with certain interruptions due to his temporary transfers to other prisons. According to the Government, during the period from
On 1 September 2003 the Panevėžys City District Court convicted the applicant of a fresh episode of robbery and blackmail. The final decision in this respect was taken by the Supreme Court on 24 February 2004.
The applicant was again convicted of another crime by the Šiauliai  on 14 January 2005. He currently serves his sentence at the Marijampolė Prison.
Article 15 of the Detention on Remand Act:
“1. Letters sent or received by a remand prisoner, except for cases stipulated in the second paragraph of this article, may be subject to censorship (gali būti cenzūruojami).
Proposals, applications and complaints addressed to the [State authorities] and the European Court of Human Rights shall not be subject to censorship and shall be dispatched within one day from their receipt.”
Rule 90 of the Remand Centres Rules as approved by the order of the Minister of Justice of 7 September 2001 provide that officers of the remand prisons are not allowed, upon their own initiative, to censor correspondence of the detainees without an appropriate decision taken under Article 15 of the Detention on Remand Act.