.  The case originated in an application (no. 3571/09) against the Republic of Armenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Armenian national, Ms Silva Asatryan (“the applicant”), on 15 June 2009.
.  The applicant was born in 1960 and lived in Yerevan prior to her imprisonment. She is represented before the Court by Mr K. Mezhlumyan, a lawyer practising in Yerevan. The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, Representative of the Republic of Armenia at the European Court of Human Rights.
.  The applicant alleged, in particular, that she had been denied a fair trial as a result of admission by the Court of Appeal of pre-trial witness statements that were not read out in court and her inability to examine those witnesses.
.  On 24 May 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
.  The present case concerns the applicant’s trial and conviction for attempted murder of M. G., a businessman and former parliamentarian. A co-defendant, Y. W., was tried and convicted for assisting an offender.
.  The facts of the case may be summarised as follows.
.  On 29 December 2001 a bomb placed under M.G.’s car detonated when the latter started the engine in the morning. M.G. survived without major injuries.
.  On the same date the District Prosecutor’s Office started an investigation into the matter. When questioned by police officers, M.G. pointed to the applicant’s ex-husband, A.G., with whom he had major disagreements over business-related issues, as the only possible offender.
.  On the same day A.G. was summoned to the police station. Having acknowledged the existence of disagreements with M.G., he denied the offence and stated that he had been at home with his son, V.G., the night before the incident.
.  On the same day V.G. was arrested on suspicion of attempted murder. The charges against him were eventually dropped several months later since his involvement in the offence had not been established.
.  On 18 February 2002 A. At., A.G.’s friend who also knew the applicant and the family, was interviewed. He stated, inter alia, that he was aware of A.G.’s problems with M.G. and that the applicant had always been against A.G. doing business with M.G. since she considered the latter a “scammer”.
.   On the same date A.A., A.G.’s neighbour, was interviewed and described his family as a normal and ordinary one. She mentioned that about a year before, the applicant had complained about M.G. because he owed them some money.
.  On 29 January 2002 L.G., the applicant’s daughter, was interviewed and stated, inter alia, that she had learnt about her parents’ divorce three or four years previously. The parents had maintained good relations and the family was in contact almost every day. She also stated that, most of the time, the applicant stayed in the apartment where the father lived.
.  On 21 February 2002 A.B., the applicant’s neighbour, was interviewed. He stated that he had known the members of the family, A.G., the applicant and their two children V.G. and L.G., since 2001, when they had settled in the building.
.  On 16 September 2005 Y.W., a friend of the family, was arrested following the discovery of a large quantity of firearms and explosives in his house. Shortly after, Y.W. confessed to M.G.’s attempted murder and stated that he had acted on the applicant’s orders.
.  On 23 September 2005 the applicant was arrested and charged with instigation of attempted murder and property damage.
.  On an unspecified date the investigation was concluded and the criminal case was referred to the Avan and Nor-Nork District Court of Yerevan for trial. The bill of indictment included L.G. in the witness call list while it appears that A.At., A.A. and A.B. were not included in it.
.  At the trial, Y.W. retracted his pre-trial statements, claiming that they had been obtained under duress. The applicant denied any involvement in M.G.’s attempted murder, stating that she had divorced A.G. in 1999 and since then she had lived with their daughter L.G. in another apartment while A.G. lived with their son, V.G. She also stated that at some point she had been asked to sign some documents in relation to a contract between A.G. and M.G. since the contract concerned the sale of the house where she used to live, which she did. However, in general she had no connection with A.G. and tried not to maintain any contact with him.
.  At the hearing of 22 June 2006 the applicant’s lawyer asked for L.G. to be excluded from the witness call list, since the latter was the applicant’s daughter. This request was granted when L.G. expressed her wish to use the testimonial privilege.
.  On 12 October 2007 the District Court found the applicant guilty as charged and sentenced her cumulatively to nine years’ imprisonment. Y.W. was also convicted. The District Court found it established that the applicant had ordered M.G.’s murder as the property-related disputes between the latter and A.G. had also affected her property rights. In this connection the District Court mainly relied on the trial statements of S.A., Y.W.’s spouse, and L.C., his former colleague and the fact that the applicant was involved in court disputes with M.G., which showed that both she and A.G. had a strained relationship with the latter.
.  On 29 October 2007 the applicant lodged an appeal against the judgment of the District Court. On 3 December 2007 she lodged a supplement to her appeal claiming, inter alia, that she had no reason to murder M.G. as she had been living separately from A.G. since their divorce in 1999 and had no interest in his business activities.
.  In the course of the proceedings before the Criminal Court of Appeal Y.W. retracted his statements made before the District Court and submitted that in reality he had organised the explosion of M.G.’s car upon the applicant’s request. However, he had no intention of killing M.G., but was trying to frighten him. The applicant maintained her defence.
.  On 18 June 2008 the Criminal Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the judgment of 12 October 2007 as regards her conviction and sentence, while Y.W.’s sentence was reduced. In its judgment the Court of Appeal, inter alia, established that although the applicant had divorced A.G., she had maintained a family-like relationship with him and expressed her annoyance at M.G.’s actions in the presence of different people. In this respect, the judgment of the Court of Appeal referred to L.G.’s pre-trial statement of 29 January 2002, A.At.’s pre-trial statement of 18 February 2002, as well as the pre-trial statements of two neighbours, A.A. and A.B., made on 18 and 21 February 2002 respectively.
.  On 21 November 2008 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law claiming, inter alia, that the Court of Appeal had based its conclusions on the pre-trial statements of L.G., A.A., A.B. and A.At., which had not been read out and examined either by the Avan and Nor-Nork District Court of Yerevan or the Court of Appeal. Furthermore, she had had no opportunity to question these witnesses.
.  On 15 December 2008 the Court of Cassation declared the applicant’s appeal inadmissible for lack of merit.
.  On 14 April 2009 the applicant lodged an application with the Constitutional Court challenging the compatibility with the Constitution of certain provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (hereafter, the CCP) allowing the Court of Cassation not to indicate reasons when declaring inadmissible an appeal on points of law.
.  On 28 July 2009 the Constitutional Court granted the application by finding such provisions of the CCP incompatible with the Constitution.
.  On 11 August 2009 the applicant, based on the above decision of the Constitutional Court, requested the Court of Cassation to reopen the proceedings and to re-examine her appeal on points of law of 21 November 2008.
.  By decision of 25 September 2009 the Court of Cassation reopened the proceedings, re-examined the applicant’s appeal on points of law and declared it inadmissible for lack of merit. In doing so, the Court of Cassation, inter alia, indicated that the Criminal Court of Appeal’s conclusion concerning the applicant’s guilt was correct as it was based, among other things, on the witness statements of L.G. and A.A.
.  Article 20 §§ 1 and 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (hereafter CCP) state that no person is under an obligation to testify against himself, his spouse or next of kin. A person who is requested by the investigating authority to provide information or materials incriminating himself, his spouse or next of kin in an offence, has the right to refuse to provide such information or materials.
.  Article 23 § 1 states that criminal proceedings shall be conducted on the basis of the principle of adversarial proceedings.
.  Pursuant to Article 86 § 3 CCP, a witness is obliged to appear upon the summons of the authority dealing with the case in order to give testimony. A witness has the right to refuse to testify and provide materials and information against himself, his spouse or next of kin (Article 86 § 5 (2) and (3)).
.  Article 105 § 1 (2.1) CCP provides that information obtained in breach of the rights of a witness guaranteed under Article 86 § 5 of the same Code, cannot be used to substantiate the charges and used as evidence in criminal proceedings.
.  Article 332 § 1 CCP states that if a person summoned to court has failed to appear before the court, having heard the opinions of the parties, it shall decide to continue the trial or adjourn the proceedings. The proceedings may be continued if the failure to appear of any such persons shall not obstruct the thorough, complete and objective examination of the circumstances of the case.
.  Pursuant to Article 339 § 1 (1) CCP, before proceeding to the hearing of a witness, the presiding judge informs that witness of his right to refuse to testify against himself, his spouse or next of kin.
.  According to Article 342 § 1 CCP, the reading out at the trial of witness statements made during the inquiry, the investigation or a previous court hearing is permissible if the witness is absent from the court hearing for reasons which rule out the possibility of his appearance in court.
.  According to Article 358 § 1 CCP, a court judgment must be based on the law and substantiated. Paragraph 3 further establishes that a judgment is substantiated if its conclusions are based on the evidence examined during the court proceedings.
.  According to Article 393 § 2 CCP, the appellate court renders a judicial decision in compliance with the general rules set out by the CCP, taking into account the requirements of the same provision. When rendering a judicial decision, the appellate court may rely on the statements of persons who were not summoned to the hearing before the appellate court but were heard by the first instance court.
.  Article 426.1 § 1 CCP states that only final acts are subject to review on the ground of newly discovered or new circumstances. On the ground of newly discovered or new circumstances a judicial act of the court of first instance is reviewed by the appeal court, while judicial acts of the appeal court and the Court of Cassation are reviewed by the Court of Cassation (Article 426.1 § 2).
.  According to Article 426.4 § 1 (2) CCP judicial acts may be reviewed on the ground of new circumstances if a violation of a right guaranteed by an international convention to which Armenia is a party has been found by a final judgment or decision of an international court.