The case originated in an application (no. 41651/10) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) on 23 July 2010 by:
-  Mr Umid Nematovich Khamroev, who was born in 1976 and lives in Sweden (“the first applicant”),
-  Mr Kosim Dzhurayevich Dadakhanov, who was born in 1966 and lives in Ukraine (“the second applicant”),
-  Mr Utkir Uktamovich Akramov, who was born in 1985 and lives in the United States of America (“the third applicant”), and
-  Mr Shodilbek Solizhonovich Soibzhonov, who was born in 1970 and lives in Ukraine (“the fourth applicant”).
The first and third applicants are Uzbek nationals and the fourth applicant is a Russian national. In his application form, the second applicant claimed to be a Russian national, but the Ukrainian authorities established that he had been deprived of that nationality in 2008 and in general referred to him as an Uzbek national.
The applicants, who had been granted legal aid, were represented by Ms G. Bocheva, a lawyer practising in Kyiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented most recently by their Acting Agent, Ms O. Davydchuk, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that their detention in Ukraine had been in breach of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention.
On 26 July 2010 the President of the Chamber indicated to the Ukrainian Government, under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, that the applicants should not be removed to Uzbekistan. On 23 August 2010 the President of the Chamber decided to discontinue the application of that interim measure.
On 27 May 2013 the above complaints of the first three applicants were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3.
On various dates, criminal proceedings were instituted against the applicants in Uzbekistan on suspicion of sedition; of creating, leading and of being members of a religious fundamentalist, extremist, separatist or other prohibited organisation; and, in respect of the first applicant, of the distribution of material threatening public order and causing incitement to ethnic or religious hatred.
Orders for their arrest were issued by the Uzbek authorities and they were placed on an international list of wanted persons.
They left Uzbekistan on various dates and eventually arrived in Ukraine.
On 3 April 2009 the Ukrainian migration authorities dismissed the first applicant’s asylum application as being groundless. The applicant appealed.
On 15 June 2010 the first applicant was arrested by the Ukrainian police as a person appearing on the international list of wanted persons.
On 16 June 2010 the police applied to the Irpin Town Court (“the Town Court”) for the applicant’s arrest under provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure concerning arrest of people suspected of criminal offences in Ukraine.
On 17 June 2010 amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure concerning extradition and detention pending extradition came into force (see paragraph 59 below).
On the same day, the Town Court extended the applicant’s detention by up to ten days, considering that additional information was needed about his personal situation. It relied on legislation applicable to persons charged with criminal offences in Ukraine and did not refer to the new provisions of the Code concerning extradition.
On 24 June 2010 the Town Court, acting under the amended provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure concerning extradition, issued an order for the applicant’s provisional arrest for forty days, pending the receipt of an extradition request from the Uzbek authorities. On 30 June 2010 the Kyiv Regional Court of Appeal upheld that order.
On 23 July 2010 the Kyiv Shevchenkivsky District Court (“the Shevchenkivsky Court”), upon an application by the General Prosecutor’s Office of Ukraine (“the GPO”), ordered the applicant’s arrest pending extradition, for a period not to exceed eighteen months, until the extradition proceedings had been completed. On 9 August 2010 the Kyiv City Court of Appeal upheld that order.
On 21 June 2011 the Kyiv Administrative Court of Appeal quashed the migration authorities’ decision of 3 April 2009 and ordered that the applicant’s request for asylum be reconsidered.
On 24 January 2012 the first applicant was released.
On 14 December 2009 the UNHCR recognised the second applicant as a refugee under its mandate.
On 23 December 2009 the migration authorities dismissed the second applicant’s application for asylum in Ukraine as being groundless.
On 29 June 2010 the second applicant was arrested by the Ukrainian police as a person appearing on the international list of wanted persons.
On 2 July 2010 the Bila Tserkva Court ordered the applicant’s provisional arrest for up to thirty days, until the receipt of an extradition request.
On 28 July 2010 the UNHCR issued a certificate stating that it had recognised the applicant as a refugee. On 29 July 2010 the applicant lodged that certificate, together with his objections to the detention request, with the Shevchenkivsky Court.
On 29 July 2010 the Shevchenkivsky Court ordered the applicant’s detention pending extradition for up to eighteen months, until the extradition proceedings had been completed. On 9 August 2010 the Kyiv City Court of Appeal upheld that order.
On 25 June 2011 the Kyiv Circuit Administrative Court quashed the migration authorities’ decision of 23 December 2009 and ordered them to re-examine the applicant’s application.
On 29 January 2012 the applicant was released.
On 4 November 2009 the migration authorities dismissed the third applicant’s application for asylum in Ukraine as being groundless. The applicant appealed.
According to police records, at 9.30 p.m. on 8 July 2010 the third applicant was arrested by the Ukrainian police as a person appearing on the international list of wanted persons.
On 10 July 2010 the police requested that the Kyiv-Svyatoshyn District Court (“the Kyiv-Svyatoshyn Court”) place the applicant under provisional arrest pending receipt of an extradition request from Uzbekistan.
In his submissions to the Kyiv-Svyatoshyn Court, the applicant opposed the police request on the grounds, in particular, that the proceedings concerning his request for asylum were still pending. In his submissions he stated that he had been arrested at 2 p.m. on 9 July 2010 and did not make any complaint in that regard.
On 12 July 2010 the Kyiv-Svyatoshyn Court ordered the applicant’s provisional arrest for up to thirty days, until the receipt of an extradition request.
On 19 July 2010 the Kyiv Regional Court of Appeal quashed the order of 12 July 2010 and remitted the request for provisional arrest to the first-instance court for fresh examination. The Court of Appeal held, in particular, that the first-instance court had failed to examine in detail the applicant’s personal situation and whether there were obstacles to his extradition.
On 3 August 2010 the Kyiv-Svyatoshyn Court ordered the applicant’s provisional arrest for up to forty days. It held that his arguments concerning an alleged risk of ill-treatment in Uzbekistan had to be examined within the framework of the proceedings for extradition.
On the same day, the police lodged a request for the applicant’s detention pending extradition, based on an extradition request which had arrived in the meantime (see paragraph 37 below).
On 4 August 2010 the Shevchenkivsky Court ordered the applicant’s detention for up to eighteen months, until the extradition proceedings had been completed. On 12 August 2010 the Kyiv City Court of Appeal upheld that order.
According to the Government, on 14 July 2011 the Kyiv Circuit Administrative Court upheld the migration authorities’ decision of 4 November 2009.
On 6 February 2012 the applicant was released.
On 9 July 2010 the GPO received formal requests from the Uzbek authorities for the first and third applicant’s extradition and on 27 July 2010 received a similar request concerning the second applicant. The GPO asked the Kyiv regional prosecutor’s office to conduct an extradition inquiry into the applicants’ cases.
On 10 July 2010 the GPO asked the Security Service and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for information about the first applicant, in particular whether he was being persecuted by the Uzbek authorities owing to political or religious activities. On 29 and 14 July 2010 similar requests were sent concerning the second and third applicants.
On the same dates, the GPO asked the Uzbek authorities to provide more detailed information about the acts of which the applicants were suspected and for assurances concerning the applicants’ treatment if they were extradited.
On 3 August 2010 the Security Service informed the GPO that it had no information concerning the details of the first and third applicants’ activities in Uzbekistan.
On 24 August, and 2 and 6 September 2010 the Uzbek authorities provided the assurances requested by the GPO in respect of the third, second and first applicants respectively.
On 24 August and 16 November 2010 the GPO, in response to its previous request, received copies of documents from the Uzbek authorities describing the nature of the charges against the third and first applicants in Uzbekistan.
On 14 October 2010 the Ambassador of the United States of America (“the US”) to Ukraine asked the GPO to facilitate a visit to the detained Uzbek nationals on 15 and 21 October 2010 by representatives of the US Department of Homeland Security for interviews as part of the process of examining their requests for asylum in the US.
According to the second applicant, on 1 October 2010 the Ministry of Foreign Affairs responded to the GPO’s request for information.
On 22 November 2010 the GPO received the reports of the Kyiv regional prosecutor’s office on the results of its extradition inquiries concerning the applicants. The reports recommended that the applicants’ extradition be refused, pursuant to paragraph 4 of Article 466 of the Code of Criminal Procedure which provides that extradition can be refused where “the competent authority of the foreign State has not provided, at the request of the central authority, additional materials or data, without which a decision on the extradition request may not be taken”.
On 8 April 2011 the GPO wrote to the US Embassy. It referred to the visit of the US officials to the first and third applicant and to information provided to the GPO by the second applicant’s lawyer that his application for asylum was pending before the US authorities. The GPO asked the Embassy to inform it of any progress in examining the applicants’ requests for asylum.
.  On 5 July and 2 September 2011 the GPO again requested information from the US Embassy, indicating that no response to its previous requests had been received.
.  On 18 October 2011 the US Embassy informed the GPO that members of its staff needed to visit the first and third applicants in order to finalise their asylum applications and take their fingerprints. It requested assistance in arranging such a visit.
.  On 16 December 2011 the UNHCR informed the GPO that it had recognised the first three applicants as refugees under its mandate and invited the GPO to give due weight to this decision in examining Uzbekistan’s extradition requests. It further stated that the US authorities were in the process of examining the first and third applicants’ requests for asylum. The UNHCR added that it could not facilitate the second applicant’s resettlement because he was in a polygamous marriage.
.  On 23 January 2012 the UNHCR informed the GPO that the first applicant had been granted asylum in Sweden.
On 10 and 20 February 2012 the GPO decided not to extradite the third and first applicants to Uzbekistan in view of the fact that they had been granted asylum in the US and Sweden respectively. The GPO also observed that the information originally submitted by the Uzbek authorities in support of their requests for extradition had been insufficient and that the Uzbek authorities had not remedied that, despite the GPO’s requests. The GPO considered that that too constituted an obstacle to the applicants’ extradition to Uzbekistan.
The parties did not inform the Court of any final decision concerning the second applicant’s extradition. As of the date of the submission of the applicants’ observations in reply to those of the Government, that is 9 December 2013, no such decision had been made.
On 2 July 2010 the applicant was arrested by the Ukrainian police. He was released on the same day but re-arrested on 6 July 2010.
On 9 July 2010 the Bila Tserkva District Court ordered his provisional arrest for up to thirty days.
On 5 August 2010 the applicant was released as no extradition request had arrived by that date.
On 16 August 2010 the GPO received an extradition request from the Uzbek authorities.
On 7 October 2010 the GPO decided to refuse extradition on the grounds that the offence with which he had been charged under Uzbek law, namely creating, leading and being a member of a religious fundamentalist, extremist, separatist or other prohibited organisation, were not offences under Ukrainian criminal law.
.  The relevant provisions of the Code as they stood before 17 June 2010 are summarised in Soldatenko v. Ukraine (no. 2440/07, §§ 26-29, 23 October 2008).
.  Article 106 of the Code provides for powers of the bodies of inquiry, most notably police, to arrest persons suspected of criminal offences for up to seventy-two hours.
.  Following amendments adopted on 21 May 2010, and which came into effect on 17 June 2010, a new chapter dedicated to the question of extradition was added to the Code. The relevant provisions of the amended Code read as follows:
“...
An extradition inquiry [shall encompass] activities carried out by bodies determined by law in order to establish and examine circumstances which, as defined by an international treaty to which Ukraine is a party or by any other legislative act,, are capable of preventing the extradition of a person who has committed a crime.
Arrest pending extradition [shall mean] placing a person in detention to ensure his or her extradition.
Provisional arrest [shall mean] detaining a person who has been arrested on suspicion of having committed a crime outside Ukraine for a period determined by this Code or by an international treaty to which Ukraine is a party, until receipt of an extradition request.”
“...
The General Prosecutor’s Office shall be the central authority concerning the extradition of an accused person (a suspect) where the proceedings [in the foreign State] are at the stage of pre-trial investigations.
...”
“Arrest in Ukraine of a person who is wanted by a foreign State in connection with the commission of a crime shall be carried out by a body of inquiry.
...
The arrested person shall be released immediately if:
1) within seventy-two hours of the arrest he or she has not been served with a reasoned decision of a court on the application of provisional arrest or arrest pending extradition;
2) it has been established that there are circumstances under which the extradition may not be carried out.
...
The procedure for the arrest of such persons and for the examination of complaints about their arrest shall be governed by Article 106 of this Code, taking into account the specific provisions envisaged by this Chapter.”
“A person who has been arrested and who has committed a crime abroad is placed under provisional arrest for 40 days or any other period set forth in an international treaty to which Ukraine is a party, until receipt of an extradition request.
A person who has been arrested shall be released immediately if the maximum period of provisional arrest has expired but no extradition request has arrived.
The body of inquiry which arrested the person, with the consent of a prosecutor, or a prosecutor, shall lodge an application for provisional arrest.
...
The application must be examined within seventy-two hours of the person’s arrest.
....
A person who has been arrested, or his or her representative, may appeal against the order placing the person under provisional arrest within three days of delivery of the order. The order shall remain in effect pending the appeal. Any ruling of the appellate court shall be final and not subject to further appeal.
...”
“Upon receipt of an extradition request from the competent authority of a foreign State, the prosecutor, on the instruction (request) of the central authority, shall lodge a request with the court at the place of the person’s detention for the arrest of the person pending extradition.
...
On receipt of a request [for an arrest pending extradition], the judge shall check the identity of the person concerned, ask him or her to make a statement, check the extradition request and the available material from the extradition inquiry, hear the opinion of the prosecutor and other participants, and deliver a decision:
1) ordering arrest pending extradition;
2) refusing arrest pending extradition if there are no grounds for its application.
...
An appeal against the judge’s decision may be lodged with the court of appeal by the prosecutor, the person placed under arrest pending extradition, or his or her defence counsel or legal representative, within three days of the date of delivery of the decision. The lodging of an appeal against the judge’s decision shall not suspend its entry into force or its execution. A decision of the court of appeal shall not be subject to [further] appeal.
Arrest pending extradition shall be applied until a decision has been taken on the extradition of the person concerned and his actual surrender (extradition), but shall not last more than eighteen months.
Within that period, and not less than once every two months, the judge at the place of the person’s detention shall check, at the request of the prosecutor, if there are grounds for keeping the person in detention or for his or her release.
Upon a complaint by the person placed under arrest pending extradition, or by his or her defence counsel or legal representative, the judge at the place of the person’s detention shall check if there are grounds for the person’s release, though not more often than once a month.
...”
“The extradition inquiry concerning circumstances capable of preventing the person’s extradition shall be carried out by the central authority or, upon its instructions (request), by the regional prosecutor’s office.
...”
“A person’s extradition to a foreign State shall be refused if:
1) on the day of the decision on extradition the person ... is, according to Ukrainian laws, a Ukrainian national or a stateless person permanently residing in Ukraine;
2) Ukrainian law does not provide the punishment of imprisonment for the crime for which extradition is being sought;
3) the charges concerning the crimes for which extradition is being sought are time-barred according to Ukrainian law ...
4) the competent authority of the foreign State has not provided, upon the central authority’s request, additional material or data, without which a decision on the extradition request may not be taken;
5) the person’s extradition is incompatible with Ukraine’s undertakings under international treaties to which it is a party;
6) there are other circumstances envisaged by an international treaty to which Ukraine is a party.
A person who has been granted refugee status may not be extradited to a foreign State where his or her health, life, or freedom is endangered for reasons of race, faith (religion), ethnicity, nationality, membership of a particular social group, or political opinion, unless otherwise provided by an international treaty to which Ukraine is a party.
...”
“Having examined the material of the extradition inquiry, the central authority shall take a decision to extradite the person or to refuse [his or her] extradition to the foreign State. The decision shall be taken by the head of the central authority or his or her deputy.
...
If a decision to extradite the person is taken, that person shall be given a copy of the decision. If the decision has not been challenged before a court within seven days, the actual transfer of the person to the competent authorities of the foreign State shall be organised.”
Section 31 of the Act provides that persons recognised as refugees by other States Parties to the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees (“the Refugee Convention”) and the 1967 Protocol to the Convention cannot be expelled or forced to return directly or indirectly to countries where their life or freedom would be threatened on account of their race, religion, ethnicity, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion. This prohibition also applies to returning persons to countries where such recognised refugees could be at risk of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.