The case originated in an application (no. 40583/15) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Oleksandr Anatoliyovych Ignatov (“the applicant”), on 25 July 2015.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, most recently Mr I. Lishchyna from the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that in the course of his pre-trial detention his rights guaranteed by Article 5 §§ 1 (c), 3 and 4 of the Convention had been breached.
On 2 December 2015 the complaints concerning the lawfulness, length and speediness of review of the applicant’s detention under Article 5 of the Convention were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1989 and lives in Nyzhni Sirogozy.
On 31 May 2013 the Solonyansky district police department in Dnipropetrovsk Region instituted criminal proceedings in respect of a carjacking.
On 4 June 2013 the applicant was arrested as a suspect in connection with the incident.
On 5 June 2013 the investigating judge of the Solonyansky District Court remanded the applicant in pre-trial detention until 4 August 2013 on the grounds that he was suspected of a serious crime, was unemployed, had no funds, did not live in the area and was not living at his official registered address. It was also considered that he might evade his procedural obligations and abscond to avoid investigation and trial.
On 21 June 2013 the applicant was charged with the robbery of G., committed together with V.
On 21 June 2013 the pre-trial investigation ended and the case against the applicant and V. was referred to the Solonyansky District Court. The case was then transferred to the Krasnogvardiysk District Court in Dnipropetrovsk (“the District Court”).
On 2 August 2013 the District Court remitted the case for further investigation and remanded the applicant in custody until 1 October 2013, noting that he had been suspected of a serious crime and might continue his criminal activities.
On 1 October 2013 the District Court held a preliminary hearing in the case and extended the detention of the applicant and V. until 29 November 2013. It noted, without going into any detail or indication to which of the co-accused it referred, that “other preventive measures will not ensure the appropriate behaviour of the accused” during the trial.
On 26 November 2013 the District Court extended the applicant’s detention until 24 January 2014, noting that he and V. had been charged with serious crimes, did not live in the area and were unemployed. It was also considered that they might influence witnesses and other participants in the proceedings or otherwise obstruct criminal proceedings, given that the trial had not yet started.
On 27 December 2013 the applicant applied for release to the District Court complaining about, among other things, his state of health.
On 21 January 2014 the District Court examined and rejected that application. The court extended the applicant’s detention until 21 March 2014 on the same grounds as those given in its previous decision of 26 November 2013. As to his health problems, the court noted that he had been treated successfully for renal colic and was fit for trial.
On 19 March 2014 the District Court rejected a further application for release lodged on 26 February 2014 and extended the applicant’s detention until 19 May 2014 on the same grounds as those given on the two previous occasions, adding that he was aware of the punishment for the crime he had been charged with and thus might obstruct the criminal proceedings to avoid criminal liability.
On 22 April, 17 June and 15 July 2014 the District Court extended the applicant’s detention until 20 June, 15 August, and 12 September 2014 respectively, on the same grounds as those given in its decisions of 26 November 2013 and 21 January 2014.
On 15 August 2014 the applicant lodged another application for release with the District Court.
On 4 September 2014 the District Court examined and rejected that application, extending the applicant’s detention until 2 November 2014. It repeated its previous reasoning, adding that he was aware of the punishment for the crime he had been charged with and thus might obstruct the criminal proceedings to avoid criminal liability. It also added that he and his coaccused V. had no strong social ties.
On 30 September 2014 the applicant lodged another application for release, which was rejected on 9 October 2014. The District Court repeated its previous reasoning, noting in addition as grounds for his detention that he was not studying.
On 31 October 2014 the District Court rejected that application and extended the applicant’s detention until 29 December 2014, giving reasons similar to those given on 4 September 2014.
On 9 December 2014 the District Court extended the applicant’s detention until 6 February 2015, repeating the reasoning given in its previous decisions.
On 27 January 2015 the applicant and V. were convicted by the Krasnogvardiysk District Court of robbery and carjacking and sentenced to five years’ imprisonment. The court also decided to reduce the remainder of the prison sentence (namely the part not covered by the pre-trial detention) by half under the Amnesty Act.
On 12 June 2015 the Mensky District Court in Chernigiv Region allowed the applicant’s application for early release.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure read as follows:
“1.  Preventive measures are:
...
(5)  detention on remand.
...
Preventive measures shall be applied during the investigation by the investigating judge at the request of the investigator following agreement with the prosecutor, or at the request of the prosecutor; during the trial, they shall be applied by the court at the request of the prosecutor.”
“1.  The term of validity of the ruling by the investigating judge or the court ordering an accused’s detention or continued detention may not exceed sixty days...”
“...
During the preliminary court hearing the court shall be entitled, at the request of participants in the trial, to impose, alter or revoke measures to ensure the conduct of the criminal proceedings, including any preventive measures imposed on the accused. When considering such requests, the court shall follow the rules set forth in Chapter II of this Code [Measures to Ensure the Conduct of Criminal Proceedings]. In the absence of such a request from the parties to the trial, the measures to ensure the conduct of the criminal proceedings that were selected at the pre-trial investigation stage shall be deemed to be extended.”
“1.  During the trial the court, at the request of the prosecution or the defence, may issue a ruling altering, revoking or imposing a preventive measure against the accused.
...
Regardless of whether such requests have been made, the court shall be obliged to examine the reasonableness of the accused’s continued detention within two months from the date of receipt of the indictment by the court ... or from the date of the court ruling ordering the accused’s detention as a preventive measure...”
The Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers, which under Article 46 § 2 of the Convention has the duty to supervise the execution of the Court’s judgments, is currently examining the execution by Ukraine of the Court’s judgment in Kharchenko v. Ukraine (no. 40107/02, 10 February 2011), which summarised shortcomings identified in the Ukrainian system of detention on remand. One of the issues highlighted in that judgment was the detention of persons without any judicial decision during the period between the end of the investigation and the beginning of the trial. According to information published on the Committee’s website, the case is currently under “enhanced supervision”.
In that context on 21 February 2013 the Ukrainian Government submitted a Revised Action Plan in which they reiterated that Parliament had adopted a new Code of Criminal Procedure which had come into force and had largely eliminated the legislative shortcomings underlying recurrent violations of Article 5 of the Convention. At its 1164th meeting (5-7 March 2013) the Committee of Ministers noted, among other things, that further clarifications were required from the Ukrainian authorities regarding the legislative changes in question.
At its 1265th meeting (20-21 September 2016) the Committee of Ministers noted that the Code of Criminal Procedure largely improved the procedure for detention on remand, however, certain violations of Article 5 were not resolved by the new Code. They referred in particular to the Chanyev case, which concerned the applicant’s detention without a court order during the period between the end of the investigation and the beginning of the trial (see Chanyev v. Ukraine, no. 46193/13, 9 October 2014). The Committee of Ministers insisted on the urgency of rapidly bringing the remaining necessary legislative reforms and on the necessity of ensuring in the meantime that all possible practical measures are taken by courts and prosecutors to prevent further violations of Article 5 with regard to detention on remand.