The case was referred to the Court, as established under former Article 19 of the Convention3, by the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) on 17 March 1998, within the three-month period laid down by former Articles 32 § 1 and 47 of the Convention. It originated in an application (no.24735/94) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Commission under former Article 25 by a Turkish national, Mr Kamil Tekin Sürek, on 18 July 1994.

The Commission’s request referred to former Articles 44 and 48 of the Convention and to the declaration whereby Turkey recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (former Article 46). The object of the request was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Articles 6 § 1 and 10 of the Convention.
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 § 3 (d) of the former Rules of Court A1, the applicant stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings and designated the lawyer who would represent him (Rule 30). Mr R. Bernhardt, President of the Court at the time, subsequently authorised the applicant’s lawyer to use the Turkish language in the written procedure (Rule 27 § 3). At a later stage, Mr L. Wildhaber, President of the new Court, authorised the applicant’s lawyer to use the Turkish language in the oral proceedings (Rule 36 § 5).
As President of the Chamber which had originally been constituted (former Article 43 of the Convention and former Rule 21) in order to deal in particular with procedural matters that might arise before the entry into force of Protocol No. 11, Mr Bernhardt, acting through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Turkish Government (“the Government”), the applicant’s lawyer and the Delegate of the Commission on the organisation of the written procedure. Pursuant to the order made in consequence, the Registrar received the Government’s  and the applicant’s memorials on 16 September and 14 October 1998 respectively. On 29 September 1998 the Government filed with the Registry additional information in support of their memorial. On 26 February 1999 the applicant filed further details of his claim for just satisfaction and on 1 March the Government filed their observations on his claim.
After the entry into force of Protocol No. 11 on 1 November 1998 and in accordance with Article 5 § 5 thereof, the case was referred to the Grand Chamber of the Court. On 22 October 1998 Mr Wildhaber had decided that, in the interests of the proper administration of justice, a single Grand Chamber should be constituted to hear the instant case and twelve other cases against Turkey, namely: Karataş v. Turkey (application no. 23168/94); Arslan v. Turkey (no. 23462/94); Polat v. Turkey (no. 23500/94); Ceylan v. Turkey (no. 23556/94); Okçuoğlu v. Turkey (no. 24246/94); Gerger v. Turkey (no. 24919/94); Erdoğdu and İnce v. Turkey (nos. 25067/94 and 25068/94); Başkaya and Okçuoğlu v. Turkey (nos. 23536/94 and 24408/94); Sürek v. Turkey no. 1 (no. 26682/95); Sürek and Özdemir v. Turkey
The Grand Chamber constituted for that purpose included ex officio Mr R. Türmen, the judge elected in respect of Turkey (Article 27 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 24 § 4 of the Rules of Court), Mr Wildhaber, the President of the Court, Mrs E. Palm Vice-President of the Court, and Mr J.P. Costa and Mr M. Fischbach, Vice-Presidents of Sections (Article 27 § 3 of the Convention and Rule 24 §§ 3 and 5 (a)). The other members appointed to complete the Grand Chamber were Mr A. Pastor Ridruejo, Mr G. Bonello, Mr J. Makarczyk, Mr P. Kūris, Mrs F. Tulkens, Mrs V. Strážnická, Mr V. Butkevych, Mr J. Casadevall, Mrs H.S. Greve, Mr A.B. Baka, Mr R. Maruste, and Mrs S. Botoucharova (Rule 24 § 3 and Rule 100 § 4).
On 19 November 1998 Mr Wildhaber exempted Mr Türmen from sitting after his withdrawal from the case having regard to the decision of the Grand Chamber in the case of Oğur v. Turkey taken in accordance with Rule 28 § 4. On 16 December 1998 the Government notified the registry that Mr F. Gölcüklü had been appointed ad hoc judge (Rule 29 § 1).
Subsequently, Mr K. Traja replaced Mrs S. Botoucharova, who was unable to take part in the further consideration of the case (Rule 24 § 5 (b)).
Pursuant to the invitation of the Court (Rule 99), the Commission delegated one of its members, Mr D. Šváby, to take part in the consideration of the case before the Grand Chamber. The Commission subsequently informed the Registry that the Commission would not be represented at the oral hearing.  On 16 February 1999 the delegate submitted his observations by way of a memorial.
In accordance with the President’s decision, a hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 3 March 1999, the case being heard simultaneously with the case of Sürek no. 4 v. Turkey. The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:
The applicant is a Turkish citizen who was born in 1957 and lives in Istanbul.
At the material time, the applicant was the major shareholder in Deniz Basın Yayın Sanayi ve Ticaret Organizasyon, a Turkish limited liability company which owns a weekly review entitled Haberde Yorumda Gerçek (“The Truth of News and Comments”), published in Istanbul.
In issue No. 42 of the review, dated 9 January 1993, a news commentary entitled “In Botan the poor peasants are expropriating the landlords!” was published.
The relevant parts of this news commentary read:
	“...
‘The waves of the earthquake centred on Botan have reached all of Kurdistan. The national liberation struggle, growing like the ripples caused by a stone cast into a pool of water, has already gone past Botan in waves, currently embracing 50 districts in 8 provinces in the active front of armed struggle.’
PKK [Kurdistan Workers’ Party ] sources briefly describe the extent of the national struggle in Kurdistan as follows: the said 8 provinces (together with their districts) are Hakkari, Şırnak, Siirt, Mardin, Batman, Urfa and Diyarbakır; while the provinces of Van, Malatya, Bitlis, Muş and Gaziantep and their districts are described as being partially involved in the war.
The popular movements in the Botan area, where approximately 4.5 to 5 million Kurds live, which have developed with the rise of the national liberation movement, have made rapid strides in the years 1990-92. The political point reached in the area is that the State has almost become inoperative. ... 
The domain vacated by the State in the political sense has since been occupied by the PKK in the rural areas and H.E.P.  organisations in the cities.  ... 
Land cannot be redistributed before it is transferred to the free will of the Kurdish people, because it is inconceivable to distribute land that bears the seal of the Republic of Turkey.	... 
Today, our struggle is an external war directed against the forces of the Republic of Turkey.	...
We want to wage a total liberation struggle.	...”
On 10 January 1993 the Istanbul National Security Court (İstanbul Devlet Güvenlik Mahkemesi) ordered the seizure of this edition of the review on the ground that, allegedly, it disseminated propaganda against the indivisibility of the State.
In an indictment dated 28 January 1993, the Public Prosecutor at the Istanbul National Security Court charged the applicant, being the owner of the review, with disseminating propaganda against the indivisibility of the State. The charges were brought under section 8 of the Prevention of Terrorism Act 1991 (-“the 1991 Act”; see paragraph 16 below) on account of the publication of the above news commentary, which concerned, inter alia, the activities of the PKK.
In the proceedings before the National Security Court, the applicant denied the charges. He pleaded that the commentary on which the charges were based in fact criticised the activities of the PKK. He invoked Article 10 of the Convention and referred to the case-law of the Commission and the Court. He stated that pluralism of opinions, including those opinions which shock or offend, is essential in a democratic society. He argued that the provisions of section 8 of the 1991 Act restrict the right to freedom of expression in contravention of the Turkish Constitution and the criteria laid down by the case-law of the Commission and the Court.
In a judgment dated 27 September 1993, the National Security Court found the applicant guilty of making propaganda against the indivisibility of the State. The applicant was first sentenced to a fine of 100,000,000 Turkish liras (TRL). Thereupon the Court, considering the good conduct of the applicant during the trial, reduced the fine to TRL 83,333,333.
The National Security Court, considering those parts of the news commentary cited at paragraph 10 above in the light of the article as a whole, observed that it referred to certain parts of Turkey as “Kurdistan”.  Moreover, in the words of the Court, it described the acts of the “PKK terrorist organisation” as a national liberation struggle, which amounted to propaganda aimed at undermining the indivisibility of the State. 
The applicant appealed. He, inter alia, reiterated the defence he had relied on before the National Security Court. On 18 February 1994 the Court of Cassation dismissed the appeal, upholding the cogency of the National Security Court’s assessment of evidence.
The relevant provisions of the Press Act 1950 read as follows:
Section 3
“For the purposes of the present Law, the term ‘periodicals’ shall mean newspapers, press agency dispatches and any other printed matter published at regular intervals.
‘Publication’ shall mean the exposure, display, distribution, emission, sale or offer for sale of printed matter on premises to which the public have access where anyone may see it.
An offence shall not be deemed to have been committed through the medium of the press unless publication has taken place, except where the material in itself is unlawful.”
The relevant provisions of the Prevention of Terrorism Act 1991 read as follows:
Section 8
(before amendment by Law no. 4126 of 27 October 1995)
“Written and spoken propaganda, meetings, assemblies and demonstrations aimed at undermining the territorial integrity of the Republic of Turkey or the indivisible unity of the nation are prohibited, irrespective of the methods used and the intention. Any person who engages in such an activity shall be sentenced to not less than two and not more than five years’ imprisonment and a fine of from fifty million to one hundred million Turkish liras.
Where the crime of propaganda contemplated in the above paragraph is committed through the medium of periodicals within the meaning of section 3 of the Press Act (Law no. 5680), the publisher shall also be liable to a fine equal to ninety per cent of the income from the average sales for the previous month if the periodical appears more frequently than monthly, or from the average sales for the previous month of the daily newspaper with the largest circulation if the offence involves printed matter other than periodicals or if the periodical has just been launched. However the fine may not be less than one hundred million Turkish liras. The editor of the periodical concerned shall be ordered to pay a sum equal to half the fine imposed on the publisher and sentenced to not less than six months’ and not more than two years’ imprisonment.”
Section 8
(as amended by Law no. 4126 of 27 October 1995)
“Written and spoken propaganda, meetings, assemblies and demonstrations aimed at undermining the territorial integrity of the Republic of Turkey or the indivisible unity of the nation are prohibited. Any person who engages in such an activity shall be sentenced to not less than one and not more than three years’ imprisonment and a fine of from one hundred million to three hundred million Turkish liras. The penalty imposed on a reoffender may not be commuted to a fine.
Where the crime of propaganda contemplated in the first paragraph is committed through the medium of periodicals within the meaning of section 3 of the Press Act (Law no. 5680), the publisher shall also be liable to a fine equal to ninety per cent of the income from the average sales for the previous month if the periodical appears more frequently than monthly. However, the fine may not be less than one hundred million Turkish liras. The editor of the periodical concerned shall be ordered to pay a sum equal to half the fine imposed on the publisher and sentenced to not less than six months’ and not more than two years’ imprisonment.
Where the crime of propaganda contemplated in the first paragraph is committed through the medium of printed matter or by means of mass communication other than periodicals within the meaning of the second paragraph, those responsible and the owners of the means of mass communication shall be sentenced to not less than six
months’ and not more than two years’ imprisonment and a fine of from one hundred million to three hundred million Turkish liras…
…”
Section 13
(before amendment by Law no. 4126 of 27 October 1995)
“The penalties for the offences contemplated in the present law may not be commuted to a fine or any other measure, nor may they be accompanied by a reprieve.”
Section 13
(as amended by Law no. 4126 of 27 October 1995)
“The penalties for the offences contemplated in the present Law may not be commuted to a fine or any other measure, nor may they be accompanied by a reprieve.
However, the provisions of this section shall not apply to convictions pursuant to section 8.”
The relevant provisions of domestic law governing the organisation and procedure of the National Security Court are quoted in paragraphs 3236 of the Sürek v. Turkey (no. 1) judgment, which is being delivered on the same date as the present judgment.
Mr Kamil Tekin Sürek applied to the Commission on 18 July 1994. He complained that his conviction and sentence constituted an unjustified interference with his right to freedom of expression as guaranteed by Article 10 of the Convention and that his case had not been heard by an independent and impartial tribunal, in breach of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. He also maintained that the criminal proceedings against him had not been concluded within a reasonable time, which gave rise to a separate violation of Article 6 § 1.
The Commission declared the application (no. 24735/94) admissible on 2 September 1996, with the exception of the applicant’s Article 6 § 1 complaint relating to the length of the criminal proceedings in his case. In its report of 13 January 1998 (former Article 31), it expressed the opinion
The applicant requested the Court to find the respondent State in breach of its obligations under Articles 6 § 1 and 10 of the Convention and to award him just satisfaction under Article 41.
The Government for their part invited the Court to reject the applicant’s complaints.