The case originated in an application (no. 38201/16) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Russian nationals, Ms Vera Vladimirovna Bogonosova (“the first applicant”) and Mr Georgiy Ivanovich Bogonosov (“the second applicant”), on 21 June 2016.
The applicants were represented by Mr V.A. Kirillov, a lawyer practising in St Petersburg. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicants complained, in particular, under Articles 8 and 13 of the Convention of a violation of their right to maintain family ties with their granddaughter and the absence of an effective domestic remedy in that connection.
On 10 November 2016 the above complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. The application was granted priority treatment (Rule 41 of the Rules of Court).
By letter of 13 November 2018 the second applicant informed the Court that on 29 August 2018 the first applicant died. He further withdrew the power of attorney that he had given to Mr V.A. Kirillov.
The applicants were born in 1955 and 1948 respectively. The first applicant died on 29 August 2018. The second applicant lives in St Petersburg.
The applicants were former spouses. They divorced in 1988, but continued to live together in the same apartment.
The applicants’ daughter, O., married K.O.V.-S., a national of Finland. The couple settled in Finland.
On 28 September 2006 O. gave birth to a daughter, M.
In May 2008 O. and M. moved in with the applicants in Russia.
On 3 April 2011 O. died of a serious illness. M. remained living with the applicants.
According to the Government, during O.’s illness the applicants’ relatives Mr and Ms Z. started to help the applicants with the upbringing of M.: they took the girl to their place of residence on weekends and holidays, and attended events in her kindergarten.
On 16 May 2011 the second applicant was appointed M.’s guardian with the written consent of the first applicant.
On 24 October 2012 the Kirovskiy District Court of St Petersburg granted the second applicant’s application and deprived K.O.V.-S. of his parental rights over M.
According to the Government, after the death of O., a protracted family dispute arose between the applicants. The first applicant was dissatisfied with the way the second applicant fulfilled his duties as M.’s guardian and insisted that their son, N.B., should take on those obligations. Furthermore, there was a disagreement as to whether M. should start school in September 2013.
When the question of M.’s schooling arose Mr and Ms Z. decided to apply to adopt the girl. The applicants at that stage supported their decision.
From February to April 2013 Mr and Ms Z. underwent training courses for individuals wishing to adopt a child left without parental care.
On 29 May and 13 June 2013 respectively the Kronverkskoye municipal entity issued positive decisions on Mr and Ms Z.’s suitability to become adoptive parents.
On 19 June 2013 the head of the Krasnenkaya Rechka municipal entity received a written statement from the second applicant to the effect that he did not object to the adoption of M. by Mr and Ms Z.
According to the Government, when the first applicant found out that the second applicant had agreed to the adoption of their granddaughter, she started to set the child against Mr and Ms Z. and to interfere with their communication. She further tried, in vain, to deprive the second applicant of his guardianship of M. and have N.B. appointed as the child’s guardian.
In connection with this situation, in the beginning of July 2013 Ms Z., with the consent of the second applicant, lodged an application seeking to be appointed as M.’s second guardian.
On 2 July 2013 the head of the Krasnenkaya Rechka municipal entity took a decision to appoint Ms Z. as M.’s second guardian. The child’s place of residence was determined as being with Ms Z.
On 4 July 2013 M. moved in with Mr and Ms Z.
From that moment on the first applicant began to lodge applications with the childcare authorities alleging that Ms Z. prevented her communicating with the child.
On 26 September 2013 a meeting was held between the parties on the subject of the first applicant’s and N.B.’s communication with the child with the participation of the Krasnenkaya Rechka municipal entity, the childcare authorities, the Children’s Rights Commissioner in St Petersburg, the prosecutor’s assistant of the district prosecutor’s office, an expert specialising in conflict resolution and a psychologist of the District Centre for Social Assistance to the Family and Children. An oral agreement was reached between Ms Z. and the first applicant to the effect that the latter’s meetings with the child were to take place on 5 October and 12 October 2013 for two hours in the presence of Ms Z. On 1 November 2013 Ms Z. and the first applicant were to come to the office of the Children’s Rights Commissioner for a debriefing on the meetings.
On 9 December 2013 the first applicant informed the childcare authorities that none of the meetings had taken place.
While the first applicant did not have any contact with the child after that, the second applicant continued communicating with M. until November 2014. Subsequently Mr and Ms Z. prevented the second applicant from staying in touch with M.
Meanwhile, on 13 November 2013 Mr and Ms Z. lodged an adoption application with the Primorskiy District Court of St Petersburg (“the District Court”).
On 25 November 2013 the second applicant submitted to the deputy head of the local administration of the municipal entity Krasnenkaya Rechka his agreement to M.’s adoption by Mr and Ms Z. He expressed his wish for the adoption case to be heard in his absence.
On 26 November 2013 the District Court granted the application by Mr and Ms Z. to adopt M. The judgment was not appealed against and became final on 7 December 2013.
In 2015 the applicants, acting separately, applied for restoration of the procedural time-limit for appeal against the adoption judgment of 26 November 2013 seeking to challenge it on account of, inter alia, their loss of post-adoption contact with their granddaughter, which ran contrary to the child’s interests.
On 11 February 2015 the second applicant applied to the District Court to have the procedural time-limit for lodging his appeal against the adoption judgment of 26 November 2013 restored.
On 16 March 2015 the District Court granted the second applicant’s application.
On 13 May 2015 the St Petersburg City Court (“the City Court”) upheld the judgment of 26 November 2013 on the second applicant’s appeal. The City Court dismissed the second applicant’s argument to the effect that the child’s close relatives had been unaware of the adoption proceedings. It noted that the second applicant had known about the proceedings, had not raised any objections to the adoption and had asked to have the case examined in his absence. The City Court further held that notification, let alone involvement in the proceedings, of the child’s other relatives (grandmother and uncle), was not required by law. As regards the second applicant’s argument to the effect that the child’s adoption had led to the termination of all contact between her and the grandparents, the City Court stated, relying on Article 67 §§ 1 and 2 of the Family Code, that the grandfather, grandmother, brothers, sisters and other relatives have a right to contact with the child and that in the event of a refusal by the child’s parents to afford them such contact, they are entitled to apply to a court to have the obstacles to their contact with the child eliminated.
On 21 August 2015 the City Court and on 22 December 2015 the Supreme Court of Russia (“the Supreme Court”), following a prior application for review of the final judgment, decided not to refer the case for review in the cassation procedure.
Meanwhile, on 28 May 2015 the first applicant applied to the District Court to have the procedural time-limit for lodging her appeal against the adoption judgment of 26 November 2013 restored. Relying on Article 137 of the Family Code she argued that by failing to involve her in the adoption proceedings the domestic court had ruptured her family ties with her granddaughter.
However, on 14 July 2015 the District Court dismissed her application. The District Court held that the first applicant had not been a party to the proceedings resulting in the judgment of 26 November 2013, that the above judgment had had no bearing on her rights and obligations, and therefore she had had no standing to appeal against it. The District Court further held that the first applicant misinterpreted Article 137 of the Family Code. It did not follow from the provisions of Article 137 that the first applicant’s family ties with her granddaughter would be ruptured. Relying of Article 67 of the Family Code, the District Court considered that it was open to the first applicant to apply to a court for the determination of her contact with the child.
On 10 September 2015 the City Court upheld the above decision on appeal.
On 11 December 2015 the City Court and on 29 January 2016 the Supreme Court decided not to refer the above decisions for review in the cassation procedure.
On 3 March 2014 the first applicant instituted court proceedings against Mr and Ms Z. seeking to oblige them not to thwart her contact with her granddaughter M. and to have determined the contact schedule with the latter.
On 18 April 2014 the administration of the municipal entity Krasnenkaya Rechka submitted that the girl needed a calm psychological atmosphere; that she perceived the situation around her as tense and anxious; and that she did not understand the conflict between the applicants themselves and between the first applicant and the girl’s adoptive parents.
On 16 October 2014 in her conversation with a psychologist M. submitted that the applicants “had never been friends”, that they often swore, even in her presence; and that she was not frightened when they swore because she was used to it.
On 21 January 2015 an expert of the Istina Independent Expert Organisation gave her opinion that the child considered and called Mr and Ms Z. her parents. She had close emotional bonds with them. Despite the absence of contact, the girl remembered and loved her grandmother. This was explained by the fact that the adoptive parents, although preventing their communication, were not exercising psychological pressure on the girl and were not denigrating the grandmother. The expert considered, however, that communication between the child and the grandmother could have a negative impact on the psychological state of the child, as there was an unsettled conflict between the applicants and the Z.s: the grandmother disapproved of the child’s adoption and was challenging its lawfulness. The expert further considered that the child’s residence with the grandparents would not be ideal, because, given the instability of interfamilial relations and the protracted conflict in the applicants’ family, there existed a risk of the child’s being involved in the adults’ conflict. However, since the girl retained the positive image of her grandmother and expressed her wish to communicate with her, it was possible to establish a contact arrangement, which would provide for an obligatory preparatory stage, including reconciliation between the relatives.
On 10 February 2015 the Pushkinskiy District Court of St Petersburg established, on the basis of the relevant reports and expert examinations, that M. still had a positive image of the first applicant and had expressed a wish to have contact with her, and that it was therefore possible to establish a contact schedule between them. The Pushkinskiy District Court therefore ordered Mr and Ms Z. not to place obstacles in the way of the first applicant’s communication with M. and held that contact between the first applicant and M. should take place as follows: during the first six months after the finalisation of the judgment – each second and fourth Sunday of the month from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m. outside the parents’ and the grandparents’ places of residence in the presence of the parents, and thereafter on the same conditions without the parents present. A year after the finalisation of the judgment the first applicant was able, in addition to the above arrangements, to spend two weeks with M. during the summer holidays with sixty days’ prior notice to the parents of the place of the planned holiday. Mr and Ms Z. appealed.
Following an appeal by Mr and Ms Z., on 17 September 2015 the City Court quashed the above judgment on appeal and discontinued the proceedings. The City Court held that the District Court had committed substantial violations of material and procedural law which resulted in wrongful conclusions. Relying on Articles 137 §§ 4 and 5 of the Family Code and clause 18 of the ruling of the Plenary of the Supreme Court no. 8 of 20 April 2006 (see paragraphs 54, 55 and 68 below), the City Court held that the first applicant had not applied for continued post-adoption contact with her granddaughter within the adoption proceedings, for which reason this issue had remained unexamined by [the District Court examining the adoption case] and no reference had been made in the adoption judgment regarding continuation of family ties between the first applicant and her granddaughter after her adoption. In such circumstances, the City Court considered that civil and family law did not enable the first applicant to claim the elimination of obstacles to her contact with the child and determination of the terms of such contact with the latter.
On 7 December 2015 the City Court and on 29 February 2016 the Supreme Court, following a prior application for review of the final judgment, decided not to refer the decision of 17 September 2015 for review in the cassation procedure.
On an unspecified date in 2015 the second applicant instituted court proceedings against Mr and Ms Z., seeking to oblige them not to thwart his contact with his granddaughter M. and to have the contact schedule with the latter determined pursuant to Article 67 of the Family Code.
On 1 December 2015 the District Court held that since the adoption judgment of 26 November 2013 did not contain an indication as to the continuation of family ties between the second applicant and his granddaughter after the adoption, the former did not have a right to claim the elimination of obstacles to contact with the child and determination of the terms of his contact with his granddaughter. Consequently, the District Court discontinued the proceedings.
On 2 March 2016 the City Court upheld the above decision on appeal.
The general part of the Family Code provides that grandparents, brothers, sisters and other relatives are entitled to maintain contact with the child. If the parents, or one of them, prevent close relatives from seeing the child, the childcare authorities may order that contact be maintained between the child and the relative in question. If the parents do not comply with the childcare authorities’ order, the relative concerned or the childcare authorities may apply to a court for a contact order. The court must take a decision in the child’s interests and must take the child’s opinion into account. If the parents do not comply with the contact order issued by a court, they may be held liable in accordance with the law (Article 67).
Adoption is the preference for the placement of children left without parental care (Article 124 § 1).
Adoption is carried out by a court following an application of an individual (individuals) wishing to adopt a child. Cases concerning the adoption of children shall be examined by the court with the obligatory participation of the adoptive parents, childcare authorities, as well as a prosecutor (Article 125 § 1).
The adoption of children under guardianship (tutelage) requires the written consent of their guardians (trustees) (Article 131 § 1).
Adopted children lose personal non-pecuniary and pecuniary rights and are relieved of their obligations vis-à-vis their parents (their relatives) (Article 137 § 2).
If one of the parents of an adopted child dies, at the request of one of the deceased parent’s parents (the child’s grandfather or grandmother) their personal non-pecuniary and pecuniary rights and obligations in respect of the child can be maintained if this is required in the child’s interest. The right of the relatives of the deceased parent to have contact with the adopted child should be exercised in conformity with Article 67 of the present Code (Article 137 § 4).
The adoption judgment should indicate whether the adopted child is to maintain relations with one of the parents or relatives of the deceased parent (Article 137 § 5).
Parties to proceedings are to be summoned to a court by registered mail with confirmation of receipt, by a telephone call or telegram, by fax or by any other means which will secure delivery of the summons to the recipient. Summonses must be served on the parties in such a way that they have enough time to prepare their case and appear at the hearing (Article 113 §§ 1 and 3).
A civil case is to be heard in a court session, with mandatory notification to all parties of the place and time of the court session (Article 155).
If a party to the case fails to appear at the hearing and there is no evidence that the party has been duly summoned, the hearing must be adjourned (Article 167 § 2).
The adoption application is examined by a court in camera in the mandatory presence of the adoptive parent(s), a representative from the custody and guardianship office, the prosecutor, and the child if the latter is over 14 years old; the presence of the child’s parents, other interested parties and the child ‒ if aged between ten and 14 years old ‒ can also be required if deemed necessary (Article 273).
If the court grants the adoption application, the rights and obligations of the adoptive parents and the adopted child become established on the date of the entry into effect of the decision (Article 274 § 2).
The decision of the court to grant the adoption application may be appealed against within ten days of its delivery in the final form (Article 274 § 2.1).
A court may restore a procedural term established by a federal law after its expiry if it finds that reasons for failure to comply with such a term were valid (Article 112 § 1).
Appeal against non-final decisions of first-instance court can be lodged by parties to the proceedings and other participants of the proceedings. It can also be lodged by persons who had not been involved in the proceedings whereby their rights and obligations had been decided upon (Article 320 §§ 2 and 3).
For the relevant provisions of domestic law on review of judicial decisions in cassation and supervisory-review procedures see Abramyan and Others v. Russia ((dec.), nos. 38951/13 and 59611/13, §§ 31-45, 12 May 2015).
Article 392 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the Russian Federation contains a list of situations which may justify the reopening of a finalised case on account of newly discovered circumstances. A judgment of the European Court of Human Rights finding a violation of the European Convention on Human Rights in a case in respect of which an applicant lodged a complaint with the Court should be considered a new circumstance warranting a reopening (Article 392 § 4 (4)).
On 20 April 2006 the Plenary Supreme Court of Russia adopted ruling no. 8 on the application of legislation by the court during the examination of cases concerning the adoption of children. Clause 4 provides that, since pursuant to Article 273 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the Russian Federation the child’s parents, other interested parties, namely the child’s relatives, the institution where the child resides or the child himself ‒ if aged between ten and 14 years old ‒ can be involved in the adoption proceedings where it is deemed necessary, the judge must decide the issue of the above persons’ participation during the preparation for the hearing so that the adoption case can be examined in the best interests of the child to the maximum extent possible.
Clause 18 of the ruling further provides that the operative part of the adoption judgment must indicate, among other things, whether the court grants the application for continued personal non-pecuniary and pecuniary rights by one of the parents of the adopted child or by relatives of the adopted child’s deceased parent.