The case originated in an application (no. 13320/02) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by thirteen Cypriot nationals, Mr Panayiotis Kyriacou Tsiakkourmas, Ms Niki Kyriacou Tsiakkourma, Ms Eleni P.K. Tsiakkourma, Ms Maria P.K. Tsiakkourma, Mr Kyriacos P.K. Tsiakkourmas, Mr Georghios Kyriacou Tsiakkourmas, Ms Giovanna Andreou Theodosiou (née Kyriacou Tsiakkourma), Mr Ioannis (or Yiannis) Kyriacou Argyrou Tsiakkourmas, Ms Myrofora Kyriacou Nicolaou Spetsioti (née Kyriacou Tsiakkourma), Mr Nicolas Kyriacou Argyrou Tsiakkourmas, Mr Andreas Kyriacou Argyrou Tsiakkourmas, Mr Soteris Kyriacou Nicolaou Tsiakkourmas and Ms Evanthia Kyriacou Tsiakkourma (“the applicants”), on 11 June 2001.
The applicants were represented by Dr K. Chrysostomides and Company LLC and Georgiades and Pelides LLC, law firms operating in Nicosia. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 20 May 2008 the Court declared the application partly inadmissible; in particular, the complaints lodged by Ms Eleni Kyriacou Argyrou Tsiakkourma, the first applicant’s mother, were declared incompatible ratione personae with the provisions of the Convention within the meaning of Article 35 § 3, as she had died prior to the lodging of the present application. On the same date, the Court also decided to communicate to the Government the first applicant’s complaints concerning the alleged violation of his rights under Articles 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 10 and 14 of the Convention, as well as the complaints raised by the remaining applicants under Articles 8 and 10 of the Convention.
On 27 October 2008 the respondent Government presented their observations on the admissibility and merits of the case. The applicants, however, did not submit any observations in reply or any just satisfaction claims within the required time-limit. In addition, on 12 March 2009 thirdparty comments were received from the Government of Cyprus, who exercised their right to intervene in the procedure (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 (b)). The parties replied to those comments (Rule 44 § 5).
On 3 June 2014 additional questions were put to the parties in relation to the first applicant’s complaints under Article 3 of the Convention regarding his alleged ill-treatment at the time of his arrest. Supplementary observations were received from the respondent Government on 6 August 2014 on the questions raised by the Court. The applicants and the thirdparty Government also submitted written comments on 30 October 2014.
The applicants were born in 1962, 1967, 1989, 1996, 1998, 1942, 1944, 1946, 1947, 1949, 1955, 1957 and 1960 respectively, and live in Larnaca, Nicosia and Famagusta. The first and second applicants are husband and wife. The third, fourth and fifth applicants are their children. The sixth to thirteenth applicants are the five brothers and three sisters of the first applicant.
On 1 December 2000 a Turkish Cypriot named Ömer Gazi Tekoğul was arrested by the police of the Republic of Cyprus in possession of two kilograms of heroin. His arrest brought protests from the authorities of the “Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus” (“TRNC”), who alleged that he had been unlawfully arrested in the buffer zone controlled by the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (“the UNFICYP”), where neither the Greek Cypriot nor the Turkish Cypriot side was allowed to exercise authority. There were reports that Mr Tekoğul’s vehicle had allegedly been found abandoned by the Turkish Cypriot authorities inside the United Nations (“UN”) buffer zone, with its engine running and headlights on. The Republic of Cyprus authorities maintained that the arrest had been effected within their jurisdiction just outside the buffer zone.
On 8 December 2000 Mr Tekoğul was charged with drug possession and smuggling, and was remanded in custody by the Larnaca District Court in the Republic of Cyprus.
According to a report of the UN Secretary General dated 30 May 2001 on the UN operation in Cyprus, UNFICYP’s own investigation into the incident had not yielded sufficient evidence to confirm or refute either version of the events regarding the arrest of Mr Tekoğul.
In the meantime, on 20 March 2001 Mr Tekoğul was sentenced to ten years’ imprisonment by the Larnaca Assize Court on various drugrelated charges, but was subsequently pardoned by President Clerides and released on 28 September 2001.
The first applicant is a building contractor. At the time of the events giving rise to this application, he owned a construction company, Panicos Tsiakkourmas and Company Ltd., which employed workers from both sides of the island.
Like many other Greek Cypriot contractors employing Turkish Cypriot workers, the first applicant picked up his Turkish Cypriot workers each morning from a café (“Rabiye’s café”) located in the Sovereign Base Area (“SBA”) of Dhekelia in the vicinity of the Pergamos checkpoint, where people crossed from the “TRNC” to the SBA. The first applicant would collect his Turkish Cypriot workers from the café every weekday morning at approximately 5.45 to 6 a.m. and would drive them to work. At the end of the working day, he would drop them off at the same location.
The events that took place on the morning of 13 December 2000, which resulted in the first applicant’s detention by the “TRNC” authorities, are disputed between the parties. They will therefore be presented separately.
At approximately 5.30 a.m. on 13 December 2000 the first applicant left his house in the village of Livadhia in Larnaca to collect his Turkish Cypriot workers from Rabiye’s café in his red Chevrolet double-cabin pickup, as he did every workday. Since it had rained heavily the night before, parts of the road were flooded, which forced him to drive slowly. The heavy rain had stopped by the morning, but it was still drizzling when he left the house.
On the main road from Pyla to Pergamos leading to Rabiye’s café, the first applicant noticed five to six metres ahead of him a white Isuzu pickup with the registration number UJ 100, which he recognised as belonging to a fellow Greek Cypriot contractor (V.Z.). As he was driving slowly behind that vehicle in the left-hand lane, the first applicant noticed further down the road another car, a red Renault, which had pulled up on the left side of the road just before the exPergamos camp junction, approximately 500 metres before Rabiye’s café. The bonnet of the red car was open and two men in civilian clothes were checking the engine.
The white pickup driving in front of the first applicant slowed down as it approached the red Renault and the driver rolled down his window to talk to the two men. While one of the men continued to check the car’s engine, the other one waved the driver of the white pickup to move along.
As the first applicant approached the stationary red Renault, another car, a white Renault which he had not previously noticed, emerged from the junction on the left-hand side and started heading towards him at full speed. The first applicant swerved his car to the right to prevent a collision and then applied the brakes. The white Renault also stopped right in front of his car and four men in civilian clothes leapt out. The first applicant then noticed that the white Isuzu pickup travelling ahead of him had also stopped, probably to check what was happening behind. In a matter of seconds, one of the men who had leapt out of the white Renault opened his driver’s door, shouted some words in Turkish and put a gun to his forehead, while another tried to pull him out of the car. When the first applicant resisted, holding tight to his unfastened seat belt, the man holding the gun hit him on the head above the left ear with the handle of his gun, which caused him to fall down on the road into a puddle of rainwater measuring 20 to 25 cm, in a semi-conscious state as a result of the force of the blow. The men kicked and punched him on the ground, and twisted and bit his hands to force him to let go of the seat belt, while the first applicant called for help. After receiving some forceful kicks below the pelvis and to the ribs, which were so strong that he thought his ribs were broken, he let go of the belt and rolled on the ground. The four men then picked him up by the arms and legs and dragged him to the white Renault, which was a left-hand drive car. The first applicant estimated that the whole ordeal, which had started at approximately 5.45 a.m., had lasted less than three minutes, and it had been witnessed by the driver of the white Isuzu pickup travelling ahead of him.
Once inside the car, with both his arms twisted behind his back, the first applicant received another strong kick from the man who was holding him by the right arm. The man holding the pistol sat in the front passenger seat and continued to point the pistol at him. They then started driving towards the Pergamos checkpoint. When the first applicant noticed that the right passenger door of the car was not fully closed, he started pushing the man to his right with his shoulder so that they would fall out of the car. As they were passing Rabiye’s café, the first applicant saw a group of people standing outside and called out for help from the slightly open door, but he could not manage to attract their attention.
When the car reached the Pergamos checkpoint, the first applicant noticed that the barrier, which was normally down, had been lifted so that they were able to drive straight through to the “TRNC” without slowing down. After driving in the occupied area for a while, the man sitting to the first applicant’s left placed a rope around his neck and tied his hands behind his back with the ends of the same rope, which prevented him from moving. When the applicant asked whether they were going to kill him, the same man answered yes and then the man sitting in the front passenger seat punched him in the face, which damaged his teeth and caused his mouth to bleed.
The first applicant could not understand the conversation in the car, which was in Turkish, except for the word “police”, which was uttered frequently. Since he had lived in the occupied area until he was twelve years old, he recognised that he was being driven towards Famagusta. Once they reached the Famagusta industrial area, the car stopped, and the man sitting in the front passenger seat took off his sock and taped it around the first applicant’s eyes, and then taped his mouth. A couple of minutes later, the first applicant heard another car drive up to them. He was quickly transferred to the other car, with his hands still tied behind his back with the rope that ran around his neck. After driving for another five to seven minutes the second car stopped and he was taken out of the car. He was subsequently taken into a building and put in a room on his own, where he waited for quite some time with his eyes and mouth taped, and his hands tied behind his back.
After a while, someone untied the rope around the first applicant’s hands and neck, but left his hands cuffed behind his back, and removed the tape from his mouth. He was then asked personal questions regarding himself and his family, including whether he had any relatives working in the police force or the army. No one explained to him where he was or why he was being held. The person who spoke to him alternated between broken Greek and English. His captors then made him sit in front of an electric heater so that he might dry, as his clothes were all wet from falling into the puddle of water outside his car during the struggle prior to his abduction.
When his captors eventually removed the sock from his eyes, the first applicant noticed that he was in an office, and the time was 11.55 a.m. Three men in civilian clothes, whom he had not seen before but later discovered to be Subinspector Ü.Ö. and police sergeants R.Ö. and H.M., were standing in front of him. When he asked them in Greek why he had been seized, one of them replied in broken Greek that he had been arrested for drug possession. They then gave him a fresh set of clothes and shoes and asked him to change out of his wet clothes. The first applicant suspected that he was in a police station, but his captors continued to conceal his whereabouts and the identity of the three persons interrogating him.
After changing into new clothes, the first applicant was led out of the building by the three men. In the reception area of the building, he saw police officers in uniform, which reinforced his assumption that he had been taken to a police station. He was subsequently taken to a hospital in Nicosia by two of his interrogators.
The first applicant was first examined by a doctor at the hospital in the presence of the two men who had taken him there. As the doctor did not speak English or Greek, they relied on the officers’ interpretation to communicate. The first applicant explained to the doctor that he was diabetic and asked the doctor to check his blood sugar levels. Tests showed that his blood sugar level had increased considerably, so the doctor prescribed him an antidiabetic drug. The first applicant also tried to tell the doctor that he was suffering from pain in his pelvis and ribs, and in particular that the pain in the ribs was making it difficult to breathe, but the doctor paid no attention to his grievances and merely registered the swelling in his head and some redness on his chest and back, without examining the injuries in his mouth or lower body.
The first applicant was subsequently referred to a radiologist, who Xrayed his chest and head. He was also examined by a specialist in pulmonary diseases. He was then taken for a drug test. When the first applicant refused to take the drug test and requested to see UN doctors instead, one of the men escorting him punched him in the stomach. It is not clear whether a drug test was subsequently performed on the first applicant.
Following the examinations at the hospital, which lasted about two hours, the first applicant was taken to another building, where he was again placed in an office. In that office, the men handling him showed him a black plastic bag with Turkish writing on it, and told him that the bag contained the drugs recovered from him. However, after some discussion among themselves, one of them went out of the room and came back with another black plastic bag, which bore no writing, and placed the drugs allegedly recovered from him in the new bag. They then placed the bag in a plastic container and sealed it before his eyes.
At approximately 5.30 p.m., the first applicant was taken to yet another small office in a nearby building. There were six men in the office, including the two who had been escorting him and two interpreters. The men were speaking to each other in Turkish, without translating for him, and drinking tea; the first applicant did not understand where he had been taken. One of the interpreters then told him in broken Greek that he was before a judge, who had charged him with possession of drugs, and that he would be placed in custody for eight days. For the brief period he was in that room, the first applicant was not given the opportunity to respond, apart from stating that he had no involvement with drugs, or to ask questions; he was not informed of his rights, nor was he asked whether he wanted the assistance of a lawyer.
The first applicant was subsequently taken to the Atatürk Square police station (referred to as the “Saray police station”) in Nicosia and placed in a very small cell, measuring approximately 1.80 by 1.20 metres, where he stayed for the next eight days. The cell was very cold, damp and mouldy in parts, because there was no glass in the small window. Despite the cold, he was given only one filthy blanket to keep warm. There were, moreover, no shower facilities in the police station. As for the toilets, they were very dirty; no soap or toilet paper was provided and the toilet did not flush. The first applicant had to call an officer each time he needed to use the toilet, and on many occasions he was not let out of his cell to go to the toilet, despite his need to urinate frequently on account of his diabetes. He solved the problem by urinating in a plastic bottle inside his cell. The first applicant further stated that he had not been given any food at the Saray police station and that he had had to purchase food from the canteen with his own money.
The first applicant claimed that the next day, a Turkish Cypriot detainee at the Saray police station approached him and told him in Greek that the police had asked him to confess to being the person who would pick up the drugs that the first applicant had intended to hide in the “TRNC”, but that he had refused to collaborate with the police.
At 3 p.m. on 14 December 2000 the first applicant was visited by a UN inspector and a doctor. The inspector issued an incident report following the visit, the relevant parts of which read as follows:
“During the visit the prisoner, who is a diabetic, stated that he had no complaints in relation to how he had been treated by the TCPE [Turkish Cypriot Police Element] but that he had been assaulted i.e. punched and kicked by six civilians and had been threatened with a gun by them a short time before his arrest by the TCPE. He stated that his arrest had occurred in the Dekelia [sic.] area.
Since his arrest he had been taken to the Hospital by the TCPE where he was administered some drugs for his diabetes. He requested the UN to secure his own clothes for him, to deliver his Diabetes Monitoring Kit to him and also to arrange a visit for his wife. He further stated that he did not do anything and that he was kidnapped at Dekelia. He was in a distressed state.
He consented to a medical examination by the UN doctor who found a number of tender areas with no bruising.”
On 15 December 2000 the first applicant was visited at the Saray police station by a Turkish Cypriot lawyer, Mr M. Aziz, who was appointed by his family to represent him. The meeting was monitored by a number of police officers. On 16 December 2000 another Turkish Cypriot lawyer, Mr G. Menteş, visited him and they met, once again, in the presence of police officers. The first applicant claimed that all his subsequent meetings with his lawyers at the Saray police station had been held in the presence of police officers or other prison authorities.
The Government’s version of the events is based on the incident reports prepared by Sub-inspector Ü.Ö., who allegedly led the operation for the first applicant’s arrest.
According to Sub-inspector Ü.Ö.’s report, on 12 December 2000 he received a tip-off call from a police informant, informing him that a Greek Cypriot named “Panayotis” would enter the “TRNC” through the SBA of Dhekelia the next morning with narcotics, which he would hide in a predesignated spot just outside the Turkish cemetery to the west of the Pergamos checkpoint, to be picked up by a contact from the “TRNC”.
At approximately 4.45 a.m. on 13 December 2000 Sub-inspector Ü.Ö., accompanied by police sergeants R.Ö. and H.M., took their positions in the vicinity of the drop-off point to wait in ambush. At around 6.05 a.m., before daybreak, they saw someone approaching on foot from the direction of the SBA, approximately seventy metres to the west of the Pergamos checkpoint. It was believed that this person, who was later identified as the first applicant, had crossed the ditch which ran along the boundary between the “TRNC” and the SBA and which was filled with rainwater at the relevant time, and then jumped over the wire fence between boundary stones nos. 96 and 97, where parts of the fence had shrunk. As the first applicant was walking towards an olive tree in the designated area, Sub-inspector Ü.Ö. came out of his hiding place and ordered him to stop, in Turkish. Upon hearing that order, the first applicant started to run back towards the SBA; however, the two police sergeants caught up with him and seized him after a struggle, during which the applicant fell to the ground. The sub-inspector then grabbed the package that the first applicant was holding in his hands, which was wrapped in a black plastic bag. In the meantime, Sergeant H.M. informed the first applicant in Greek that they were police officers and told him that he had entered “TRNC” territory without permission. He also asked the first applicant to identify himself and to explain what he was carrying in the plastic bag. The first applicant gave his name and stated that he was innocent. The police officers then handcuffed him and placed him in the police car. Once inside the car, the police officers opened the plastic bag and found two plates of cannabis resin wrapped in a white cloth and a Greek newspaper. Sergeant H.M. informed the applicant once again, in Greek, that he had entered “TRNC” territory without permission and that he had in his possession prohibited drugs.
At approximately 6.50 a.m. the first applicant was taken to the Famagusta (Gazimağusa) police headquarters for an identity check, where he was also questioned about where he had obtained the drugs and to whom he was taking them in the “TRNC”. The first applicant remained silent in response to those questions.
At approximately 8.30 a.m. Sub-inspector Ü.Ö. and Sergeant H.M. went to the narcotics bureau of the Nicosia (Lefkoşa) police headquarters to inform their superiors of the first applicant’s arrest, while the first applicant stayed at the Famagusta police headquarters under the supervision of Sergeant R.Ö.. After going to the narcotics bureau, Sub-inspector Ü.Ö. and Sergeant H.M. went back to the scene of the incident, where Subinspector Ü.Ö. sketched a map of the area and another sergeant took photographs. Sub-inspector Ü.Ö. also took a soil sample from the area for forensic analysis.
At approximately 11.30 a.m. Sub-inspector Ü.Ö. and Sergeant H.M. went back to the Famagusta police headquarters, and took the first applicant’s clothes and shoes as evidence.
At approximately 12.50 p.m. the first applicant was taken to the Dr Burhan Nalbantoğlu State Hospital (“the Nicosia State Hospital”) for a general medical examination. After the examination, he was taken to the narcotics bureau of the Nicosia police headquarters, where the material which was obtained from him earlier and which was believed to be cannabis resin was sealed in his presence, to be dispatched to the laboratory for further examination. The first applicant’s shoes, together with the soil sample collected from the area where he was believed to have crossed into the “TRNC”, were also sealed before his eyes for forensic analysis.
Later the same evening, the first applicant was brought before the “TRNC” Nicosia District Court, where the presiding judge ordered his remand in custody for eight days to facilitate the police investigation. The hearing was held in the judge’s office and the applicant was assisted by two interpreters.
According to the detailed incident report prepared by Sub-inspector Ü.Ö., on the night of 13 December 2000 various measures were taken in the area where the first applicant had been arrested to catch the person who was supposed to pick up the drugs, but no one showed up.
The analysis report of 18 December 2000 drawn up by the Ministry of Health and Environment of the “TRNC” confirmed that the substance allegedly seized from the first applicant was cannabis resin, in the amount of 1.1 kilograms.
According to the report of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry of the “TRNC” dated 2 January 2001, various different kinds of soil were found under the first applicant’s shoes, while the muddy specimen found on the heel appeared to be the most recent. The amount of soil extracted from the heel was not found to be sufficient for a comprehensive analysis. Nevertheless, the limited examinations conducted revealed that the sample obtained from the shoes resembled the sample obtained from the scene of the incident, without, however, being identical. The report indicated that variations in soil properties could be due to the depth from which the soil sample had been obtained, or whether it had been obtained from a fertilised part of the land or not.
On 21 December 2000 Sub-inspector Ü.Ö. informed the first applicant of the charges against him, which were the possession of 1.1 kilograms of cannabis resin and its unlawful import into the “TRNC”. The first applicant, who was provided with an interpreter, used his right to remain silent, merely stating that his lawyer would defend him. However, he refused to sign a written statement to that effect.
Later the same day, the first applicant was brought before the “TRNC” Nicosia District Court for a bail hearing, where he was represented by two lawyers, Mr M. Aziz, a local lawyer practising in “TRNC”, and Mr P. Brogan, who practised at the English Bar. He was also assisted by an interpreter. At the hearing, the prosecution requested the court to order the first applicant’s detention until the trial in view of the risk of his absconding, and called Subinspector Ü.Ö. as a witness.
The first applicant’s counsel pleaded in favour of his release, and also argued that he had not been arrested in “TRNC” territory as alleged, but had been abducted from SBA territory by unknown persons and then taken to the “TRNC” after being badly beaten. The assault had left injuries on his body, as documented in various medical reports. The first applicant did not make any additional comments on his alleged ill-treatment, but merely stated that he would appear for trial if he were released on bail.
Sub-inspector Ü.Ö. denied the allegation that the first applicant had been assaulted and stated that the injuries observed on his body might have been caused as a result of the resistance he had shown to his arrest.
At the end of the hearing, the “TRNC” Nicosia District Court refused the first applicant’s bail request on the weight of the arguments presented by the prosecution and ordered his pre-trial detention for a period not exceeding three months. The District Court indicated in this connection that it had not found the first applicant’s statement that he would appear for trial if released on bail to be credible and reliable, but it did not comment on his counsel’s allegations of ill-treatment. The first applicant was transferred to the Nicosia Central Prison after the hearing.
It appears that on 30 January 2001 the first applicant appeared before the court for another bail hearing. The Court has not been provided with the minutes of that hearing, but it appears that the hearing was adjourned until 8 February 2001 on account of the first applicant’s deteriorating health, and that he was transferred to hospital for treatment for high blood sugar levels (see paragraphs 106-109 below for further details).
On 6 February 2001 the charges against the first applicant were lodged with the Famagusta District Court.
On 8 February 2001 the Famagusta District Court convened for a preliminary inquiry in the case, which lasted until 15 February 2001, during which period the District Court sat for six full days. The first applicant was present throughout the hearings and was represented by both his lawyers. He was also assisted by interpreters.
During the preliminary inquiry the prosecution called five witnesses: the three police officers who had allegedly arrested the first applicant, namely Sub-inspector Ü.Ö. and police sergeants H.M. and R.Ö.; another police officer who had interpreted the formal charges against the first applicant; and the forensic chemist who had analysed the drugs allegedly seized from him. The first applicant, on the other hand, called one witness, Mr J.C., the UN Liaison Officer in Cyprus at the material time.
The Famagusta District Court first heard the prosecution witnesses, who gave testimonies consistent with the incident reports and presented evidence against the first applicant, including a sketched map indicating where the applicant had crossed into the “TRNC” and where he had been captured, photographs of the relevant areas taken a few hours after the arrest, the drugs allegedly recovered from the applicant, and the clothes and shoes he had been wearing on the relevant day, which were soiled with mud on account of the struggle on the ground, as well as copies of the medical reports drawn up following his arrest.
The prosecution witnesses were subsequently cross-examined by the defence counsel, who challenged the veracity and credibility of their testimonies in the light of the first applicant’s account of events, according to which he had been kidnapped from his car in SBA territory and had then been handed over to the “TRNC” police. The defence counsel accordingly asked detailed questions about the tip-off call which Sub-inspector Ü.Ö. had allegedly received the day before the first applicant’s arrest and the identity of the police informant; the planning of the ambush and the weather conditions on the relevant morning; the route that the first applicant had followed to reach the “TRNC”; the exact point from which he had allegedly crossed into “TRNC” territory; and the paperwork undertaken by the police subsequent to the first applicant’s arrest. The responses received appeared to be consistent with the earlier testimonies and did not reveal new evidence, apart from some factual details, such as the height of the border fence, which, according to the prosecution witnesses, was approximately 110 centimetres at the point of crossing but yielded when pressed, details of the conversation with the police informant, and the notes taken by the arresting officers in their police notebooks prior to and after the operation.
Sub-inspector Ü.Ö. was asked why he had not submitted the package of drugs allegedly recovered from the first applicant for a fingerprint examination, to which he responded that he had seen no need for such an examination as he had taken the package directly from the applicant’s hands himself. He further maintained that no examination had been made of the footprints identified on the terrain, as the first applicant had apparently slipped and had not left very clear marks.
Sub-inspector Ü.Ö. was also asked whether he had recorded the tip-off he had received from his informant. He responded that he had recorded both the tip-off call and the subsequent operation conducted on the morning of 13 December 2000 for the first applicant’s arrest in his police notebook, which had been submitted to the court as evidence.
On the last day of the preliminary inquiry the defence counsel called Mr J.C. as the defence’s sole witness. Mr J.C. stated that he had been appointed by the UNFICYP as a Civil Affairs Police Liaison Officer. His duty was to liaise between the Greek and the Turkish Cypriot sides on policing and humanitarian issues. He explained that on 3 December 2000 his contact person on the Turkish side on humanitarian issues, Mr M.İ., who was the head of the Directorate on Consular Affairs and Minorities Issues of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Defence of the “TRNC”, had called him for a meeting. During the meeting, Mr M.İ. had told Mr J.C. that he wanted to protest, through the UN, about the recent arrest of Ömer Gazi Tekoğul by the Greek Cypriot police in the UN buffer zone. Mr M.İ. had allegedly told him that if Ömer Gazi Tekoğul was not released before noon on 4 December 2000, Greek Cypriots from Pyla, a mixed village located in the UN buffer zone, would start disappearing. M.İ. had added that if the Greek Cypriot police had adopted a new policy of kidnapping suspects from the buffer zone, the Turkish Cypriot police would respond in the same manner.
In response to the objections of the prosecution regarding the admissibility of Mr J.C.’s testimony as evidence, the Famagusta District Court held that it would accept Mr J.C.’s testimony not as evidence as to the truth of the statement allegedly made by Mr M.İ., which would be against the rule on hearsay evidence, but only as evidence of the fact that a meeting had taken place between Mr M.İ. and Mr J.C.
On the basis of the testimonies and other evidence presented before it, on 15 February 2001 the Famagusta District Court decided that there were sufficient grounds to commit the first applicant for trial before the Famagusta Assize Court. It also prolonged the first applicant’s pre-trial detention.
The first applicant claimed that during the preliminary inquiry, he had seen one of his abductors amongst the audience, but that the latter had managed to leave the court room before he had had the chance to point him out to his lawyer.
The first applicant’s trial commenced in the Famagusta Assize Court on 23 February 2001. He attended all of the hearings together with his two lawyers. He was also provided with an interpreter.
In addition to the five witnesses who had testified at the preliminary inquiry, the prosecution called as witnesses a forensic police officer, a “TRNC” military officer stationed in Pergamos, the three doctors who had examined the first applicant on 13 December 2000 and the agricultural engineer who had analysed the soil obtained from the first applicant’s shoes. The evidence provided by the prosecution witnesses, including during crossexamination, was, in general, consistent with the previous testimonies and official reports.
During his cross-examination Sub-inspector Ü.Ö. was asked a number of questions regarding the identity of his informant, which he refused to answer. However, he gave detailed information about the telephone conversation he had had with the informant, and also about his “exploratory visit” to the estimated drug drop-off point in the evening of 12 December 2000 together with the informant. Subinspector Ü.Ö. also stated that he had informed his supervisor about the information he had received from his informant prior to the operation conducted on 13 December 2000, while keeping the identity of the informant secret. However, he had not alerted the local police and military officers in Pergamos in order to protect the secrecy of the operation. In response to a question as to why no one had been left at the drop-off point following the first applicant’s arrest to capture the latter’s contact person in the “TRNC”, Sub-inspector Ü.Ö. stated that he had suspected his informant to be that contact person and that, in any event, a unit had been stationed at the dropoff point on the night of 13 December 2000 to catch any suspects.
During his cross-examination Dr E.A., who had conducted the initial medical examination of the first applicant after his arrest, was asked to provide details of the findings of his medical report (see paragraph 24 above). Accordingly, he indicated that on the relevant morning he had observed a swelling with a diameter of 4 centimetres on the left side of the first applicant’s head, as well as redness measuring 0.5 cm by 4-5 cm behind the right ear, redness measuring 8-10 cm across the chest, and two areas of redness measuring 3-5 cm by 3-4 cm on the back, all of which appeared to have been sustained only hours before the examination. He stated that the swelling observed above the first applicant’s left ear could have been caused by blunt-force trauma or by the impact of falling on a stone or similar hard object. He also confirmed that the examination had been conducted in the presence of two persons in civilian clothes, whom he had perceived to be police officers and who had also acted as interpreters between the first applicant and himself. He added that although he had raised the question specifically, the first applicant had not expressed any complaints of bodily injury, apart from stating that he was diabetic. The police, on the other hand, had explained that there had been a scuffle during his arrest.
Dr İ.A., who had examined the first applicant after Dr E.A. for any pulmonary problems, stated that the first applicant had presented symptoms of bronchitis. He had therefore prescribed medicine to him for that purpose but had not noted any other injuries or marks on his face or torso. He also indicated that the examination had been conducted in the presence of another person in civilian clothes, whom he assumed to be a police officer.
Dr H.K., a general surgeon, stated before the court that he had also examined the first applicant on the relevant day in response to his complaints of abdominal pain, but had not identified any causes for such pain. In response to a question from the first applicant’s lawyer, he stated that a blow to the abdomen could cause pain in that area. He added that if the blow was strong, it would also leave a mark, but he had not noted any such marks on the first applicant’s abdomen.
On 23 March 2001, after the close of the case for the prosecution, the first applicant was called to make his defence statement. His sworn testimony was largely in line with the account of events he subsequently submitted to the Strasbourg Court, including the detailed allegations of his abduction and illtreatment. However, he did not claim before the trial court that his abduction had been witnessed by the driver of a certain white Isuzu pickup.
Following the first applicant’s statement and crossexamination, the defence called seventeen witnesses to testify in support of its case, including a number of SBA police officers. The pertinent witness statements are summarised below.
Mr G.H. stated that he had left his house in Larnaca to go to work at approximately at 5.30 a.m. on the morning of 13 December 2000. While on his way to Pergamos to pick up his Turkish Cypriot workers, he had overtaken the first applicant’s car, which was heading in the same direction. When asked whether he had actually seen the applicant in the car, G.H. answered in the negative and indicated that he had only identified the car from its number plate. Moreover, he had been unable to tell whether there had been only one person or more in the car. G.H. claimed that as he had approached Pergamos, he had noticed a stationary white car on the left-hand side of the road, with its bonnet open and a man examining its engine. Shortly afterwards, he had noticed a red car with a number plate starting with a “Z”, parked to the right of the white car. He had driven past those cars without stopping, but while driving by, he had heard a man shouting. He had assumed that it was the driver of the white car calling for help with his car. He had arrived at Rabiye’s café where his workers were waiting for him at approximately 5.45 a.m., had a coffee and then left with his workers. As he was driving past the spot where he had seen the two Renault cars previously, he had noticed the first applicant’s car parked oddly, almost in the middle of the road and facing towards the roadside, with its driver’s door open, its engine running and its headlights on. The two other cars, on the other hand, had gone.
On the morning of 13 December 2000, as he was driving to Pergamos to pick up his Turkish Cypriot workers from Rabiye’s café, Mr A.G. had noticed a red car with a red “Z” number plate parked on the left side of the road just before the junction leading to the ex-Pergamos camp. It had looked like the police cars that were used by the “TRNC” police in Pyla. The red car was facing Pergamos with its bonnet open, and there were two men standing in front of it. He had then noticed, on the opposite side of the road by the cypress trees, a white car, which had flashed its headlights at him. He had driven past both cars without stopping and arrived at Rabiye’s café at approximately 5.40 to 5.45 a.m. He had left the café at approximately 6 a.m. and while driving past the place where he had previously seen the two cars, he had noticed that those cars had gone but this time the first applicant’s car was parked on the right side of the road, facing the wrong direction, with its engine running, and its headlights and wipers on. The driver’s door was also open.
Mr N.M. left his house at approximately 5.30 a.m. on 13 December 2000 to pick up his Turkish Cypriot workers at their designated café by the Pergamos checkpoint. A red double-cabin pickup, which he later learned belonged to the first applicant, was driving approximately seventy metres ahead of him in the same direction. When he saw that part of the road was flooded, N.M. first turned his car around to return home, as he thought the weather would not be suitable for construction work that day, but then changed his mind and resumed his journey to Pergamos. On reaching the junction leading to the ex-Pergamos camp sometime between 5.40 and 5.50 a.m., he noticed the first applicant’s car parked in the right-hand lane of the road, facing slightly to the right. He also saw someone getting out of that car and walking towards the fields on the right. There was no one else in the car, but the engine was running. The driver’s door and both rear passenger doors were open. He also noticed three or four other people approximately twenty metres further down in the fields to the right, but did not see any other cars in the vicinity. He then heard someone yelling “Let me go!” in Greek from the direction of the fields, but was too scared to get out of the car to see what was going on, and drove back home.
While driving towards Pergamos to pick up his Turkish Cypriot workers at approximately 6.05 a.m. on the morning of 13 December 2000, Mr Yiannis Tsiakkourmas saw his brother’s car parked just before the junction leading to the ex-Pergamos camp. He noticed that the engine was running and the wipers were on, the driver’s door was open, but his brother was not around. His phone and bag were, however, in the car. He drove to Rabiye’s café to ask about his brother, and when he found no further information he took two of his Turkish Cypriot workers with him and drove back to the place where he had found the first applicant’s car. He then went to the SBA police to report his brother missing. Upon returning to the place of the incident, and prior to the arrival of any SBA police officers, he asked one of his Turkish Cypriot workers to move the car to avoid causing any accidents. The car was accordingly parked in a safer spot on the left side of the main road.
On the morning of 13 December 2000, while driving to Pergamos to pick up his Turkish Cypriot workers, Mr S.E. saw a red Chevrolet doublecabin pickup, which he later learned was the first applicant’s car, parked in the right-hand lane of the road approximately 500 metres from Rabiye’s café, slightly facing the left-hand side of the road and with the driver’s door open. When he reached the café, one of the first applicant’s Turkish Cypriot workers approached him and said that his boss had still not arrived. S.E. let the worker call the first applicant from his mobile phone, but the first applicant did not answer. S.E. then left the café with his workers. As he was driving past the first applicant’s car again, he saw three or four people standing by it, including the first applicant’s brother, Yiannis Tsiakkourmas.
Three other Greek Cypriot builders, Mr H.Z., Mr A.S. and Mr M.T., also gave similar accounts to that of S.E. regarding the location of the first applicant’s car.
Detective Sergeant P.P., a Greek Cypriot, was the chief investigating officer appointed by the SBA police to investigate the first applicant’s alleged abduction. He stated that at approximately 6.30 a.m. on the morning of 13 December 2000, he had seen Yiannis Tsiakkourmas at the SBA police station, reporting his brother missing. When he went to the scene of the incident at around 7 a.m., he found the first applicant’s red Chevrolet pickup, which had already been moved from its original position, at the exPergamos camp junction, on the left-hand side of the main road from Pyla to Pergamos. He noticed that the car key was still in the ignition, and there was a handbag and a mobile phone inside the car. He and a couple of other officers searched the vicinity for signs of the applicant, with the help of a sniffer dog, but found no clues to indicate his whereabouts. He claimed that in some parts of the fields by the side of the main road, the mud was 30 to 40 centimetres deep, which made walking in the fields very hard. He then instructed Sergeant N. to go to the Pergamos checkpoint to enquire whether the first applicant had been detained by the “TRNC” police that morning. The answer was negative.
Detective Sergeant P.P. presented to the trial court a map he had sketched on 3 January 2001, covering the area between boundary stones nos. 96 and 97 where the first applicant was alleged to have crossed into the “TRNC”, as well as some photographs that the SBA police had taken in the area. The sketched map indicated a stream, with a barbed-wire fence to its north, marking the boundary between the SBA and the “TRNC”. About fifteen metres from the barbed wire was an olive tree in an uncultivated field, which was the alleged drop-off point for the drugs the first applicant was accused of smuggling. According to the map, the barbed-wire fence in the relevant area was 120 to 140 cm high on average, but P.P. acknowledged that the fence had deformed and sunk in certain parts, which was also evident in some of the photographs. Moreover, there was a small hole measuring 6 by 20 cm at the bottom of the fence adjoining the field. According to P.P., the approximate depth of the stream on the relevant date was two and a half to three metres.
In the cross-examination, the prosecution argued that the exact location where the first applicant had been captured, including the deformed wire fences where he had crossed into the “TRNC”, had intentionally not been photographed by the SBA police, so the photographs submitted to the trial court as evidence were irrelevant and misleading. Moreover, the wire fence on the SBA-“TRNC” border was not barbed throughout, contrary to P.P.’s suggestion. The prosecution claimed that the investigation conducted by the SBA police had lacked independence and impartiality.
Mr N.P., a Greek Cypriot superintendent in the SBA police service, testified that at approximately 1.30 a.m. on 13 December 2000 he had received a call at the police station stating that some of the roads in the SBA of Dhekelia had been flooded because of the heavy rain that night. He therefore left the police station to check the roads and instruct the rerouting of certain roads as necessary. At approximately 5 a.m. he drove past the area where the first applicant’s vehicle was later found abandoned. Although the heavy rain had stopped by that time, it was still drizzling and the road in the relevant area was covered with three to five inches of water. By 6 a.m. the rain had stopped completely.
When shown the photographs which the “TRNC” police had allegedly taken in the area later that morning, Mr N.P. said that the ground looked too dry, so those photographs could not have been taken on 13 December 2000.
Sergeant A.E.N. was a Turkish Cypriot working in the SBA police force. At approximately 6.25 a.m. on the morning of 13 December 2000, he crossed from the “TRNC” to the SBA through the Pergamos checkpoint to report to his work station. As he was approaching the ex-Pergamos camp junction on the main road from Pergamos to Pyla, he noticed a stationary car further down his lane, facing his direction. Since the headlights of the car were bothering his eyes, he flashed his lights, but there was no reaction. As he approached, he saw that the stationary car was a red pickup and the driver’s door was open. When A.E.N. pulled up by the red car to see what was going on, he noticed that the car’s engine was also running, although there was no one inside it. Once he reached the police station he reported what he had seen and was accordingly instructed to go back to the place of the incident for further investigation. When A.E.N. went back at approximately 7.10 a.m., he found that Yiannis Tsiakkourmas and two Turkish Cypriot workers had moved the red pickup and had parked it about 25 metres down the road leading to the ex-Pergamos camp.
Mr D.J.W. was a search-dog trainer in the British armed forces. At approximately 8.15 a.m. on the morning of 13 December 2000 he was deployed to track the first applicant’s whereabouts with his dog. When he arrived there were six SBA police officers at the scene of the incident. He first explained to the trial court how the tracking process worked in general and stated that the dog could only track one person at a time, and would follow the freshest track in the area. On that morning, they had started the search at the place where the first applicant’s car was first found. They had covered the 400-metre perimeter, but had not been able to find any tracks. Since the recent rainfall had made the ground wet, it would not have been possible to walk on the grass by the asphalt road without leaving footprints, but they had found no such marks, which meant that the first applicant had not left the area on foot.
The defence lastly called Mr J.C. as a witness, to testify on his exchange with Mr M.İ., an officer of the “TRNC” Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The trial court, however, ruled that Mr J.C. could not testify on the content of Mr M.İ.’s statements in view of the rules on hearsay evidence.
At the hearing held on 10 April 2001, the first applicant’s lawyer, Mr P. Brogan, told the trial court that while the defence had a number of Turkish Cypriot witnesses who wished to testify in favour of the defence, mainly to confirm the sighting of the abandoned vehicle, it had not been possible to secure their attendance as those witnesses were being intimidated by the Turkish Cypriot authorities. According to submissions made by the applicants, the President of the Court responded in a hostile manner and requested proof of service of witness summonses on the relevant Turkish Cypriot persons, but the exchange between the President and the defence counsel was not included in the minutes of the hearing.
At the hearing held on 11 April 2001, the first applicant’s other lawyer, Mr M. Aziz, informed the trial court that the defence still had eight more witnesses to call. However, since they had not managed to duly serve those witnesses with official summonses, and most of them had no further information to share with the court than that already presented, they had decided to relinquish their right to call those witnesses and to close the defence case. The President of the Court asked in return why the said witnesses had not been served with a “short summons” to secure their attendance and stated that the court was very sensitive to this issue in view of Mr P. Brogan’s allegations of witness intimidation made at the previous hearing. Mr M. Aziz stated in response that he had no information as to the factual basis of Mr P. Brogan’s allegations of intimidation and that he did not mean to blame any State officials for the non-attendance of the Turkish Cypriot witnesses.
On 26 April 2001 the Famagusta Assize Court delivered its judgment against the first applicant, which reads as follows:
“The legislation, the testimonies and the evidence presented have been assessed [by the court] comprehensively.
[The court] has carefully observed the prosecution witnesses, as well as the defendant and his witnesses during their depositions.
While there are some small discrepancies between the testimonies of ... prosecution witnesses, their statements were mainly found to be credible, accurate and reliable.
On the other hand, [the court] has not found the testimonies of the defendant and his witnesses to be credible, accurate and reliable. Moreover, we decided that these testimonies were not likely to be true, on the basis of the principle of “balance of probabilities”.
Since all witness testimonies and the evidence presented to the court are in the case file, we find it unnecessary to cite them one by one in our judgment.
We believe that on the basis of the testimonies and evidence they presented, the prosecution have proven, beyond reasonable doubt, both charges against the defendant.
Consequently, the defendant is found guilty of both charges brought against him.”
The first applicant was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment on the first count, with no sentence on the second count. The Famagusta Assize Court, however, ruled that he be released from prison in view of the time he had already spent on remand.
The medical examinations conducted on 13 December 2000 in the aftermath of the first applicant’s arrest have been outlined in paragraphs 63  65 above. According to the information and documents provided by the parties, he underwent further medical examinations throughout his detention in the “TRNC”, the details of which are as follows.
The day after his arrest, on 14 December, the first applicant was examined by a UNFICYP medical officer, Dr S.T., at his request. It appears that a “TRNC” official in civilian clothes supervised the examination and took notes.
According to the information in the case file, the first applicant told Dr S.T. that he had been punched and kicked at the time of his arrest and that he felt acute pain in his ribs and pelvis. The first applicant claimed before the Court that he had been prevented from saying more as the “TRNC” official supervising the examination had told him to keep quiet.
When conducting a physical examination, the doctor noted a slight swelling above the first applicant’s left ear; a graze behind the right ear and the right side of the back; and tender areas on the right side of the chest and the left side of the back, behind the neck, and around the tail bone and the right hip. No handcuff marks were noted on his wrists.
It appears from Dr S.T.’s notes that the first applicant indicated that he had been treated well after being handed over to the uniformed police on 13 December 2000, and that he was being given his diabetes medication. Dr S.T. noted that the applicant’s diabetes was the type that could usually be controlled by diet (type-2 diabetes) and further remarked that arrangements had been made for a blood glucose monitoring kit to enable him to monitor his diabetes. There were, however, no remarks regarding the first applicant’s intimidation by the “TRNC” official supervising the examination.
On 28 December 2000 Dr S.T. made an unannounced visit to the central prison to check on the first applicant. During the visit he also performed a blood sugar test. In a report he issued the next day, Dr S.T. indicated that although the applicant’s blood sugar level was somewhat high (“197 g/dL”), it was still within the normal range for him – he had informed the doctor that his levels were usually around “200g/dL”. The doctor also noted that the applicant’s request for a special diet for his diabetes was being met by the prison authorities. In conclusion, Dr S.T. was satisfied that the applicant was receiving adequate treatment for his diabetes and was being allowed to monitor his blood sugar levels.
Dr S.T. visited the first applicant again on 19 and 23 January 2001, together with a Turkish Cypriot doctor, H.S., to check his physical state and blood sugar levels. In his report dated 23 January 2001, Dr S.T. made the following remarks:
“In my opinion a good standard of medical care is being given. However, because of Mr. Tsiakkourmas’ mental state and the stress he is under, his diabetic control is poor. There is also a question as to whether or not he is complying fully with his treatment.”
Dr S.T. also visited the first applicant on 16 February and 9 April 2001 for routine medical checks and noted that he was in reasonable health. In his latter report dated 9 April 2001, Dr S.T. also stated that the first applicant had made no complaints of ill-treatment by the prison staff.
On 8 January 2001 the first applicant was examined by Dr G.P., a Hungarian specialist in internal medicine and endocrinology practising in Limassol, in relation to his diabetes. The doctor noted that his blood sugar level was “340 mg/dL” and that he had lost a considerable amount of weight since his imprisonment. He then concluded his report as follows:
“The obvious weight loss and marked hyperglycaemia without any other signs of concomitant disease can only be explained by a rapid metabolic deterioration that followed his imprisonment. The initial and ongoing stress situation, the involuntary immobilisation of a formerly physically active person in association with marked depression are factors which increase both hyperglycaemia and insulin resistance in the diabetic person and lead to catabolism. The present treatment is obviously insufficient to prevent further worsening.
If his immediate return to his normal environment and daily activities is not achievable at present, I suggest this:
Glimepiride (Amaryl) 1.0 mg tablet to be taken twice daily
Metformin (Glucophage, Lipha) 500 mg tablet once daily
Diabetic food (food to be taken at least five times daily, no added sugar) with adequate water consumption
Regular daily physical exercise
Blood glucose testing three times daily
If these measures do not improve his diabetes control significantly in few days’ time or signs of further deterioration are detected, the commencement of insulin treatment and/or hospitalisation should be considered. His physical state should also be followed up to decide if medical treatment is necessary.”
On 15 January 2001 Dr G.P. saw the first applicant once again at the Nicosia State Hospital, together with Dr H.S. and a UNFICYP medical officer, R.K. Dr G.P. noted his findings as follows:
“The patient was in a very bad mood ... and he mentioned that he didn’t want to comply with further medical assistance from whatever side. ... [He said that] he took this tablet [Amaryl] only once daily and didn’t take the other tablet [Glucophage] recommended during my first visit.
His physical examination was carried out by Dr H.S. in our presence.... His blood sugar was 349 mg/dL.... I advised an abdominal ultrasound examination which was carried out without delay by the X-ray department in our presence. Multiple small stones were found in both kidneys without any other pathological findings.
After these I tried to convince him to comply with our medical recommendations ...
The main problem now seems to be the lack of compliance with the medical recommendations.
His parodontitis [sic.] and the presence of small renal stones are also warning signs that his diabetic control must be improved otherwise a progressing inflammation in the mouth and a urine infection can worsen his diabetes with severe acute consequences. To avoid this, a proper compliance with the medical recommendations seems to be absolutely important.
In this situation a psychiatric exploration is also necessary, carried out by a doctor who speaks Greek as a mother tongue ... This exploration may help break his present denial of medical care and provide further opinion [on] how to proceed with his medication.”
Dr G.P.’s findings coincided with the separate report prepared by the Turkish Cypriot doctor, H.S.
On 25 January Dr G.P. saw the first applicant for the third time and noted his findings as follows:
“... He complained of regular gastric pain ... He confirmed that he was taking the anti-diabetic drug according to the last recommendation.
... I took his blood sugar, which was 199 mg/dL in the fasting state this time.
We recommended hospitalisation for a better blood sugar stabilisation and followup. The idea was rejected by Dr H.S. who suggested a more frequent blood sugar monitoring to show if his blood sugar levels can be diminished, if required, with an elevated anti-diabetic dose without bringing him out of the prison. On my fears that the patient may have a stress mediated gastric ulceration that can progress into perforation or bleeding he promised to arrange a gastroscopy on 30 or 31st January next week.”
On 15 March 2001 Dr G.P. examined the first applicant for the fourth and the last time, in the presence of Dr H.S. and a UNFICYP medical officer, and made the following notes:
“... He has not performed a blood sugar test since weeks but in general he felt somatically fit. Sometimes he does not take the Amaryl tablet in the evening when he ‘feels alright’.
... I took his blood sugar, which was 191 mg/dL ... non-fasting.
There was an agreement among all three doctors present that it was time to carry out new laboratory and ECG tests. However, the patient denied all these and allowed only the aforementioned blood sugar test ...
His explanation was that he felt helplessness, nobody wanted to help him to take him out of prison, he didn’t even ask for my visit or for any other medical help in the future. He also said that he would stop tablet taking on Monday and would start a hunger strike. I tried to explain to him that in his health situation this would be really dangerous, could lead to sudden worsening of his status. I could not convince him to abandon this idea, that he should comply with the medical suggestions to remain fit ...
His anger and negativistic attitude to health care can be signs of deepening depression.”
On 12 January 2001 the first applicant was examined by another UNFICYP medical officer, Dr R.K., who made the following findings after his visit:
“Mr. Tsiakkourmas ... suffers from diabetes type II for about four years.
The patient was found in a good physical condition but seemed to be depressive ...
His blood sugar level [was] 220 mg/dL ...
The drugs recently prescribed by Dr G.P. are available at prison, but he refuses to take any other drugs than prescribed by his ‘own doctor’. There is also the possibility to monitor the bodyweight and to check the blood sugar level three times a day, as recommended, but the patient refuses this as well, because he wants to avoid to be pricked too often and in his opinion doing this every two or three days seem to be sufficient. The perfect therapy plan developed by Dr G.P. is not accepted by the patient!
...
His blood sugar level is too high and has to be properly adjusted, but there is no acute danger to his life. The main problem at this moment seems to be the fact that he refuses any other medication prescribed or monitoring recommended than from his own doctor.”
Dr R.K. issued the following “inter-office memorandum” on 16 January 2001 in relation to the first applicant’s health situation:
“1.  Dr. H.S., the [Turkish Cypriot] responsible doctor at Nicosia General Hospital North, is an endocrinologist and seems to be very competent and cooperative. All necessary drugs and means to carry out recommended tests (blood sugar level, blood pressure, weight etc.) and supportive measures (physical exercise, diet etc.) are available at the hospital as well as at the prison.
The main problem at this moment is the patient’s unwillingness to follow the therapy plan for understandable reasons (lack of trust of foreign doctors, depressive situation ...).
...”
After his visit on 25 January 2001 Dr R.K. noted that the first applicant had still not been taking the recommended medication regularly.
According to the documents submitted by the respondent Government, the first applicant was also regularly examined by Turkish Cypriot doctors.
On 3 and 8 January 2001 a Turkish Cypriot doctor, whose name cannot be discerned from the reports, examined the first applicant and measured his blood sugar levels. He also prescribed medication for his diabetes, including 1mg of Amaryl.
On 15 January 2001 Dr H.S. examined the first applicant in the presence of Dr G.P., Dr M.K. and a UN officer at the Nicosia State Hospital and noted the following in his report:
“Tsiakkourmas suffers from type-2 diabetes and takes Amaryl (1mg), twice a day. While his diabetes was controlled through diet previously, currently he is hyperglycaemic.
It was noticed during the examination that Tsiakkourmas was stressed and depressed ... The right lumbar region was sensitive to percussion and there was pain upon deep palpation at the right hypochondriac region ... The results of the examination of the extremities were normal.
His blood sugar level was 347 mg/dl ...
Based on these results, his gallbladder and kidneys were examined in ultrasound. His gallbladder was empty and no stones were noted; there were stones in both kidneys. Liver, spleen, urinary bladder and prostate were normal.”
Based on his findings, Dr H.S. recommended that the first applicant continue with his medication and special diet, exercise daily, measure his glucose levels regularly and be brought to the hospital for examination by him twice a week. He also recommended the first applicant’s referral to a psychiatrist.
It appears that Dr H.S. continued to examine the first applicant regularly throughout his detention. In his report dated 22 January 2001, he noted that the first applicant had refused to be examined and had stated that he had not been taking his medication.
On 25 January 2001 the first applicant was examined by a Turkish Cypriot psychiatrist, Dr İ.T., with the assistance of an interpreter. The doctor noted no pathologies, apart from the applicant’s distress. She stated in her report that she had offered to prescribe the first applicant a tranquiliser, but he had rejected it.
On 30 January 2001 the first applicant was admitted to the Nicosia State Hospital for closer monitoring of his health. He was kept there until 5 February 2001.
After visiting the first applicant at the hospital on 1 February 2001, Dr R.K. noted his improved physical condition. According to his report dated 6 February 2001, the first applicant’s state of health continued to improve after his discharge from the hospital. Similarly, when he visited the first applicant on 20 and 28 February 2001 and 27 March 2001, Dr R.K. found him in a “sufficient health condition”, although his psychological state appeared to have deteriorated. Dr R.K. stressed to the first applicant that if he had any health problems, he should approach the prison authorities and ask to be seen by a doctor.
Following his discharge from the hospital the first applicant was also visited twice by Dr S.T. for routine medical checks (on 16 February and 9 April 2001). Dr S.T. noted that he was in reasonable health and also stated that he had made no complaints of ill-treatment by the prison staff.
On 18 April 2001 the first applicant was examined by another UNFICYP medical officer, Dr J.G., who also found him to be in a very satisfactory state of health. Dr J.G. indicated that the first applicant continued to take the prescribed anti-diabetic drugs regularly, and that he had been receiving the proper diet. He also noted that the first applicant had been performing physical exercises and was allowed to get books and newspapers.
The first applicant submitted a medical report dated 11 May 2001 issued by his dentist. The report stated that he was suffering from serious problems with his upper anterior teeth, including abscessed gums, and had a scar on his lower lip, which was consistent with a powerful blow to the face.
The first applicant also submitted other medical certificates that he had obtained from various doctors approximately six months after his release from prison, including one from his own doctor. According to those reports, while the first applicant’s diabetes appeared to be under control by that time, he continued to suffer psychologically.
It appears from the information in the case file that the first applicant was allowed to receive visitors twice a week during his detention on remand, including from his friends, and was granted one hour for each visit. His allegation that he was not given permission to make telephone calls was denied by the Government.
Following special permission sought by the second applicant (the first applicant’s wife), the first applicant was authorised to receive visits from his family on 15 April 2001, Easter Sunday, although it was not an ordinary visit day.
The parties disagreed as to whether the family visits in the Nicosia Central Prison were monitored. The applicants claimed that a prison officer had stood guard in or by the visit room during most visits, whereas the Government maintained that the applicants had been able to meet and communicate out of the sight of the authorities.
The parties submitted photographs and sketched maps of the scene of the incident and its vicinity, as well as various documents concerning the events and evidence that unfolded following the detention of the first applicant by “TRNC” authorities. Those documents, in so far as they are relevant, are summarised below.
The Government submitted four pages from the police notebook of Sub-inspector Ü.Ö., including two handwritten entries.
The first of those entries, which was made at 6.30 p.m. on 12 December 2000, read as follows:
“According to the information I received, at approximately 5.30 a.m. on the morning of 13 December 2000 a Greek Cypriot will enter the TRNC via Pergamos to hide illicit drugs in the empty lot located by the border crossing, to be picked up by his accomplice on this side. The superintendent put me in charge of taking the necessary precautions in the area. I informed sergeants R.Ö. and H.M..”
The second entry was made at 7.10 a.m. on 13 December 2000, after the arrest of the first applicant, and described the circumstances in which the latter had been captured with drugs as follows:
“At 6.05 a.m. we captured a Greek Cypriot coming from the SBA on the lot by the cemetery located next to the Pergamos Gate, together with sergeants R.Ö. and H.M.. I took the bag he was carrying. Upon checking the bag, I found what I believed to be two plates of cannabis resin wrapped in newspaper. The defendant was informed by sergeant H.M., who acted as the interpreter, that he was being arrested for having made an unauthorised entry into the TRNC and possessing illicit drugs. The defendant said “I am innocent”. I learned from Sergeant H.M. that the person’s name was “Banayodis Giryagu” [sic.]. We transferred Banayodis Giryagu to the Gazimağusa Security Directorate. At 6.45 a.m. I interrogated [him] with the help of sergeant H.M. [to find out] where he had found the drugs in his possession and who he was taking them to. I could not get any responses. I left the detainee in Gazimağusa under the control of sergeant R.Ö.. I am now leaving for Lefkoşa together with the evidence.”
After being informed about the discovery of the first applicant’s car in SBA territory, in a seemingly abandoned state with his briefcase and mobile phone left inside the car, the SBA police promptly started an investigation into his whereabouts. The forensic examinations conducted in and around the car, including with the help of a sniffer dog, did not yield any results. The police and the military in the “TRNC” initially denied any knowledge of the first applicant; it was not until 10.25 a.m. that the “TRNC” authorities informed the SBA police that the first applicant was in their custody, having been found in possession of drugs in “TRNC” territory.
On the basis of the information received from the “TRNC” authorities, the SBA police searched the first applicant’s car for traces of drugs and fingerprints. It appears that they found no traces of drugs, and no further information was provided regarding fingerprints. Over the next couple of months, they also interviewed some 104 people in an attempt to shed light on the events of 13 December 2000. Amongst the interviewees were the first applicant’s Turkish Cypriot workers, his fellow Greek Cypriot contractors, including those who later testified before the Famagusta Assize Court, members of the SBA police force, and the residents of the houses in the area where the first applicant’s car had been found and where he had allegedly crossed into the “TRNC”.
A number of interviewees attested to having seen the first applicant’s car on the morning of 13 December 2000 parked in an odd manner on the main road from Pyla to Pergamos, albeit with some inconsistencies as to its position and state, such as whether and which doors of the car were open, which way it was facing and whether the engine was running. Some others who had taken the same road around the relevant time stated that they had not noticed anything out of the ordinary or seen the first applicant’s car. A number of persons approached for statements, including some Turkish Cypriots, refrained from giving statements altogether because they were afraid to talk for political reasons.
Of the 104 people interviewed, only two, G.H. and A.G., who also subsequently testified before the Famagusta Assize Court, had seen the Renault cars that had allegedly been used for the first applicant’s abduction. Although A.G. stated before the Assize Court that he had seen two Renault cars, one white and one red (see above paragraph 69), he had not mentioned anything about a white car in his earlier statement to the SBA given on 19 December 2000. Moreover, the sketched plan attached to G.H.’s statement, indicating the respective positions of the red and the white Renault cars and the car of the first applicant, did not fully correspond to the statements given by the other witnesses and the first applicant himself, nor did it match his subsequent statement before the Assize Court, particularly as to where the red Renault car had been parked vis-à-vis the white one.
Amongst all those interviewed, only one person – a Greek Cypriot builder, Mr N.M., who also subsequently appeared before the Famagusta Assize Court as a witness – claimed to have witnessed anything suggesting an abduction on the relevant morning. In his statement to the SBA police on 18 January 2001, N.M. said that at approximately 5.50 a.m. on the morning of 13 December 2000, he had seen a red double-cabin pickup parked on the main Pyla-Pergamos road, with no other cars around it, and a man running from that car towards the field on the right side of the road. There were three or four other men in the field, who were pulling someone by the hands and arms towards the east side of the field, and he heard that man yelling “Let me go!”.
On 16 December 2000 the SBA police interviewed Mr V.Z., the owner of the white Isuzu pickup with registration number UJ 100, which the first applicant claimed had been travelling in front of him towards Pergamos on the relevant morning. V.Z. stated that on the morning of 13 December 2000, his car had been driven by a Turkish Cypriot worker of his, whose name he did not reveal for safety reasons (but who will be referred to as “X” hereinafter). According to what V.Z. had heard from X, as he was driving from Pergamos to Pyla on the morning of 13 December 2000, X had noticed two civilian cars, one red and the other white, blocking the way of a doublecabin pickup that had been coming from the direction of Pyla (that is, the opposite direction to him). As he approached, he saw three or four persons running from one of the vehicles towards the pickup and by the time he was driving past those vehicles, they were pulling the driver out of the pickup, while three or four other people were sitting inside the other vehicle. V.Z. stated that X had not seen anything more because he had driven past without stopping. Allegedly, a couple of days after the incident the first applicant’s nephew, Kyriacos Tsiakkourmas (who himself is an applicant before the Court), and an SBA police officer managed to track down X. Yet, apart from their allegations, there is no evidence in the case file to demonstrate that any contact was actually made with X or that X confirmed V.Z.’s testimony.
As for the interviews conducted with the residents of the area, it appears from their testimonies that none of them had seen anyone around on the morning of 13 December 2000. They had certainly not seen anything suggesting an arrest or abduction on the road. Some of them confirmed that the depth of the stream by the border fences, which the first applicant had allegedly crossed to enter the “TRNC”, had been around eighty centimetres to one metre on the morning in question. It further appears from the documents submitted by the applicants that after finishing the interviews with the residents of the area around the Pergamos Gate, an SBA officer set off to walk from the point of the alleged crossing into the “TRNC” to the point of the alleged abduction in order to measure the time it would have taken the first applicant to walk that distance. According to the officer’s notes, the relevant path could be covered in ten minutes at a normal pace.
The applicants also submitted various SBA police reports regarding the investigation conducted into the first applicant’s alleged abduction. The report dated 15 December 2000 stated the following:
“On 14.12.00 Panicos’ [the first applicant’s] wife, accompanied by a Turkish Advocate, visited him in custody in the Controlled Area of Northern Cyprus. It has been confirmed by both parties that Panicos alleges that at the location of his abandoned vehicle he saw a vehicle with the bonnet open and two men with their attention fixed on the engine compartment. He stopped to offer assistance, and at this point he was bundled into their vehicle and driven from the SBA into the controlled site via Pergamos gate. This was against his will. He was then driven around for approximately one hour, given a parcel and pushed out of the vehicle at an unknown location. Approximately five minutes passed and then a Turkish Cypriot Police car arrived. He went to them for assistance and was arrested for allegedly being in possession of a parcel of controlled drugs”.
In another report prepared on 16 December 2000, SBA sergeant P.P. noted that the first applicant’s nephew, Kyriacos Tsiakkourmas, had given him some information that he had received from his uncle’s Turkish Cypriot lawyer regarding the alleged abduction. The relevant parts of the report read as follows:
“Panicos also told his solicitor that following his abduction he was taken to a place where there were airplanes. During the journey the persons who abducted him were beating him up. On arriving at the aeroplane place (suspected to be Erdjian Airport [sic.]) the persons who abducted him dragged him out of the vehicle, threw a bag to him and left. Following that Turkish Police arrived at the said place and arrested him.”
In a report prepared on 5 January 2001, SBA sergeant P.P. noted that the “Political Section” of the TRNC Police Plain Clothes Unit used two unmarked civilian vehicles, a red Renault and a white Renault, to patrol the area of Pyla and Pergamos. In his opinion, those vehicles had also been used for the abduction of the first applicant.
In their report issued on 23 January 2001, the SBA police made the following conclusions:
“Turkish Cypriot Police Officers maintain that they arrested Tsiakkourmas inside the Turkish Controlled Area about 70 yards west of Pergamos Gate.
If this account is accepted then Tsiakkourmas must have abandoned his vehicle, engine running, lights on and driver’s door open, almost in the middle of what was then a fairly busy road. He must have left his briefcase and mobile telephone and (carrying a large quantity of cannabis) walked 500 metres across a muddy field, climbed a 1.5 metre high fence and crossed a 4 metre wide ditch. An SBA Police Officer will state that there was water to a depth of one metre in the ditch that morning. He thereafter must have tried to hide the cannabis under a 1 metre high olive tree (the only one in the area described by the Turkish Police). (This in an area with which Tsiakkourmas would be unlikely to be familiar – inside the Turkish Controlled Area). All of this he must have accomplished knowing that his employees were waiting for him at 0545 hrs, as they had been doing for the past ten years, at the Pergamos Check Point.
...
Notwithstanding the fact that it is often much more difficult to prove innocence rather than guilt it is submitted that, in spite of the statements of the Turkish Cypriot Police to the contrary, all other available evidence indicates that Panicos Tsiakkourmas was taken from his vehicle at the locus where that vehicle was abandoned – well within the Eastern Sovereign Base Areas. Other than the statements of the Turkish Cypriot Police Officers there is absolutely no evidence – forensic or historical – to indicate that Tsiakkourmas had – or ever has had – illegal drugs in his motor vehicle or in his possession.”
Some members of the SBA police also appeared before the Famagusta Assize Court as defence witnesses. Their statements have been noted above (paragraphs 74-79 above). In a separate affidavit he sent to the Court, SBA sergeant P.P. stated that various Turkish Cypriot witnesses who had wished to testify before the Assize Court for the defence had been intimidated by the Turkish Cypriot authorities. Sergeant P.P. claimed that some of those witnesses had personally told him that they had been questioned and threatened by the Turkish Cypriot police. The Court notes that it cannot be inferred from the case-file that these allegations were brought to the attention of the Assize Court.
On 24 January 2001 the SBA police conducted a reconstruction of the first applicant’s alleged abduction on the basis of the evidence available to them. The reconstruction was also recorded on video. It appears that a number of “TRNC” police officers also watched the reconstruction.
The SBA police were not permitted to interview the applicant during his detention in the “TRNC”. However, following his release they took a statement from him, which was consistent with his account of the events submitted to the Court. They also showed him the video of the reconstruction exercise. According to the records of the SBA police, the first applicant recognised two of the bystanders in the reconstruction video as his abductors. Upon investigation, it was established that one of the persons recognised by the applicant was police officer E. of the Famagusta Intelligence Service and the second one was police officer Ü., who worked at the Pergamos police station. Arrest warrants were subsequently issued against those persons on 7 June 2001 on suspicion of the offence of abduction. There is no further information in the case file on this matter, nor is it clear whether this information was shared with the Turkish Cypriot authorities.
There is no information in the case file to suggest that the Government of the United Kingdom lodged any protests with the Turkish Government in relation to the alleged abduction of the first applicant from SBA territory.
On 7 July 2001 the applicant’s Turkish Cypriot lawyer, Mr M. Aziz, gave the following information to Mr Rauf Denktaş, the President of the “TRNC” at the material time, regarding the allegations of witness intimidation during the trial of the first applicant before the Famagusta Assize Court:
“At the close of the case by the Prosecution, the defense summoned 17 witnesses. The names of all the Greek, English and Turkish witnesses that were summoned were given to me by P. Brogan, the co-defense lawyer, after consultation with the British Sovereign Bases Police. However, due to reasons out of my knowledge, the names of some additional witnesses were withheld from me. An attempt was made to call these witnesses at the last minute. The names of these witnesses were given to me at the last minute. I issued the necessary summonses through the Registrar’s Office of the Famagusta District Court. All the witnesses listed in the attached paper were issued with summons [17 witnesses in total] and these were brought to the Court to testify. Although the 3-4 witnesses whose names were given to me late were issued with summonses, these could not be served by the Court bailiff in time.
On the last day of the trial, I gave the Court the information I got from the English lawyer that these 3-4 witnesses had actually wanted to come to the Court but had been threatened or hindered. The Court asked me whether [they] had been summoned, in which case the court could order their presence. I told the Court that the summonses had not been served yet. As there was no service of the summons, the judge, under the Criminal Procedure Law and the related Regulation, could not order the arrest of these witnesses. As a result, the defense closed its case (without calling these additional witnesses) after calling 17 witnesses listed in the attached paper.
The reason a proper service of the summonses could not be done was the concealment of the names of these witnesses even from me till the last minute, and our attempt to summon them without applying for a short service order from the Court. As a defense lawyer, as well as not personally having seen the witnesses, I got to know about their identities just before the issuing of the summons, the day before in the afternoon, and issuing a summons the same day, I sent it by hand to the British Sovereign Bases Police. It is not again in my knowledge whether these witnesses were personally served with these summonses. We produced no evidence that they had been duly served. For this reason, the claims that the witnesses for defense had been prevented or threatened are not in my knowledge. Nothing was done to put such an allegation before the Court in the form of evidence.”
On 17 July 2001 that letter was conveyed by Mr Rauf Denktaş to Mr Edward Clay, the British High Commissioner to Cyprus at the relevant time.
On 8 January 2001 Mr Rauf Denktaş sent the following letter to the UN Secretary General regarding the alleged abductions of the first applicant and of Mr Tekoğul.
“I understand that letters of protest about the arrest by the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus police of one Panicos Tsakourmas [sic], aged 39, while in possession of drugs is being circulated in all directions by the Greek Cypriot leadership. It is alleged that the said Tsakourmas was abducted by Turkish Cypriots in retaliation to “the arrest” by the Greek Cypriot police of Turkish Cypriot Ömer Gazi Tekoğul at Pyla, a mixed village.
Both Tsakourmas and the Turkish Cypriot Ömer Gazi Tekoğul, aged 42, are in custody pending their trial in respective courts, one in the Greek side and the other before the Assize Court to be held in February in the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. Both sides allege that they were kidnapped by the police of the other side. Naturally, it is the relevant courts which will have to decide these issues. The allegation that Tsakourmas was arrested in retaliation to the unlawful arrest of Tekoğul is strenuously denied by the three policemen involved.
But the case of Tekoğul is a clear case of abduction by Greek Cypriot policemen who, concealing their identity, pretended to be a good friend of Tekoğul until the day he was abducted by them.
...
On 1 December 2000, at about 2040 hours [Tekoğul] had started his car, parked outside a Turkish coffee shop in Pyla, in order to go home when the two Greek Cypriot “friends” approached his car and beckoned him to enter their car for a chat. As soon as Tekoğul entered their car, he was hit on the head, and driven away in the direction of Larnaca. Shortly, four other Greek Cypriot policemen joined them and Tekoğul was taken into custody while his car, outside the coffee shop in Pyla, continued to run. Some hours later, the family was informed by neighbours about the car and Tekoğul’s father took it away.
In the mixed village of Pyla, under United Nations control, the rule is that if anyone is arrested by either side, the United Nations should immediately be informed. This was not done in the case of Tekoğul. The family was informed about the said “arrest” 12 hours after the abduction.
Tekoğul’s Greek Cypriot advocate Andreas Constantinou made this statement to the Cyprus Mail, on 28 December 2000.
‘I believe the police lied in their statements and I told the Attorney-General this when they said Tekoğul was arrested in the free areas, if they arrested him in free areas why didn’t police show us the car?’
All in all it is clear that Tekoğul was abducted in line with the well-known, and long practiced Greek Cypriot policy of harassing Turkish Cypriots. Abduction of wellknown or popular Turkish Cypriots had stopped for some time, but it appears that the practice is coming back unless United Nations authorities in Pyla take stern steps in this matter.
In view of growing publicity about the Tsakourmas’ case I thought I should give this information to you for a fair appraisal of the situation.”
A report prepared by the SBA police on 17 December 2000 noted the following:
“On 17/12/2000 at 1220 hrs, Turkish Cypriot leader Rauf DENKTAŞH [sic.] visited Pyla village...
...
He was then interviewed by the Media. Amongst others he stated about TSIAKKOURMAS case:
- He only knows that the arrest was affected within TCAs [Turkish Cypriot Administration].
- The arrest of TSIAKKOURMAS cannot be characterised that it occurred in retaliation to the arrest of the T/Cypriot, because everybody knows that he is employing about 15 Turkish Cypriot workers.
- No negotiations are taking place for an exchange between the two prisoners. The matters are in the hands of the Courts.”
According to another report of the SBA police dated 12 January 2001, Mr Rauf Denktaş had allegedly said in a meeting with Sir David Hannay, Britain’s Special Envoy to Cyprus at the time, that he would be prepared to release the first applicant on bail if Ömer Gazi Tekoğul were also granted bail, because both suspects were suffering from health problems.
The applicants submitted as evidence an affidavit made by Mr J.C. before a notary public in Dublin, Ireland, on 10 December 2001. The relevant parts of his affidavit read as follows:
“On the morning of Sunday 3.12.2000 at approximately 9.30 a.m., I received a telephone call whilst in my apartment within the UN compound in the UN Headquarters in Nicosia. The telephone call ... was from Mr M.İ. Mr M.İ. wanted to meet the Chief of Mission of UNFICYP. He did not tell me the reason ... I was unable to contact the Chief of Mission. Mr M.İ. then wished to speak to the Special Adviser to the Chief of Mission who was also Head of the Civil Affairs Branch. I failed to make contact with the Special Adviser and informed him accordingly. He was very agitated and I agreed to meet him to discuss what he described was a serious matter ...
Mr M.İ. was very agitated and very concerned about the arrest of Ömer Gazi Tekoğul who, he alleged, was arrested in the UN buffer zone in the Pyla area. Ömer Gazi Tekoğul is a Turkish Cypriot, who was arrested by the Police of the Republic of Cyprus on the night of Friday 1.12.2000 being found in possession of a substantial amount of the illegal drug heroin.
... he [Mr M.İ.] told me to take down a protest about Ömer Gazi Tekoğul’s arrest. As he spoke, I noted his protest in my notebook.
...
I then read out to Mr M.İ. the protest that he made in the format that I would present it which was as follows:
“PROTEST
On 3/12/2000, 1100 hrs north Ledra Checkpoint, Nicosia, Mr M.İ. made the following protest to Insp. J.C., CAPLO, UNFICYP for the information of the Greek Cypriot Government and UNFICYP.
I strongly protest the fact that the Greek Cypriot police kidnapped a Turkish Cypriot ÖMER GAZI TEKOĞUL in Pyla village within the UN controlled buffer zone on Friday night 01/12/00. I further state that if ÖMER GAZI TEKOĞUL is not released before 1200hrs (noon) on Monday 04/12/00 Greek Cypriots living in the Pyla area will disappear. If the Greek Cypriot police are engaging in a new policy of kidnapping suspects from the UN controlled buffer zone Turkish Cypriot police will respond in a similar manner.”
Mr M.İ. approved the format.
...
I exhibit as Exhibit A to this affidavit page 53 of my notebook in which I recorded the protest as made by Mr M.İ.”
The relevant parts of Article 16 of the Constitution read as follows:
“1.  Every person has the right to liberty and security of person.
No person shall be deprived of his liberty save in the following cases when and as provided by law: -
...
(c) the arrest or detention of a person effected for the purpose of bringing him before the competent legal authority on reasonable suspicion of having committed an offence or when it is reasonably considered necessary to prevent his committing an offence or fleeing after having done so;
...
Every person arrested or detained shall be informed at the time of his arrest, in a language which he understands of the reasons for his arrest or detention and shall be allowed immediately to have the services of a lawyer to be chosen by him or by his relatives.
The person arrested shall, as soon as is practicable and in any event not later than twenty-four hours after his arrest, be brought before a judge, if he is not in the meantime released.
The judge before whom the person arrested is brought shall promptly proceed to inquire into the grounds of the arrest in a language understandable by the person arrested and shall, as soon as possible and in any event not later than three days from such appearance, either release the person arrested on such terms as he may deem fit or where the investigation into the commission of the offence for which he has been arrested has not been completed remand him in custody. The judge may remand him in custody for a period not exceeding eight days at any one time provided that the total period of such remand or detention in custody shall not exceed three months from the date of the arrest; on the expiration of the said period every person or authority having the custody of the person arrested or detained shall forthwith set him free.
The exercise of the right of appeal against the decisions of the judge under paragraph (7) cannot be denied.
Every person who is deprived of his liberty by arrest or detention shall be entitled to take legal proceedings by which the lawfulness of his detention may be decided speedily by a court. If his detention is found to be illegal, the Court shall order his release.”
The relevant parts of Article 17 of the Constitution provide as follows:
“1.  No person shall be denied access to the court assigned to him by or under this Constitution ...
In the determination of his civil rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, every person is entitled to a fair and public hearing within a reasonable time by an independent, impartial and competent court established by law. Judgement shall be reasoned and pronounced in public session.
...
Every person has the right –
(a)  to be informed of the reasons why he is required to appear before the court;
(b)  to present his case before the court and to have sufficient time necessary for its preparation;
(c)  to adduce or cause to be adduced his evidence and to examine witnesses according to law;
(ç)  to have a lawyer of his own choice and to have free legal assistance where the interests of justice so require and as provided by law;
(d)  to have free assistance of an interpreter if he cannot understand or speak the language used in court.”
The relevant part section 14 of the Criminal Procedure Law states:
"(1) Any officer may, without a warrant, arrest any person -
...
(b) who commits in his presence any offence punishable with imprisonment;”.
The relevant part of section 132 of the Criminal Procedure Law (Part V) reads as follows:
“1. Any person convicted by an Assize Court and sentenced to death or to any term of imprisonment or to a fine exceeding twenty five Cypriot liras may, subject to the provisions of sections 135 and 136 of this Law, appeal to the Supreme Court as the Court of Cassation ...”
The relevant parts of section 37 of the Courts of Justice Law provide as follows:
 “2. Subject to the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Law, but save as otherwise provided in the subsection, every decision of a court exercising criminal jurisdiction shall be subject to appeal to the Supreme Court [acting as] the Court of Cassation. Any such appeal may be made as of right on any ground against a decision of conviction or a decision imposing sentence...
 3. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Criminal Procedure Law or in any other Law or in any Rules of Court and in addition to any powers conferred thereby, the Supreme Court [acting as] the Court of Cassation, on hearing and determining any appeal either in a civil or a criminal case, shall not be bound by any determinations on questions of fact made by the trial court and shall have power to review the whole evidence, draw its own inferences, hear or receive further evidence and, where the circumstances of the case so require, re-hear any witnesses already heard by the trial court, and may give any judgment or make any order which the circumstances of the case may justify, including an order of retrial by the trial court or any other court having jurisdiction, as the Supreme Court may direct.”