The case originated in an application (no. 35746/11) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Armenian nationals, Mr Mamikon Saribekyan and Mrs Siranush Balyan (“the applicants”), on 10 June 2011.
The applicants were represented by Mr A. Ghazaryan and Mr  A.  Zeynalyan, lawyers based in Yerevan. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Asgarov.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that their son had been tortured and killed in Azerbaijani detention, involving violations of Articles 2, 3, 13 and 14 of the Convention.
On 10 November 2015 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The Armenian Government made use of their right to intervene under Article 36 § 1 of the Convention. They were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan.
On the morning of 11 September 2010 the applicants’ son, Manvel Saribekyan, born in 1990 and a resident of the village of Ttujur in the Gegharkunik region of Armenia, close to the north-eastern border with Azerbaijan, went with his neighbours to the nearby forest allegedly to collect wood and look for stray cattle. At around 5 p.m. he lost his bearings in the fog and, as it appeared later, was arrested by Azerbaijani military police.
“Based on the forensic medical examination, the conclusions of additional laboratory investigations, the examination of evidence and the information in the record of proceedings dated 04.10.2010 “The examination of the scene”, and according to the questions which were put before the examination, I come to the following conclusion:
The cause of death of [Mr Saribekyan] was mechanical asphyxiation which occurred during hanging as a result of the compression of the neck membranes. This opinion was confirmed by the detection of the following signs: a strangulation furrow on both side surfaces of the neck, the tip of the tongue squeezed against the teeth, haemorrhages in soft tissues of the neck and both pectoral muscles, involuntary excretion of faeces, congestion of internal organs, haemorrhages under the visceral pleural membranes and epicardium, pulmonary emphysema, partial atelectasis lesions, and brain substance oedema. According to the dynamics of the early signs of decomposition of corpses, death occurred 6-8 hours before the examination of the dead body in the morgue.
The location of the strangulation furrow in the upper third of the neck, being unclosed from bottom to top with a transverse-oblique direction, and the haemorrhage in both pectoral muscles show that the noose around his neck was tightened by his own weight as a result of hanging, front and side parts of the neck having suffered the most pressure from the noose. The noose had been squeezed typically. Taking into account the circular form on the lower extremities of post-mortem lividity and considering the direction of the strangulation furrow, it could be said that the body was hanging in a vertical state and that the dead body was hanging for 4-6 hours.
It appears from the morphological features of the strangulation furrow that the noose around his neck was made from a soft once-folded cloth and that it could have been made from the piece of rope presented for examination.
The forensic-chemical investigations, ‘had not found ethyl alcohol, barbituric acid derivatives, alkaloid (or opium) phenothiazine, pyrazolone, benzodiazepine derivatives or salicylates in the blood of the dead body of [Mr Saribekyan]’.
During the forensic examination of a tampon which was taken from the anus of the deceased [Mr Saribekyan], no sperm was found. No changes, injuries or signs of injury were found at the back area and around the anus.”
“The following injuries were discovered during the forensic examination of Mr  Saribekyan’s body: a depression due to compression of neck muscles; haemorrhages in pectoral and neck muscles on both sides, the skin on the right side of the head, both thyroid lobes, the soft tissue of both brain hemispheres (temporal areas), the medullary substance, the right side of the chest, the right lumbar and rear surface of the left thigh, and tissue and mucous membranes of the rectal area; as well as a lesion on part of the rectal wall. All of the above-listed injuries were inflicted during life, of which the haemorrhages in the right adipose body of the kidney and the right side of the pectoral muscles as well as the haemorrhages in the segment lying between the medium and rear axillary lines had occurred up to one day prior to death. The haemorrhages into the right lumbar area, left thigh, rectum and its mucous membranes as well as the lesion of the rectal wall had been inflicted 1-2 days prior to death. The depression due to compression of neck muscles, the haemorrhage in both lobes of the thyroid and the cranio-cerebral trauma, including the haemorrhages of the head skin, soft brain membranes and brain tissue, occurred immediately before death, of which the depression and the haemorrhages of neck muscles and both lobes of thyroid were caused by neck compression with a semi-hard ring, while the other injuries were caused with blunt object(s) having a restricted surface. Furthermore, scratches of the right temporal region of the head inflicted with blunt object(s) were also discovered.
During the forensic examination of Mr Saribekyan’s body, no gunshot injuries or closed-cut wounds were found.
Mr Saribekyan’s death was caused by mechanical asphyxiation as a result of compression of the neck organs with a ring, which is proved by the presence of the relatively slanting depression caused by semi-hard squeezing, running front-to-back and bottom-to-top, which was inflicted during life, and the haemorrhage of lower soft tissues and both thyroid lobes, emphysema as well as hemorrhage of areas beneath the epicardium and mediastinum. Due to the unavailability of data from the previous forensic examination and records describing the appearance of the body at the site of its first discovery it is impossible to determine the precise time of death. However, based on the degree of putrefaction, as well as considering that the body had undergone autopsy and was maintained at low temperatures, it is possible that death had occurred within the timeline mentioned in the decision [of 5 November 2010 to open a criminal investigation, i.e. between 11 September and 5 October 2010].”