The case originated in an application (no. 5718/10) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Slovak national, Mr František Laufik (“the applicant”), on 8 January 2010.
The Government of the  (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková.
On 14 March 2011 the application was communicated to the Government. In accordance with Protocol No. 14 the application was allocated to a Committee of three judges.
The applicant was born in 1951 and lives in .
On 14 March 2001 the applicant being a shareholder of a limited liability company sought determination of his right to consult the company’s accounting documents before the .
On 5 November 2002 the  granted the action in that it ordered the defendant to afford the applicant the opportunity to consult the company’s documents for the years 2000 and 2001.
On 8 June 2004 the Supreme Court, on the defendant’s appeal, dismissed the judgment concerning the applicant’s claim to consult the company’s documents for 2001. It further quashed the remaining part of the judgment and returned the case to the  for a new determination. The applicant appealed on points of law.
On 27 April 2006 a cassation chamber of the Supreme Court dismissed the appeal on points of law.
On 7 November 2008 the  by a decision of a chamber in a changed composition stayed the proceedings pending the outcome of
On 28 April 2009 the Supreme Court dismissed the appeal.
On 30 June 2009 the applicant turned to the  complaining about the length of the proceedings before both the  and the Supreme Court concerning his action. It further alleged that the proceedings leading to the Regional Court’s decision to stay them had been unfair and that he had been deprived of his right to a hearing before a tribunal established by law. Finally, he complained of a violation of his right to peaceful enjoyment of his possessions.
On 10 September 2009 the  rejected the applicant’s complaint. The , examining separately the length of proceedings before the  and the Supreme Court, held that the Regional Court’s inactivity following its decision to stay the proceedings could not be considered as unjustified delays. As to the period before the decision to stay of the proceeding, it did not find any indication of a violation of the applicant’s right to a hearing within a reasonable time. As far as the proceedings before the Supreme Court were concerned, the  observed that at the time of lodging of the constitutional complaint the proceedings had been stayed by the final decision and their duration was in any event less than six months. It therefore rejected the complaint of the length of the proceedings as being manifestly ill-founded. It also rejected the remaining complaints on the same ground.
On 20 April 2011 the  issued a judgment in the other set of proceedings which became final on 16 December 2011.
On 4 April 2012 the  again stayed the proceedings pending the outcome of the proceedings on the appeal on points of law concerning the above judgment of 16 December 2011.
The applicant appealed against the decision. The proceedings are pending.