The case originated in an application (no. 36801/09) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Vladimir Yakovlevich Kapustin (“the applicant”), on 21 February 2008.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr Anton Leonidovich Burkov, a lawyer practising in Yekaterinburg. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 30 June 2017 notice of the complaints under Articles 5 § 1 and 10 of the Convention was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Russian Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1945 and lives in Yekaterinburg. The applicant is a lawyer.
On 2 December 2006 a congress of the United Russia Party (“the congress”) was held in Yekaterinburg. At 9.35 a.m. on that date the applicant started a solo demonstration next to the Central Postal Office, holding a placard that stated “United Russia Party – poverty and extinction”.
In his application to the Court the applicant submitted that he had been approached by a senior traffic police officer, T., together with police officers. After the applicant had explained that his solo demonstration had been lawful, Officer T. had “compelled” him to stop the demonstration. The applicant had refused. “Under the threat of placing him in a police vehicle” T. had then taken (сопроводил) the applicant to the police station.
In his observations following notification of the present application to the respondent Government, the applicant stated that he had been approached by Officer T. and had been surrounded by other officers. Officer T. had threatened “to forcibly escort him to the police station in a police vehicle”. The applicant had had no choice but to comply with the police officer’s order and to follow him to the police station out of fear of retaliation (by way of prosecution under Article 19.3 of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”)), for non-compliance with a lawful order by a public official). At the station he had been “forced” to write a statement in order to be allowed to leave.
According to the Government, the police officer “invited” or “asked” the applicant to follow him to the police station “in order to clarify the possibility for him to continue the demonstration”. The applicant agreed. The applicant was not handcuffed or otherwise restrained; his placard was not seized.
The applicant was required to make a written statement concerning his demonstration and placard. He was released one hour later and continued his demonstration. No administrative-escort record or administrative-arrest record was drawn up. The applicant was not charged with any offence.
The applicant then returned to the venue where the congress was taking place. After several minutes there, he went home.
In early December 2006 the applicant sought the institution of criminal proceedings against the arresting officer on account of obstruction of the holding of a meeting, assembly, demonstration, procession, or picketing, or of participation in the aforesaid (Article 149 of the Criminal Code) and abuse of power (Article 286 of the Criminal Code). A refusal to prosecute was issued. The applicant successfully challenged the refusal in court. The pre-investigation inquiry was resumed and then closed on several occasions. On 20 July 2007 an investigator issued a decision refusing to prosecute the police officers. It appears that the applicant was given a copy of that decision in October 2007. The applicant’s position was summarised as follows in the decision:
“A traffic police officer asked the applicant why he was protesting. He replied that a solo demonstration was not prohibited. After that the officer returned to his vehicle. In five minutes another officer [T.] approached him and asked what he was doing there. The applicant replied that he was staging a solo demonstration. The officer stated that the applicant was breaching the law. The applicant disagreed. Then the officer asked him to follow him to the police station in a police vehicle. He refused ... and suggested that they would go on foot to the station. The officer agreed. They then went on foot: the officer followed the applicant at some distance; the applicant was not restrained; no physical force was used. They entered the station ... All that time the placard remained in the applicant’s possession ... The on-duty officer told Officer T. to draw up a transfer report [рапорт о приводе]. The officer replied that they [the on-duty officers] should do it themselves, and left the station. The on-duty officer told another officer to take the applicant to room no. 307 ... The applicant had to wait there ... Then Officer V. took the applicant’s statement about the demonstration and the placard ... The applicant then returned to the venue [of the congress]. After several minutes there, he went home considering that he had expressed his civic views ...”
Officer T. stated that he had received an order from the town on-duty unit that the applicant be escorted to the police station; he had then asked the applicant to follow him to the station; the applicant had agreed.
The decision of 20 July 2007 reads as follows:
“There is no corpus delicti in respect of the offence under Article 286 of the Criminal Code in Officer T.’s actions. The officer considered that the applicant’s actions contained corpus delicti of an administrative offence. Officer T. did not use the measure of administrative escort because under Article 27.2 of the CAO as that measure is defined as the act of compelling a person [to go to a station] for the purposes of compiling an administrativeoffence record when it cannot be done on the spot. The applicant autonomously went to the station. No measures of psychological or physical compulsion were used. Thus there had been no “compulsion”. No formal arrest had then been carried out in the police station. Under Article 27.3 of the CAO administrative arrest is defined as a short-term limitation on one’s liberty in a special cell (under the terms of Article 27.6 of the CAO). The applicant was not placed in any such cell. After his identity had been established and a statement had been taken, he left the station without delay and continued his demonstration.”
On 11 December 2007 the Kirovskiy District Court of Yekaterinburg upheld this refusal to prosecute. On 11 January 2008 the Sverdlovsk Regional Court upheld that judgment. The courts concluded that the applicant had voluntarily followed the police officer to the station and, after his release, had continued his demonstration.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law and judicial practice, see Novikova and Others v. Russia (nos. 25501/07 and 4 others, §§ 47-86, 26 April 2016) and Tsvetkova and Others v. Russia (nos. 54381/08 and 5 others, §§ 60-75, 10 April 2018).