The case originated in an application (no. 19273/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Galina Valentinovna Yartseva (“the applicant”), on 9 February 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr Y. Mylnikov, a lawyer practising in Velikiy Novgorod. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 11 January 2018 notice of the complaint concerning the applicant’s right to freedom of expression was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1963 and lives in Velikiy Novgorod.
The applicant was the founder and the editor of Russkiy Karavan, a newspaper distributed in Velikiy Novgorod. Some 5,000 copies were distributed randomly by volunteers, for instance, at bus stops. The applicant paid for the production of the newspaper. The edition of 15 October 2007, for instance, cost her 6,018 Russian roubles (RUB; approximately 170 euros (EUR) at the time).
On 15 October and 26 November 2007 the applicant authored and published in Russkiy Karavan three articles entitled “For the indestructible union of Communists and the non-affiliated”, “Russia guards its borders” and “Signs of the time. Simplicity is worse than stealing”.
In the same editions the applicant also published articles entitled “Under another person’s name” and “Russia for Russians too”.
On 27 and 6 December 2007 the Prosecutor’s Office of Velikiy Novgorod initiated proceedings against the applicant, accusing her of unlawful pre-election campaigning in breach of the Code of Administrative Offences (CAO) (see paragraph 18 below) on account of the publication of the articles mentioned above.
The applicant argued that her prosecution for allegedly breaching certain requirements of the legislation restricting the print media’s functioning during an election period had violated her right to freedom of expression under Article 10 of the Convention. For instance, she submitted that the article “For the indestructible union of Communists and the nonaffiliated” was an invitation for a wide debate on a matter of public interest, namely the removal of the line “against all candidates” from vote ballots. It discussed possible options for a voter who did not like any of the candidates on the ballot paper. The article indicated that some choices might result in ballots being declared invalid, and that such a finding would benefit the United Russia party. At the same time, the article expressed a fear that the “leftist” parties might only win less than seven percent of votes and thus would not obtain any seats in the State Duma. Those circumstances might result in the excessive dominance of the ruling party, United Russia. Thus the article sought to guard against restauration of the one-party system from the Soviet times and the destruction of political pluralism.
According to the applicant, the articles “Russia guards its borders” and “Signs of the time. Simplicity is worse than stealing” concerned the topic of Russian citizenship and the related (arguably, controversial) federal law that had been adopted, inter alia, by the members of United Russia. The first article was based on a story of a child born in Russia.
By a judgment of 11 December 2007 a justice of the peace convicted the applicant under Article 5.11 of the CAO and sentenced her, as the editor of Russkiy Karavan, to a fine of RUB 2,000 (EUR 56 at the time) for the articles “Russia guards its borders” and “Signs of the time. Simplicity is worse than stealing”, as well as for another article (“Russia for Russians too”).
In the court’s view, the following part of “Russia guards its borders” contained calls not to vote for the United Russia party and described the consequences of electing its candidates:
“In order to save the kid we need to abolish the anti-Russian statute on Russian citizenship that was adopted by the United Russia [party] in 2002. They do not want to do it. We can save the kid and thousands of Russians from the fate of outcasts. To do this, abstain from voting for United Russia.”
In the court’s view, the following part of “Signs of the time. Simplicity is worse than stealing” contained calls not to vote for the United Russia party and described activities aimed at creating a negative image of that party:
“The massive psychosis of exalting Putin is being fostered by the United Russia [party]. It has affected the awesomely independent judiciary who now treat Putin’s word as the law. However, it would be unfair to blame only the judiciary. It is not capable of remedying the defects of the law as such by way of its decisions. It is also true that not all outcasts from distant villages know about the possibility of going to a court. Thus it is the legislature (or, in reality, United Russia) that must correct the defect (or the intentional ugliness) of the new statute on citizenship. They do not want to do that. So the only way to save our compatriots is to not vote for the United Russia [party].”
By another judgment of 11 December 2007 the justice of the peace convicted the applicant under Articles 5.10, 5.11 and 5.20 of the CAO. She was sentenced to a fine of RUB 3,000 (EUR 84 at the time) for the article “For the indestructible union of Communists and the non-affiliated” and another article (entitled “Under another person’s name”).
In the court’s view, the following part of “For the indestructible union of Communists and the non-affiliated” contained calls to vote for the Communist Party of the Russian Federation:
“The Communist Party of the Russia Federation is the only force that is capable of opposing the United Russia [party] today, and this is despite the Communist Party’s mistakes and claims that many citizens might have against it. Let us unite around it. There are other parties that inspire respect and trust. However, a vote for them would partition the votes and thus would improve the chances of United Russia ... Receiving less than seven percent of votes, the leftist parties will not get seats in the Duma while at the same time each of those parties would take some 3 or 4 percent away from the Communist Party. Remember that there is a real threat of United Russia’s total dominance and we have seen it blossom.”
The justice of the peace considered, inter alia, that the article “For the indestructible union of Communists and the non-affiliated” constituted an unlawful election contribution in the amount of RUB 6,018 to the Communist Party of the Russian Federation’s participation in the ongoing election to the State Duma.
On 10 and 11 January 2008 the Novgorod Town Court upheld the judgments.
Article 5.10 of the CAO proscribes pre-election campaigning outside the official campaigning period. Article 5.11 of the CAO proscribes preelection campaigning by persons who are not authorised by law to engage in pre-election campaigning. Article 5.20 of the CAO proscribes financing an electoral campaign outside the scope of a candidate’s electoral fund or by way of providing free services or services for manifestly reduced or increased fees, when the aim of the above-mentioned actions are directed at obtaining a desired election result and when the relevant candidate has not given his written consent and has not paid for them from his or her electoral fund.
For a summary of other relevant domestic law and judicial practice, see Orlovskaya Iskra v. Russia (no. 42911/08, §§ 36-51, 21 February 2017).