The case originated in an application (no. 59109/08) against the Republic of Armenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a non-governmental organisation based in Armenia, the Helsinki Committee of Armenia (“the applicant organisation”), on 10 November 2008.
The applicant organisation was represented by Mr R. Revazyan, a lawyer practising in Yerevan. The Armenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr G. Kostanyan, Representative of the Republic of Armenia at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant organisation alleged, in particular, that the Mayor’s decision of 8 May 2008 had violated its right to freedom of assembly and that it did not have an effective remedy.
On 21 January 2010 the application was communicated to the Government. The seat of judge in respect of Armenia being currently vacant, the President of the Court decided to appoint Judge Johannes Silvis to sit as an ad hoc judge (Rule 29 § 2 (a) of the Rules of Court).
The applicant organisation is a non-governmental human rights organisation based in Yerevan.
On 12 May 2007 a third person, L.G., who was apparently a witness in a murder investigation, died while at a police station. According to the official version, L.G. died in an attempt to escape by jumping out of a second-floor window of the police station. It appears that this event provoked an outcry among Armenian human rights groups and civil society.
On 19 February 2008 a presidential election was held in Armenia, which was followed by mass post-election rallies and protests and an intense standoff between the authorities and the supporters of the opposition, resulting in clashes and at least ten persons being killed.
.  On 1 March 2008 a state of emergency was declared by the President of Armenia for a period of 20 days, during which all public assemblies were banned.
On 6 May 2008 the applicant organisation applied to the Mayor of Yerevan, notifying its intention to hold a mourning march on the first anniversary of L.G.’s death. The march was to take place on 12 May from 8 p.m. to 9.30 p.m. It was to start at Republic Square and continue through Nalbandyan Street in the direction of the police station.
On 8 May 2008 the Mayor decided to ban the planned event, with reference to Sections 9 § 4 (3) and 13 § 1 (3) of the Assemblies, Rallies, Marches and Demonstrations Act (“the Act”), finding:
“According to the official opinion of the Police ... of 8 May 2008 ..., the mass public event held on 1 March 2008 turned into mass disorder resulting in human casualties and not all the circumstances of the crime and offenders have been disclosed, and not all weapons and ammunition used [at that event], whose circulation may pose danger to the lives and health of citizens, have been found in the course of the investigation into the criminal case instituted in connection with that fact by the Special Investigative Service of Armenia[. H]ence, it will be impossible to prevent new crimes, if the mass public event [in question] is held.
According to the official opinion of the National Security Service ... of 7 May 2008 ..., the National Security Service of Armenia has credible and verified data which show that the mass public event in question, if allowed, will result in undermining national security, public order, and the health and morality of society, in encroachments on constitutional rights and freedoms and in disorder and [new] crimes.”
By a letter of 12 May 2008 this decision was posted to the applicant organisation. On the same date the police, who had apparently been informed of the decision of 8 May 2008, prevented the organisers from holding the planned event.
On 13 May 2008 the applicant organisation received the letter of 12 May 2008.
According to Section 9 § 4 (3), the competent authority may ban the holding of a public event if, according to credible data, it is aimed at forcibly overthrowing the constitutional order, or inflaming ethnic, racial or religious hatred, or campaigning for violence or war, or may lead to mass disorder and crime, or to undermining national security, public order and the health and morality of society, or to encroachments on the constitutional rights and freedoms of others. Such data may be considered credible, if the Police or the National Security Service under the Government of Armenia have issued an official opinion on the data. In the same manner, the aforementioned authorities issue an opinion if such grounds cease to exist. Such an opinion is also issued in cases envisaged by Section 9 § 6.
According to Section 9 § 6, in cases where mass public events have turned into mass disorder resulting in human casualties, the competent authority, in order to prevent new crimes, given that other means of prevention have been exhausted, may temporarily ban the holding of mass public events until the circumstances of the crime and the identity of the offenders have been disclosed.
According to Section 10 § 1, mass public events may be held only after notifying the competent authority in writing.
According to Section 10 § 4, the organisers shall send written notification of the intention to hold a mass public event to the head of the local authority where the event is to be organised or to the Mayor of Yerevan, if the public event is to be held in Yerevan, not later than five working days and not earlier than twenty days before the planned date of the event.
According to Section 12 § 1, the competent authority shall examine the notification within 72 hours of receipt, in the order in which notifications have been received.
According to Section 12 § 6, as a result of examination of the notification, in the absence of the circumstances mentioned in Section 13, the notification of the mass public event shall be taken into consideration and the event shall be held in the place and at the time indicated in the notification. In the presence of the circumstances mentioned in Section 13, a decision shall be taken banning the mass public event.
According to Section 12 § 7, the competent authority shall immediately inform the organisers and the police of its decision taken as a result of examination of the notification, as well as post up the decision on its premises in a specially designated spot, accessible and visible to the public. The decision of the competent authority shall remain posted up in that spot until 6 p.m. on the planned date of the mass public event indicated in the notification.
According to Section 12 § 8, should the competent authority not take a decision banning the mass public event, the organisers shall have the right to hold the mass public event on the terms and conditions set forth in the notification.
According to Section 13 § 1 (3), a mass public event may be banned only when, inter alia, there exist grounds stipulated by Section 9 of this Act.
According to Section 13 § 2, a decision banning a mass public event shall contain a reasoned and clear explanation of the grounds on which the mass public event is banned.
According to Section 13 § 3, a decision banning a mass public event may be contested before the courts. The court shall adopt a judgment within 24 hours. A court judgment annulling a decision banning a mass public event shall enter into force from the moment of its delivery.
According to Articles 66-69, four types of application may be lodged with the Administrative Court: an application to challenge, seeking the annulment in part or in whole of the administrative act constituting an interference (Article 66); an application to oblige, seeking the adoption of a favourable administrative act (Article 67); an application to perform an action, seeking the performance of certain actions or refraining from certain actions (Article 68); and an application to recognise, seeking the recognition of existence or absence of a legal relationship (Article 69). An application to recognise may be lodged only if it is impossible to lodge an application under Articles 66-68. Such application may seek to recognise the invalidity of an administrative act, as well as to recognise the unlawfulness of the interfering administrative act, which is no longer in force, or of actions or inaction, if the applicant has a justified interest in doing so, namely: (a) if there is a risk of adoption of a similar act or of performance of similar actions or inaction; (b) if the applicant intends to claim pecuniary damage or (c) if the applicant seeks to restore his honour, dignity or reputation.