The case originated in an application (no. 43494/09) against the Kingdom of the Netherlands lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Netherlands national, Ms Rohiniedevie Garib (“the applicant”), on 28 July 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr R.S. Wijling, a lawyer practising in Rotterdam. The Netherlands Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr R.A.A. Böcker of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged that the restrictions to which she was subjected in choosing her place of residence were incompatible with Article 2 of Protocol No. 4 to the Convention.
The application was allocated to the Third Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). On 23 February 2016 a Chamber of that Section composed of Judges Luis López Guerra, President, Helena Jäderblom, George Nicolaou, Helen Keller, Johannes Silvis, Branko Lubarda and Pere Pastor Vilanova, and also of Stephen Phillips, Section Registrar, declared the application admissible and held, by five votes to two, that there had been no violation of Article 2 of Protocol No. 4. The joint dissenting opinion of Judges López Guerra and Keller was annexed to the judgment. On 23 May 2016 the applicant requested the referral of the case to the Grand Chamber in accordance with Article 43 of the Convention. On 12 September 2016 the panel of the Grand Chamber granted that request.
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined according to the provisions of Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24 of the Rules of Court. Mr Johannes Silvis, the judge elected in respect of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, having left the Court, on 15 September 2016 the President of the Court appointed Mr Egbert Myjer to sit as an ad hoc judge in his place (Article 26 § 4 of the Convention and Rule 29). At the final deliberations, Judge Gabriele Kucsko-Stadlmayer, substitute judge, replaced Judge András Sajó, who was unable to take part in the further consideration of the case (Rule 24 § 3). Ms Mirjana Lazarova-Trajkovska, whose term of office expired on 1 February 2017, continued to sit in the case (Article 23 § 3 of the Convention and Rule 24 § 4).
The applicant and the Government each filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1) on the merits. In addition, joint third-party comments were received from the Human Rights Centre of Ghent University and the Equality Law Clinic of the Université libre de Bruxelles, which had been given leave by the President to intervene in the written procedure (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3).
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 25 January 2017 (Rule 59 § 3).
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Mr Wijling, Ms Azghay and Mr Böcker, and also their answers to questions from judges.
The applicant was born in 1971 and now lives in Vlaardingen.
On 25 May 2005 the applicant moved to the city of Rotterdam. She took up residence in rented property at the address A. Street 6b. This address is located in the Tarwewijk district in South Rotterdam. The applicant had previously resided outside the Rotterdam Metropolitan Region (Stadsregio Rotterdam).
The applicant stated that no later than early 2007 the owner of the property asked her and her two young children to vacate the property as he wished to renovate it for his own use. He offered to let the applicant a different property at the address B. Street 72A, also in the Tarwewijk area. She further stated that, since it comprised three rooms and a garden, the property was far more suitable for her and her children than her A. Street dwelling which comprised a single room. However, whether the A. Street property was actually renovated or required renovation at all remains in dispute (see paragraph 83 below).
In the meantime on 13 June 2006, Tarwewijk had been designated under the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act (Wet bijzondere maatregelen grootstedelijke problematiek, see paragraph 21 below) as an area where only those households could move into housing who had been granted a housing permit (huisvestingsvergunning) to do so in relation to an identified property. Accordingly, on 8 March 2007 the applicant lodged a request for a housing permit with the Burgomaster and Aldermen (burgemeester en wethouders) of Rotterdam in order to be permitted to move to B. Street 72A.
On 19 March 2007 the Burgomaster and Aldermen gave a decision refusing such a permit. They found it established that the applicant did not satisfy the statutory requirements for a housing permit (see paragraph 21 below) on the basis that she had not been resident in the Rotterdam Metropolitan Region for six years immediately preceding the introduction of her request. Moreover, since she was dependent on social-security benefits under the Work and Social Assistance Act (Wet Werk en Bijstand), she also did not meet the income requirement that would have qualified her for an exemption from the residence requirement.
The applicant, who was represented throughout the domestic proceedings and before the Court by the same lawyer, lodged an objection (bezwaarschrift) with the Burgomaster and Aldermen.
On 15 June 2007 the Burgomaster and Aldermen gave a decision dismissing the applicant’s objection. Adopting as their own an advisory opinion by the Objections Advisory Committee (Algemene bezwaarschriftencommissie), they referred to the fact that housing permits were intended to be an instrument to ensure the balanced and equitable distribution of housing and to the possibility for the applicant to move to a dwelling not situated in a “hotspot” area.
The applicant lodged an appeal (beroep) with the Rotterdam Regional Court (rechtbank). In so far as relevant to the case, she argued that the hardship clause ought to have been applied. She relied on Article 2 of Protocol No. 4 of the Convention and Article 12 of the 1966 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. She also submitted that the requirement of six years’ residence in the Rotterdam Metropolitan Area, as applied to her, constituted discrimination based on income status contrary to Article 26 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
The Regional Court gave a decision dismissing the applicant’s appeal on 4 April 2008 (ECLI:NL:RBROT:2008:BD0270). In so far as relevant to the case before the Court, its reasoning was as follows:
“Section 8(1) of the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act [see paragraph 21 below] provides for the possibility of temporary restrictions on freedom of residence in areas to be indicated by the Minister [sc. the Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment (Minister van Volkshuisvesting, Ruimtelijke Ordening en Milieubeheer)]. The aim of these restrictions is to reverse a process of overburdening and decreasing quality of life (leefkwaliteit), particularly by striving towards districts whose composition is more mixed from a socioeconomic point of view. The restrictions are also intended actively to counteract the existing segregation of incomes throughout the city through the regulation of the supply of housing in certain districts and in so doing improve the quality of life of the inhabitants of those districts (Parliamentary Documents, Lower House of Parliament (Kamerstukken II) 2004/2005, 30 091, no. 3 [i.e. the Explanatory Memorandum (Memorie van Toelichting), see paragraph 31 below], pages 11-13). In view of the aims of the law, as set out, these temporary restrictions on the freedom to choose one’s residence cannot be found not to be justified by the general interest in a democratic society. Nor can it be found that, given the considerable extent of the problems noted in certain districts in Rotterdam, the said restrictions are not necessary for the maintenance of ordre public. The Regional Court takes the view that the legislature has sufficiently shown that in those districts the ‘limits of the capacity for absorption’ have been reached as regards care and support for the socioeconomically underprivileged and that moreover in those districts there is a concentration of underprivileged individuals in deprived districts as well as considerable dissatisfaction among the population about inappropriate behaviour, nuisance and crime.
As regards the violation of Article 26 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights posited by [the applicant], the Regional Court takes the view that sufficient reasons have been given (Parliamentary Documents, Lower House of Parliament, 2004/2005, 30 091, no. 3, pp. 18-20) that in so far as these measures constitute an indirect distinction, this distinction has sufficient objective justification.
The Regional Court observes in this connection that the restrictions based on the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act imposed by the 2003 Housing By-law [of the Municipality of Rotterdam] (Huisvestingsverordening 2003) constitute only a minimal and temporary restriction on the freedom to choose one’s residence. In so finding, the Regional Court notes that it does not appear – and [the applicant] has not made out a case – that [she] cannot obtain fitting housing elsewhere in the Municipality or the Region.”
The applicant lodged a further appeal (hoger beroep) with the Administrative Jurisdiction Division (Afdeling bestuursrechtspraak) of the Council of State (Raad van State). As she had done before the Regional Court, she invoked Article 2 of Protocol No. 4 to the Convention and Articles 12 and 26 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
On 4 February 2009 the Administrative Jurisdiction Division gave a decision (ECLI:NL:RVS:2009:BH1845) dismissing the applicant’s further appeal. In so far as relevant to the case before the Court, its reasoning included the following:
“2.3.2.  The right freely to choose one’s residence, provided by Article 2 of Protocol No. 4, may, under the fourth paragraph, be subject, in particular areas, to restrictions imposed in accordance with law and justified by the public interest in a democratic society. The right of everyone freely to choose one’s residence, laid down in Article 12 § 1 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, shall not be subject to any restrictions except those which are provided by law and are necessary to protect public order. The Administrative Jurisdiction Division observes in this connection that the concept ‘public order’ in the Covenant includes, in addition to the prevention of disorder, public safety, the prevention of crime and all universally accepted fundamental principles corresponding to human rights on which a democratic society is based. The arrangement set out in section 2.6(2) of the 2003 Housing By-law constitutes a restriction on Garib’s free choice of a place of residence. It is not disputed that this restriction is provided for by law and is inspired by the interest that society has in [ensuring] the quality of life in districts of major cities. The Administrative Jurisdiction Division finds that, considering that the area in issue is one designated under section 5 of the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act, the Burgomaster and Aldermen were entitled to take the view that the restriction [on freedom to choose one’s residence] is justified in the general interest in a democratic society within the meaning of Article 12 § 3 of the 1966 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The area in issue is a so-called ‘hotspot’, where, as has not been disputed, the quality of life is under threat. The restriction resulting from section 2.6(2) of the 2003 Housing By-law is of a temporary nature, namely for up to six years. It is not established that the supply of housing outside the areas designated by the Minister in the Rotterdam Metropolitan Region is insufficient. What [the applicant] has stated about waiting times does not lead the Administrative Jurisdiction Division to reach a different finding. The Administrative Jurisdiction Division further takes into account that pursuant to section 7(1), introductory sentence and under b of the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act, the Minister is empowered to rescind the designation of the area if it turns out that persons seeking housing do not have sufficient possibility of finding suitable housing within the region in which the municipality is situated. In view of these facts and circumstances the Administrative Jurisdiction Division finds that the restriction in issue is not contrary to the requirements of a pressing social need and proportionality. The Administrative Jurisdiction Division therefore finds, as the Regional Court did, that section 2.6(2) of the 2003 Housing By-law does not violate Article 2 of Protocol No. 4 of the Convention or Article 12 of the 1966 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
3.3.  As to Garib’s argument that section 2.6(2) of the 2003 Housing By-law violates Article 26, first sentence, of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights because it entails an indirect distinction, the Administrative Jurisdiction Division holds as follows. Since a relatively large number of people are resident in the areas covered by that section who are dependent on social-security benefits under the Work and Social Assistance Act, section 2.6(2) can lead to an indirect distinction being made. Such a distinction is permitted if there is an objective and reasonable justification for that distinction and the difference in treatment that flows from it. Whether such is the case must be considered in the light of the question whether the making of the distinction serves a legitimate aim and is proportionate to the aim sought to be achieved, i.e. is a suitable means to achieve that aim and the aim cannot be achieved by other, less intrusive means. Section 2.6(2) of the 2003 Housing By-law is intended by the Local Council (gemeenteraad) to effect differentiation in the districts in order to increase the quality of life. Given the seriousness of the problems the solution thereof must be considered a legitimate aim. The income requirement set by section 2.6(2) of the 2003 Housing By-law is the final measure of a package of measures (pakket van maatregelen) introduced to meet that goal. It has not, or not sufficiently, been disputed that the other measures in themselves produce insufficient effect. Considering the fact that the measure is limited in time and it does not appear that Garib cannot obtain suitable housing elsewhere in the Municipality or the Region, the Administrative Jurisdiction Division agrees with the Regional Court that the Burgomaster and Aldermen, taking into account the fact that the legislature created the possibility to make use of this means by statute and explicitly and the legislature equally weighed the need to open this possibility in addition to the existing possibilities, had good reasons to take the view that, in addition to the measures already in existence, this measure too is necessary and proportionate.
3.4.  Finally, Garib has submitted that the Burgomaster and Aldermen were wrong to find that the particular circumstances on which she relied did not constitute grounds to apply the hardship clauses. These particular circumstances are that her present dwelling is too small for her and her two children and that its poor state of repair causes her inconvenience (voor overlast zorgt). It is the policy of the Burgomaster and Aldermen to apply the hardship clauses only in untenable situations, for example in cases of violence. Like the Regional Court, the Administrative Jurisdiction Division takes the view that the Burgomaster and Aldermen were entitled to consider that there is no such situation in the present case.”
In so far as relevant to the case before the Court, the Housing Act (Huisvestingswet) provides as follows:
The Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act applies to a number of named municipalities including Rotterdam. It empowers those municipalities to take measures in certain designated areas including the granting of partial tax exemptions to small business owners and the selecting of new residents based on their sources of income. It entered into force on 1 January 2006.
As in force at the relevant time, provisions of the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act relevant to the case were the following:
“1.  The Minister [of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment] can, if so requested by the local council (gemeenteraad), designate areas in which persons seeking housing may be made subject to requirements under sections 8 and 9 of this Act.
The indication referred to in the first paragraph shall be for a term of up to four years. At the request of the local council, this term can be extended once only for up to four more years. [Section 7] shall apply by analogy.”
“1.  When making the request referred to in section 5(1), the local council shall satisfy the Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment that the intended designation of the areas mentioned in the request:
(a)  is necessary and appropriate to combat inner-city problems in the municipality; and
(b)  meets requirements of subsidiarity and proportionality.
The designation referred to in section 5(1) shall be given only if the requirements of the first paragraph have been met, and if the local council has satisfied the Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment that persons seeking housing to whom, as a result of such designation, a housing permit for taking housing in the designated areas into their use cannot be granted retain sufficient possibility to find housing suitable for them within the region in which the municipality is situated. ...”
“1.  The Minister shall rescind the designation referred to in section 5 if it is apparent to him that:
...
persons seeking housing to whom a housing permit allowing them to take into use housing within the designated areas cannot be granted as a result of the designation referred to in section 5 have insufficient possibility to find housing suitable for them within the region in which the municipality is situated. ...”
“1.  The local council can, if it considers [such a measure] necessary and appropriate for combating inner-city problems (grootstedelijke problematiek) within the municipality and it meets the requirements of subsidiarity and proportionality, determine in the housing by-law that persons seeking housing who have been resident without interruption of the region within which the municipality is situated for less than six years can only be eligible for a housing permit allowing them to take into use housing belonging to categories designated in that by-law if they dispose of:
(a)  an income from work under a contract of employment;
(b)  an income from an independent profession or business;
(c)  an income from an early retirement pension;
(d)  an old-age pension within the meaning of the General Old Age Pensions Act (Algemene Ouderdomswet);
(e)  an old-age pension or survivor’s pension within the meaning of the Wages (Tax Deduction) Act 1964 (Wet op de loonbelasting 1964); or
(f)  a student grant within the meaning of the Student Grants Act 2000 (Wet op de studiefinanciering 2000).
The local council shall determine in the housing by-law that the Burgomaster and Aldermen can grant a person seeking housing who does not meet the requirements set out in the first paragraph a housing permit allowing them to take into use housing as referred to in that paragraph if denying them that housing permit would lead to iniquity of an overriding nature (een onbillijkheid van overwegende aard). ...”
“The Minister shall send a report to Parliament on the effectiveness and effects of this Act in practice to Parliament every five years after the entry into force of this Act.”
The Council of State scrutinised the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Bill and submitted an advisory opinion to the Queen. The Government forwarded the opinion to Parliament, together with their comments (Advisory Opinion of the Council of State and Further Report (Advies Raad van State en Nader Rapport), Parliamentary Documents, Lower House of Parliament, 2004/2005, 30 091, no. 5).
The applicant, in her observations, draws attention to several remarks made by the Council of State. In so far as relevant to the case before the Court, these included, firstly, concerns about the unwanted side effects of regulating access to housing in inner-city areas on the availability of housing for low-income groups in surrounding municipalities; secondly, concerns about persons with income from sources other than social-security benefits being compelled to accept housing in depressed neighbourhoods against their wishes; thirdly, concerns about compatibility with human rights treaties, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and Protocol No. 4 to the Convention; and, lastly, concerns about the implicit distinction based on income, which might lead to indirect distinctions on grounds of race, colour or national or ethnic origin.
The Government responded to these concerns. Side effects affecting surrounding municipalities were to be expected only if the municipality concerned could not guarantee the availability of alternative housing itself; at all events, other local authorities would be consulted before the Minister gave a decision and the number and extent of the urban areas to be designated were expected to be limited. It was normally left to those seeking housing whether to react to an offer of housing or not; there was thus no compulsion. Moreover, while the effect of designation under the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act might well be to shorten waiting lists and encourage persons with income from sources other than social-security benefits to take up residence there, this was actually an intended effect. The measures in issue were justified in terms of Article 12 § 3 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and Article 2 § 3 of Protocol No. 4 to the Convention. It could not be excluded that members of minority groups might be affected indirectly, but the aim thereby served was legitimate, the means chosen were appropriate to that aim, alternative means were not available and the requirement of proportionality had been met. In the latter connection, the Government pointed to the requirement that sufficient alternative housing had to be available within the region for those in need of it before an urban area could be designated under the Act; if after all this proved not to be the case, the Minister would withdraw the designation.
Changes were made to the Explanatory Memorandum (Memorie van Toelichting) reflecting the points raised.
It is stated in the Explanatory Memorandum to the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Bill (Parliamentary Documents, Lower House of Parliament 2004/2005, 30 091, no. 3) that it was enacted in response to a specific wish expressed by the authorities of the municipality of Rotterdam. The emergence of concentrations of “socioeconomically underprivileged” in distressed inner-city areas had been observed, with serious effects on the quality of life owing to unemployment, poverty and social exclusion. Many who could afford to move elsewhere did so, which led to the further impoverishment of the areas so affected. This, together with antisocial behaviour, the influx of illegal immigrants and crime, was said to constitute the core of Rotterdam’s problems. The need therefore existed to give impetus to economic improvement locally. Quick results were not expected, for which reason the Act was intended to remain in force indefinitely; however, its effects would be reviewed in five years’ time.
In addition to the local authorities of Rotterdam, those of other cities had been asked for their input. Interest in the aims and measures of the Act had been expressed by the remaining three of the four major cities – Amsterdam, The Hague and Utrecht, in addition to Rotterdam – and other municipalities, large towns in particular. It would, however, be left to each municipality to choose for itself the measures to adopt in response to local needs.
Measures available under the Act included offering tax incentives and subsidies with a view to promoting economic activity in affected areas. Other measures were aimed at regulating access to the housing market in particular areas.
In the longer term, measures including the sale of rental property, the demolition of substandard housing and its replacement by higher-quality, more expensive residential property were envisaged. As a short-term temporary measure, intended to offer a “breathing space” for more permanent measures to produce their effects, it was proposed on the one hand to encourage settlement by persons with an income from employment (or past employment), professional or business activity or student grants and on the other to stem the influx of socioeconomically deprived house-seekers with a view to increasing population diversity.
At the same time it was recognised that those denied settlement in the areas in issue should be provided with suitable housing elsewhere in the city or region concerned. If that was not secured, the areas affected would not be designated under the legislation proposed or an existing designation would have to be withdrawn as the case might be.
The question of compatibility with human rights treaties, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and Protocol No. 4 to the Convention, was addressed in the following terms:
“4.3  Compatibility with treaties, the Constitution (Grondwet) and the General Equal Treatment Act (Algemene wet gelijke behandeling)
The measures proposed constitute a minor restriction on the right freely to choose one’s residence, as protected by Article 12 § 1 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (hereafter the Covenant), Article 2 of Protocol No. 4 to the European Convention on Human Rights (hereafter the Convention) and Articles 18 and 43 of the Treaty establishing the European Community.
Article 12 § 1 of the Covenant guarantees the right to freedom of settlement (vrijheid van vestiging) to anyone who is lawfully on Netherlands territory. The measures adopted in this Bill constitute only a minor restriction of this right to freedom of settlement. The restriction applies only to the areas designated by the Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment on the application of the local council. It is moreover a precondition for such designation and the application of the measures proposed that persons seeking housing who are affected by the requirements to be imposed on the basis of the proposed sections 8 and 9 should retain sufficient possibilities to find a dwelling elsewhere in the municipality or the region. If that is not guaranteed, the area shall not be designated or the designation shall be withdrawn by the Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment. The measures proposed will therefore not result in those persons seeking housing being unable to settle in the municipality within which the measures referred to will be applied or the region within which that municipality is situated. The minimal restriction on the right to freedom of settlement that may be the consequence of the measures proposed is justified, because the measures serve to protect public order as referred to in Article 12 § 3 of the Covenant. The concept of public order includes, in addition to the prevention of disorder, public safety, the prevention of crime and all universally accepted fundamental principles corresponding to human rights on which a democratic society is based.
The measures proposed in this Bill are intended to prevent an increased concentration of socioeconomically (more) deprived groups in certain areas or districts as a result of selective migration. The measures enable the municipality to tackle the existing segregation of incomes across the city in a short time by regulating the offer of housing. The influx of socioeconomically disadvantaged does, after all, have the consequence that a correspondingly greater demand is placed on social security structures, that support for economic activities and services is reduced and that the integration of immigrant groups is hampered. This threatens social isolation for both native-born households and households of immigrant descent in those districts. To counter this development a temporary restriction of the influx of socioeconomically (more) deprived groups is required. These measures therefore serve the protection of public order as referred to in Article 12 § 1 of the Covenant. As indicated [elsewhere in the Explanatory Memorandum], a sort of breathing space is thus created for the district concerned, so that the measures generally already ongoing to provide durable improvement of the situation in those areas or districts can actually produce their effects.
Article 2 § 4 of Protocol No. 4 to the Convention guarantees the right of everyone lawfully within Netherlands territory freely to choose their residence. With regard to this right, too, there is merely a minor restriction within the meaning of Article 2. In the relevant case-law it has in any case been held that within the framework of assessments under the Convention States enjoy a certain margin of appreciation when it comes to measures in the field of socioeconomic policy, including housing policy. In the Government’s considered opinion, this restriction can, as the Council of State says in its advisory opinion, be justified in reliance on Article 2 § 4 of Protocol No. 4 to the Convention. That fourth paragraph admits of restrictions on the right freely to choose one’s residence if that is in the public interest in a democratic society. In the Government’s considered opinion the measures proposed in this Bill are, for the reasons set out above (in relation to Article 12 of the Covenant), in the general interest.
...
In addition, the measures affect the right to equal treatment, as protected by, among other provisions, Article 1 of the Constitution, Article 26 of the Covenant, Article 5 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, Article 14 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 12 to the Convention. Based on income, a person seeking housing who has been resident in the region for less than six years either qualifies or does not qualify for a housing permit for a dwelling in the designated area. In addition, a person seeking housing may qualify to be granted a housing permit for a dwelling in the designated area with priority, based on socioeconomic characteristics. A distinction based on income must be objectively justified pursuant to Article 1 of the Constitution and the international treaties mentioned. As has been remarked above, within the framework of assessments under the Convention, States enjoy a certain margin of appreciation when it comes to housing policy.
The question whether objective justification exists for the measures proposed, in so far as these measures give rise to an indirect distinction on one of the grounds aforementioned, must be answered with the assistance of the following four questions.
Legitimate aim
The powers granted by sections 8 and 9 can be applied to support measures in districts that are under severe stress aimed at improving the position of those districts. The aim is to ‘assist the recovery’ of districts that have to contend with a cumulation of problems of a social, economic and physical nature. Moreover, it concerns a temporary restriction of the influx of persons seeking housing whose socioeconomic position is relatively weak. The Government are of the opinion that in this case the aim is a legitimate one. The powers set out in sections 8 and 9 of this Bill may therefore be used only in districts that are under very serious stress. This is a measure that may not and will not be resorted to lightly.
Appropriate
The aforementioned aim will be achieved by not admitting persons seeking housing who have completed less than six years’ residence in the region to dwellings in the designated areas. The result will be that the pressure on those areas will be reduced as a consequence of the reduced inflow of persons seeking housing who are in a socioeconomically weaker position. To ensure that the measure does not impact (too) negatively on the regional housing market and the necessary flexibility within the region, the said requirements are not set to persons seeking housing who have been resident in the region for six years or longer.
Subsidiarity
The Major Cities Policy is intended to keep middle and higher incomes in the city and prevent the concentration in certain districts of low-income groups. As remarked [elsewhere in the Explanatory Memorandum], this is a long-term process. In the short term additional measures will therefore be needed to prevent the situation from deteriorating further.
When the Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment considers whether designation of areas in which requirements based on sections 8 and 9 may be imposed on persons seeking housing is justified, it will also be weighed to what extent the instruments provided by the Housing Act, as already in force, have made enough of a difference. The Government are accordingly of the opinion that the aim cannot be achieved by other means in respect of these areas.
Proportionality
The aim is to improve the situation in areas that are under severe stress. The interest that is (partially) affected is the interest that persons seeking housing who do not qualify for a housing permit in the designated areas but who are dependent on the supply of low-cost housing have in being able to find housing suited to their needs. The precondition that is posed explicitly as regards designation of areas and use of the powers granted by sections 8 and 9 is that the persons seeking housing who are not granted a housing permit as a result of that designation retain sufficient possibilities elsewhere in the region to find a dwelling suited to their needs. Their interest in finding a dwelling suited to their needs is to some extent impinged on; they are (temporarily) unable to settle in particular areas within the municipality. Since they (must) have possibilities elsewhere in the municipality and the region, this restriction is proportionate to the aim pursued by it.
The requirement that persons seeking housing who do not qualify for a housing permit in the designated areas should have sufficient possibilities elsewhere in the municipality or the region to find a dwelling suited to their needs will in practice limit the maximum size of areas that can be designated. After all, if too many areas, or too large a part of the area of the municipality, is proposed by the local council for designation, then the chance for these persons seeking housing to find a dwelling will be significantly reduced, the result being that this necessary precondition will no longer be met.
The Government consider that adopting the powers provided for by sections 8 and 9 of the Act is necessary to achieve a legitimate aim, namely relieving the pressure on urban areas that are under severe stress, and also that these powers are suited to that aim. Moreover, the Government are of the opinion that adopting the powers provided for by sections 8 and 9 of the Act meets the requirements of subsidiarity and proportionality. The procedure for designating specific areas includes a number of (procedural) safeguards. Thus, the local council must, when applying for designation of a specific area, satisfy [the Minister] that the designation proposed is a necessary and appropriate measure for countering inner-city problems and that the designation proposed meets the requirements of proportionality and subsidiarity (section 6(1)). In addition, it is set out in section 7 that the Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment shall rescind the designation of an area if the requirements aforementioned are no longer met.”
The Lower House of Parliament discussed the Bill on 6, 7 and 15 September 2005. Members proposed numerous amendments. In so far as relevant to the case before the Court, amendments adopted included a provision requiring that, before designating an area within which the housing permit requirement would apply, the Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment had to ascertain that persons refused a housing permit retained adequate access to suitable housing elsewhere in the region (see section 6(2) of the Act, as adopted); and requiring municipalities introducing a housing permit system to adopt a hardship clause in every case (see section 8(2) of the Act, as adopted).
The Lower House of Parliament adopted the Act by 132 votes to 12 of the members present and voting.
In the Upper House of Parliament, concern was expressed about the compatibility of the Act with internationally guaranteed human rights, Article 2 of Protocol No. 4 to the Convention and Article 12 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in particular. In reply, the Government stressed the supervisory role of the Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment and drew attention to the legal remedy constituted by proceedings before the competent administrative tribunals (Memorandum in Reply (Memorie van Antwoord), Parliamentary Documents, Upper House of Parliament (Kamerstukken I) 2005/2006, 30 091, C).
On 20 December 2005, after discussion, the Upper House of Parliament adopted the Act by 60 votes to 11 of the members present and voting.
Before the entry into force of the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act, the 2003 Housing By-law of the municipality of Rotterdam set rules for, among other things, the distribution of low-rent housing to lowincome households by empowering the Burgomaster and Aldermen to issue housing permits. In designated areas it was forbidden to take up residence without a housing permit if the rent was lower than a specified amount. The By-law set out criteria for the Burgomaster and Aldermen to apply in granting such housing permits; these criteria included a correlation between rent and income levels and another between the number of rooms in particular dwellings and the number of persons comprising a household.
On 1 October 2004 the municipality of Rotterdam introduced, on an experimental basis, a by-law under which only households with an income between 120 per cent of the statutory minimum wage and the upper limit for compulsory public health insurance (ziekenfondsgrens; approximately double the statutory minimum wage at the time) were entitled to a housing permit allowing them to take up residence in moderate-cost rented housing.
In January 2006 the 2003 Housing By-law of the municipality of Rotterdam was amended to introduce detailed rules implementing the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act locally. As relevant to the present case, these rules echoed section 8(1) and (2) of the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act (section 2.6 of the 2003 Housing By-law).
The 2003 Housing By-law was replaced, with effect from 1 January 2008, by a new Housing By-law (Designated Areas (Rotterdam)) (Huisvestingsverordening aangewezen gebieden Rotterdam). This by-law, which remains in force, includes provisions corresponding to those outlined in the preceding paragraph.
On 13 June 2006 the Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment, acting under section 5 of the said Act, designated four Rotterdam districts, including Tarwewijk, and several streets for an initial period of four years. These designated areas are generally referred to using the English-language expression “hotspots”.
In 2010 the designations were extended for a second four-year term and a first designation was made for a fifth district.
The Equal Treatment Commission (Commissie Gelijke Behandeling) was a Government body set up under the General Equal Treatment Act (Algemene wet gelijke behandeling). Its remit was to investigate alleged direct and indirect distinctions (onderscheid) between persons. It existed until 2012 when it was absorbed by the Netherlands Institute for Human Rights (College voor de Rechten van de Mens).
In December 2004 the Equal Treatment Commission was approached by Regioplatform Maaskoepel (“Maas Delta regional coordinating platform”), a federative organisation comprising social housing bodies active in the Rotterdam area, with the request to consider the experimental Rotterdam by-law then in force (see paragraph 37 above).
The Equal Treatment Commission decided to include in its examination of the request the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Bill, which at that time was still pending in the Lower House of Parliament. While recognising that the Bill did not apply to certain categories of cases covered by the experimental by-law, the Equal Treatment Commission found it relevant given that it could be applied to entire areas of the city.
The Equal Treatment Commission gave its opinion on 7 July 2005. In relation to the operation of the 2003 Housing By-law prior to the entry into force of the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act, it expressed the view that persons with non-Western European immigrant roots, such as persons of Turkish, Moroccan, Surinamese or Netherlands Antilles descent (afkomst) and single-parent families (i.e. working mothers and mothers on social security) were overrepresented among the unemployed and among those earning less than 120 % of the statutory minimum wage. For that reason the measures in issue constituted an indirect distinction based on race in the case of persons of non-European immigrant descent and on gender in the case of working mothers. It further concluded that these distinctions were not justified given the availability of alternative policy choices, such as demanding testimonials of prospective tenants; regular checks by officials; improving the quality of housing; expropriating or purchasing low-quality housing from private landlords; suppressing illegal tenancy and sub-tenancy; and actively pursuing antisocial tenants.
Commenting on the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Bill, the Equal Treatment Commission added that it failed to address the said indirect distinctions and the justification given in the Explanatory Memorandum was too general.
The Equal Treatment Commission wrote to the Lower House of Parliament in what the Government describe as “more nuanced” terms on 5 September 2005. Its comments were taken into account when the Bill which ultimately became the Act was debated in parliament. However, a copy of this document has not been submitted.
According to figures published by the Municipality of Rotterdam, there were 289,779 dwellings in the municipality in 2010, of which 5,954 or 2.05% were situated in Tarwewijk. The total number of dwellings in the four districts designated in 2006 – Carnisse, Hillesluis, Oud-Charlois and Tarwewijk – was 23,449, i.e. 8.01% of the total for the municipality. With the addition of Bloemhof (designated on 1 July 2010), the total came to 29,759 or 10.27%.
On 1 January 2010 the population of the municipality of Rotterdam stood at 587,161. Of these, 11,690 or 1.99% were resident in Tarwewijk. The total number of inhabitants of the four districts designated in 2006 was 45,654, i.e. 7.77% of the total for the municipality. With the addition of Bloemhof, the total for the designated districts came to 59,367 or 10.11%.
An evaluation report, commissioned by Rotterdam’s own City Construction and Housing Service (Dienst Stedebouw en Volkshuisvesting) after the first year following the introduction of the housing permit in Rotterdam, was published on 6 December 2007 by the Centre for Research and Statistics (Centrum voor Onderzoek en Statistiek), a research and advice bureau collecting statistical data and carrying out research relevant to developments in Rotterdam in areas including demographics, the economy and employment (hereafter “the 2007 evaluation report”).
The report noted a reduction of the number of new residents dependent on social-security benefits under the Work and Social Assistance Act in “hotspot” areas, though not, of course, a complete stop because Rotterdam residents of six years’ standing were not prevented from moving there.
From July 2006 until the end of July 2007 there had been 2,835 requests for a housing permit. Of these, 2,240 had been granted; 184 had been refused; 16 had been rejected as incomplete; and 395 were still pending. The hardship clause (section 8(2) of the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act) had been applied in 38 cases.
Three-quarters of the housing permits granted concerned housing let by private landlords; the remainder – 519 – had been granted through the intermediary of social housing bodies (woningcorporaties). The latter selected their tenants with due regard to the official requirements, so that refusals of housing permits with regard to social housing were unheard of.
Of the persons refused a housing permit, 73 (40% of all those who met with a refusal) were known to have found housing elsewhere relatively quickly.
The 2007 evaluation report was presented to the Local Council on 15 January 2008. On 24 April 2008 the Local Council voted to maintain the housing permit system as was and have a new evaluation report commissioned for the end of 2009.
A second evaluation report, also commissioned by Rotterdam’s City Construction and Housing Service, was published by the Centre for Research and Statistics on 27 November 2009. It covered the period from July 2006 until July 2009 (“the 2009 evaluation report”), during which the events complained of took place.
During this period, the social housing bodies had let 1,712 dwellings in the areas concerned. Since the social housing bodies could only accept tenants who qualified for a housing permit, no applications for such a permit had been rejected in this group.
Out of 6,469 applications for a housing permit relating to privatelylet housing, 4,980 had been accepted (77%); 342 had been refused (5%); and 296 had been pending at the beginning of July 2009. Examination of a further 851 had been discontinued without a decision being taken (13%), generally because these applications had been withdrawn or abandoned; the assumption was that many of these applications would in any case have been rejected. It followed, therefore, that if the pending cases were not taken into account, approximately one-fifth of this category of applications had been either refused or not pursued to a conclusion.
The reason to reject an application for a housing permit had been related to the income requirement in 63% of cases, sometimes in combination with another ground for rejection; failure to meet the income requirement had been the sole such reason in 56% of cases.
Of 342 persons refused a housing permit, some two-thirds were known to have managed to find housing elsewhere, either in Rotterdam (47%) or elsewhere in the Netherlands (21%).
The hardship clause had been applied 185 times – expressed as a percentage of applications relating to privately-let housing, 3% of the total. These had been cases of preventing squatters from taking over housing left empty (antikraak), illegal immigrants whose situation had been regularised by a general measure (generaal pardon), assisted living arrangements for vulnerable individuals (begeleid wonen), cooperative living arrangements (woongroepen), start-up enterprises, the re-housing (herhuisvesting) of households forced to clear substandard housing for renovation, and foreign students. In addition, in one-third of cases the hardship clause had been applied because a decision had not been given within the prescribed time-limit.
The effects of the measure were considered based on four indicators: proportion of residents dependent on social-security benefits under the Work and Social Assistance Act, corrected for the supply of suitable housing; perception of safety; social quality; and potential accumulation of housing problems:
(a)  It had been observed that in the areas where the housing permit requirement applied, the reduction of the number of new residents dependent on social-security benefits under the Work and Social Assistance Act had been more rapid in “hotspot” areas than in other parts of Rotterdam. In addition, the number of residents in receipt of such benefits as a proportion of the total population of those areas had also declined, although it was still greater than elsewhere.
(b)  In two of the areas where the housing permit requirement had been introduced, the increase in the perception of public safety had been more rapid than the Rotterdam average. Tarwewijk had shown an increase initially, but was now back to where it had been before the measure was introduced. One other area had actually declined significantly in this respect. All of the areas where the housing permit requirement applied were still perceived as considerably less safe than Rotterdam as a whole.
(c)  In terms of social quality, there had been improvement in most of the parts of Rotterdam where problems existed, Tarwewijk among them. It was noted, however, that the effect of the housing permit in this respect was limited, since it only influenced the selection of new residents, not that of residents already in place.
(d)  Housing problems – defined in terms of turnover, housing left unused, and house price development – had increased somewhat in the affected areas including Tarwewijk, though on the whole at a slower rate there than elsewhere. Reported reasons for the increase were an influx of immigrants of mostly non-European extraction (nieuwe Nederlanders, “new Netherlands nationals”) and new short-term residents from Central and Eastern Europe; the latter in particular tended to stay for three months or less before moving on, and their economic activity was more difficult to keep under review as many were self-employed.
Social housing bodies tended to view the housing permit requirement as a nuisance because it created additional paperwork. They perceived the measure rather as an appropriate instrument to tackle abuses by private landlords, provided that it be actively enforced and administrative procedures be simplified. Others with a professional involvement in the Rotterdam housing market mentioned the dissuasive effect of the measure on would-be new residents of the affected areas.
The report suggested that the housing permit requirement might no longer be needed for one of the existing “hotspots” (not Tarwewijk). Conversely, five other Rotterdam districts scored high for three indicators, while a sixth exceeded critical values for all four.
A third evaluation report, this time commissioned by Rotterdam’s City Development Service (Housing Department), was published by the Centre for Research and Statistics in August 2012 (second revised edition). It covered the period from July 2009 until July 2011 (“the 2011 evaluation report”).
The social housing bodies had let 1,264 dwellings in the areas concerned; as during the previous period, no applications for housing permits had been rejected in this group because the social housing bodies could only accept qualifying tenants.
There had been 3,723 applications for a housing permit relating to privately-let housing. Of these, 3,058 had been accepted (82%); 97 had been refused (3%); and 282 had been pending on 1 July 2011. Examination of 286 had been discontinued without a decision being taken (8%), generally because they had been withdrawn or abandoned. This meant that, if the pending cases were not taken into account, approximately one-tenth of applications were either rejected or not pursued to a conclusion because the household concerned had reconsidered its decision to move.
The reasons to reject an application for a housing permit had included failure to meet the income requirement in 81% of cases, sometimes combined with other reasons. In the remaining cases the decision to reject had been based on the excessive number of persons wishing to take up residence in a particular dwelling; the unlawful sub-letting of rooms; the absence of valid residence rights; or the fact that the person making the application was underage.
The individual hardship clause had been applied in 93 cases; as a proportion of successful applications for a housing permit, this amounted to just under 3%. In addition, in 55 cases objections had been lodged against refusals; of these, 5 had been successful and had resulted in the grant of a housing permit. The grounds on which the hardship clause was applied were the same as those stated in the 2009 evaluation report (see paragraph 61 above).
In terms of social index, Tarwewijk continued to score lowest of all the Rotterdam districts. Social cohesion was very weak, which was explained by the number of house moves but also by a general lack of participation in social life. In terms of residential environment (leefomgeving), the district was vulnerable, the problem being a lack of suitable housing.
Based on the same indicators and methodology as the previous report, the 2011 evaluation report concluded that the housing permit system should be continued in Tarwewijk and two other areas (including one in which it had been introduced in the meantime, in 2010); discontinued in two others; and introduced in one area where it was not yet in force.
On 18 July 2012 the Minister of the Interior and Kingdom Relations (Minister van Binnenlandse Zaken en Koninkrijksrelaties) sent a separate evaluation report assessing the effectiveness of the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act since its inception and its effects in practice to the Lower House of Parliament, as required by section 17 of that Act (Parliamentary Documents, Lower House of Parliament, no. 33 340, no. 1). The Minister’s covering letter stated the intention of the Government to introduce legislation in order to extend the validity of the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act. Requests to that effect had been received from a number of affected cities. It was noted that not all of the cities concerned had made use of all of the possibilities offered by the Act; in particular, only Rotterdam used housing permits to select new residents for particular areas. Appended to the Minister’s letter was a copy of the 2009 evaluation report and a letter from the Burgomaster and Aldermen of Rotterdam in which they, inter alia, confirmed the desirability of extending the indication of particular areas for applying the housing permit requirement beyond the first two four-year periods: the measure was considered a success, and a twenty-year programme involving the large-scale improvement of housing and infrastructure (the “National Programme Quality Leap South Rotterdam” (Nationaal Programma Kwaliteitssprong Rotterdam Zuid, see below)) had been started in the southern parts of Rotterdam in 2011.
Both the applicant and the Government have submitted a report entitled “Evaluation of the effects of the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act”, by the Amsterdam Institute for Social Science Research (University of Amsterdam; the report is referred to hereafter as the “Amsterdam University report”). This report was commissioned by the Minister of the Interior and Kingdom Relations, who published it in November 2015, to be put before Parliament.
The report comprises 16 pages of introduction, 116 pages of analysis and 40 more pages of references and appendices (tables, methodology, list of interviewees). Its conclusion reads, inter alia, as follows:
“8.  Conclusion
[...]
In the study we have distinguished between two groups: the potentially refused and the reference group. The potentially refused are members of households without any income from work who have been living in the metropolitan area for less than six years. On this basis they are not eligible for a housing permit in the designated districts of Bloemhof, Carnisse, Hillesluis, Oud-Charlois and Tarwewijk. The reference group also has no income from work, but satisfies the residence requirement.
1.  Findings
The excluded group: the potentially refused
More often than the reference group, the potentially refused are young, male and live alone. More often than the reference group, the potentially refused are of non-European foreign origin, and much more often, they are from the European migrant population. Trends between 2004 and 2013 show a strong increase in the proportion of persons among the European migrant population, principally from Eastern European countries like Poland, Bulgaria and the Czech Republic.
[...]
Effect on the position of the potentially refused on the housing market
[...]
The group of the potentially refused tends to move house relatively frequently and during the period covered by this research their mobility increased (from 34.5% in 2004 to 38.1% in 2013). This high rate of mobility would appear to be a consequence of the composition of the group (relatively young persons and small households, often without children). After correction for background characteristics, it turns out that new arrivals tend to move more often, and continue to do so after the year in which they arrive.
[...]
Effect on the designated districts: house-moving flows and population composition
[...].
Changes in the Rotterdam housing market, including as a result of the Act, have led to new patterns of spatial distribution of new arrivals without income from work. An analysis of population dynamics confirms that the increase in the proportion of potentially refused is generally the consequence of changed house-moving flows (and not of any other dynamic such as downward social mobility of the resident population).
[...]
Designated districts: quality of life and security
Has the application of the measure under Chapter 3 of the Act had any actual effect on the quality of life and security in the designated areas?
Based on a (modified) Security Index we find that during the period 2006-2013 the designated districts have shown a more negative development in their scores than the other districts of the city. This interrelation has been examined more closely by comparing the development trend in all Rotterdam districts, taking into account the district status and other changes in the housing markets. After these checks have been carried out it still appears that the districts covered by the Act display a significantly worse development than the other districts of Rotterdam.
[...]
In so concluding it must be observed that the Act is not necessarily the cause of these lagging developments. Changes in city policy, police and justice, education, social assistance, etc. at the neighbourhood, municipal and national level are beyond the scope of this evaluation. These findings do however suggest that the Act has not contributed to any improvement.
Quality of life elsewhere
[...]
What development is seen in districts with a considerable influx of house-movers who do not qualify for a housing permit as regards quality of life and security?
[...]
In sum, it can be stated that there is a slight negative interrelation between changes in the influx of the potentially refused and the quality of life and security of the neighbourhoods. This interrelation is, however, not uniform and the causal link is not firmly established. Although the potentially refused can cause a deterioration of the quality of life and security in a neighbourhood, the interrelation may also point the other way. Because of their weak and deteriorating position on the housing market, the potentially refused will generally be limited to districts where there is a relative decline in quality of life and security.”
On 19 September 2011 the Minister of the Interior and Kingdom Relations (on behalf of the Government), the Burgomaster of Rotterdam (on behalf of the municipality of Rotterdam), and the presidents of a number of South Rotterdam boroughs (deelgemeenten), social housing bodies and educational institutions signed the National Programme “Quality Leap South Rotterdam”. This document noted the social problems prevalent in South Rotterdam inner-city areas, which it was proposed to address by providing improved opportunities for education and economic activity and improving, or if need be replacing housing and infrastructure. It was intended to terminate the programme by the year 2030.
On 31 October 2012 the Minister of the Interior and Kingdom Relations, Rotterdam’s Alderman for housing, spatial planning, real property and the city economy (wethouder Wonen, ruimtelijke ordening, vastgoed en stedelijke economie) and the presidents of three social housing bodies active in Rotterdam signed an “Agreement concerning a financial impulse for the benefit of the Quality Leap South Rotterdam (2012-2015)” (Convenant betreffende een financiële impuls ten behoeve van de Kwaliteitssprong Rotterdam Zuid (2012-2015)). This agreement provided for a review of priorities in Government financing of housing and infrastructure projects in the South Rotterdam area within existing budgets and for a once-only additional investment of 122 million euros (EUR). Of the latter sum, EUR 23 million had been reserved by the municipality of Rotterdam until 2014; another EUR 10 million would be added for the period starting in 2014. These funds would be used to refurbish or replace 2,500 homes in South Rotterdam. A further EUR 30 million would be provided by the Government. The remainder would be spent by the social housing bodies on projects within their respective remit.
On 19 November 2013 the Government introduced a Bill proposing to amend the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act (Parliamentary Documents, Lower House of Parliament 2013/2014, 33 797, no. 2). The Explanatory Memorandum stated that its purpose was to empower municipalities to tackle abuses in the private rented housing sector, give municipalities broader powers of enforcement and make further temporal extension of the Act possible.
The Inner City Problems (Special Measures) (Extension) Act (Wet uitbreiding Wet bijzondere maatregelen grootstedelijke problematiek) entered into force on 14 April 2014, enabling the designation of particular areas under section 8 of the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act to be extended the day before it was due to expire. It makes further extensions of the designation possible for successive four-year periods (section 5(2) of the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act, as amended).
With effect from 1 January 2017 the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act was amended further to enable the selective allotment of housing in order to limit nuisance and criminal behaviour.
On 27 September 2010 the applicant moved to housing in the municipality of Vlaardingen. This municipality is part of the Rotterdam Metropolitan Region. She rents her dwelling from a Government-funded social housing body.
The applicant states that she has found paid work.
As of 25 May 2011 the applicant had been resident in the Rotterdam Metropolitan Region for more than six years. She therefore became entitled to reside in one of the areas designated under the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act regardless of her sources of income.
The Government state that no renovation or building permits were sought for the dwelling in A. Street inhabited by the applicant at the time of the events complained of between 2007 and 2010 and that no such permit was applied for in the period prior to 2007 either.
Until 2015 only the municipality of Rotterdam made full use of the possibilities which the Inner City Problems (Special Measures) Act offered. In 2015 and 2016, three other municipalities followed suit (Nijmegen, Capelle aan den IJssel and Vlaardingen, the latter two being part of the Rotterdam Metropolitan Region).
The following is taken from the Article-by-Article commentary contained in the Committee of Experts’ report to the Committee of Ministers:
“16.  The third amendment consists in the fact that the Committee’s text makes no express provision for restrictions founded on what is necessary for the economic welfare of the country.
At the outset, two different positions were taken in the Committee.
Some experts thought that considerations of economic welfare should not justify any restrictions, even if these were confined to the rights referred to in paragraph 1, except insofar as they arose from the need to safeguard ordre public.
Others considered that the rights defined in paragraph 1 of Article 2 should be subject to restrictions which, when provided for by law, constitute measures necessary in a democratic society for the economic welfare of the country. They agreed, however, that the right to leave a country, provided under paragraph 2, could not be subject to restrictions of this nature.
The following arguments were advanced in support of the first view:
(a)  the inclusion of a provision for restrictions on the ground of economic welfare would permit of abuse by States in the imposition of restrictions on the exercise of the rights enunciated in paragraphs 1 and 2.
(b)  to prevent such abuse, the exercises of these rights should be subject to restrictions in the interests of economic welfare only when the restrictions were in accordance with law and justified by the need to safeguard ordre public.
(c)  according to Article 2, paragraph 1, only persons lawfully within the territory of a State have the right to move freely in that territory and choose their residence freely; this does not prevent the State from making regulations for the admission of aliens which take account of the economic welfare of the country;
(d)  Article 2, paragraph 1 does not guarantee a work permit to aliens lawfully within the territory of a State, nor does it assure them of a free choice of place of work. The State is entitled to control the issue of work permits in the light of the economic and social situation.
(e)  The inclusion of a restriction relating to economic welfare would constitute a retrograde step in relation to the now commonly accepted principles regarding the movements of foreigners. Recent international agreements on the movement of persons contain no clauses restricting movement in the interests of economic welfare (cf. Article 1 of the European Convention on Establishment signed in Paris on 13th December 1955 [ETS 19]; Article 48 of the Treaty setting up the European Economic Community, signed at Rome on 25th March 1957; Article 12 (3) of the United Nations draft Covenant).
(f)  the adoption of the other view would allow States to restrict the freedom of movement not only of aliens but also of their own nationals on economic grounds and this would be a retrograde step rather than a step forward in the protection of individual rights.
(g)  Furthermore, it was illogical to provide for restrictions of an economic nature on freedom of movement and choice of residence while at the same time rejecting any such restrictions on the freedom to leave one’s country.
(h)  Article 8, paragraph (2) of the Convention should not be regarded as a precedent. The fact that the Convention contains no general restrictive clauses but that each Article carries its own restrictions shows that the nature of such clauses has to be determined in relation to the subject-matter of the particular Article.
(i)  One expert stated that under his country’s Constitution restrictions on freedom of movement and choice of residence could not be based on purely economic considerations and that therefore he could not accept the other view.
Supporters of the other view argued as follows:
(a)  It is difficult to define the conditions in which ‘economic welfare’ is covered by the concept of ordre public.
(b)  With regard to the reference to recent international agreements, and particularly to the European Convention on Establishment, it should be remembered that in Article 2 of that Convention, each Contracting Party undertakes to facilitate the prolonged or permanent residence in its territory of nationals of the other Parties ‘to the extent permitted by its economic and social conditions’.
(c)  There is every reason to keep to the restriction provided for in Article 8 (2) of the Convention since the right to respect for the home with which it is concerned is very close to the freedom of choice of residence, which is the subject of Article 2 of the Assembly’s draft.
(d)  The powers of the European Court and Commission of Human Rights and the Committee of Ministers constituted a strong safeguard against any possible abuse of such a restriction.
(e)  One expert also invoked, where his country was concerned, reasons of a constitutional nature making it impossible to agree to a text which did not contain clauses authorising some restrictions based on considerations of economic well-being.
The Committee finally decided to delete all reference in paragraph 3 to considerations of economic welfare and to add a new paragraph relating to this question (see below paragraph 18).
The fourth amendment concerns the English translation of the expression ‘ordre public’.
The Committee decided to replace ‘law and order’ by the French words ‘ordre public’ written within inverted commas (cf. Article 2, para. 3 of the draft United Nations Covenant).
Furthermore, the Committee intended, for the purpose of this Article, that the notion of ‘ordre public’ should be understood in the broad sense in general use in continental countries.
The fifth amendment concerns the French version in which the expression ‘prévention des infractions pénales’ was found preferable to ‘prévention du crime’. (Cf. Art. 5, para. 1 (c), Art. 6, paras. (2), [Article 7 and Article 8] of the Convention; contra Arts. 10 and 11 of the Convention).
In this connection, one expert asked whether provision should not be made for a restriction for the purposes of the punishment of crime (and not merely for its prevention).
The Committee thought that the need to punish crime was covered by the notion of the maintenance of ‘ordre public’.
Paragraph 4 of the Committee’s draft
The majority of the Committee was against the inclusion of a provision permitting restrictions on the ground of economic welfare. In view, however, of the possibility that in particular areas it might be necessary, for legitimate reasons, and solely in the public interest in a democratic society, to impose restrictions which it might not always be possible to bring within the concept of ‘ordre public’, the Committee decided to insert an additional paragraph providing that the rights set forth in paragraph 1 might also be subject, in particular areas, to restrictions imposed in accordance with law and justified by the public interest in a democratic society.
The term ‘area’, as used in this Article, does not refer to any definite geographical or administrative unit. The meaning of this provision is that the restrictions in question must be localised within a well-defined area.”
The Committee of Ministers laid the Protocol open for signature and ratification, unaltered, on 16 September 1963. The Protocol entered into force on 2 May 1968, after it had received five ratifications. The Kingdom of the Netherlands ratified it on 23 June 1982.
In Denmark, the Social Housing Act (Lov om Almene Bolinger) restricts access to housing in certain residential areas where a proportion of the residents are out of work.
Section 51b(1) provides that the municipal council (kommunalbestyrelsen) may refuse to place new residents on the waiting list for dwellings in social housing areas with “a high percentage of residents outside the labour market” (en høj andel af personer uden for arbejdsmarkedet) if they, and their spouse or cohabitant partner, are on public early retirement or in receipt of social security benefits. A social housing area with “a high percentage of residents outside the labour market” is defined as an area with at least 1,000 inhabitants, at least 40% of those aged between 18 and 64 being “outside the labour market” (section 51b(3)), or with at least 5,000 inhabitants, at least 30% of those aged between 18 and 64 being outside the labour market (section 51b(4)). However, the municipal council shall be obliged to assign other suitable housing elsewhere to such persons (section 51b(9)).
Section 59(1) provides, inter alia, that social housing organisations shall make at least every fourth vacant social dwelling available to the municipal council in order for the latter to solve urgent social housing needs. Assignment shall take place after an assessment of the needs of the prospective new resident and the composition of the population in the district at the time of assignment.
Section 59(6) lays down that vacant housing available to the municipal council under other provisions including section 59(1), if situated in a social housing areas with “a high percentage of residents outside the labour market” (section 51b(3) and (4)) or a “ghetto area” within the meaning of section 61a shall not be assigned to a prospective resident if he or she, or a member of their household
(a)  has been convicted of a crime, or released from a penal institution, within the previous six months;
(b)  has not reached the age of 18 and has been convicted of a crime, or released from a penal institution, within the previous six months;
(c)  has been evicted, or had his or her lease terminated, within the previous six months as a result of serious misconduct (grove overtrædelser af god skik og orden); or
(d)  is not a national of a member State of the European Union, the European Economic Area or Switzerland, unless he or she is a student registered with an accredited educational institution.
Section 61a defines a “ghetto area” as an area of social housing with at least 1,000 inhabitants, where at least three of the following criteria are fulfilled:
“1.  The proportion of immigrants from non-Western countries and their descendants exceeds 50 per cent;
The proportion of 18–64-year-olds without any link to the labour market or education exceeds 40 per cent (average for the last two years);
The number of people convicted under the Penal Code (straffeloven), the Firearms Act (våbenloven) or the Narcotics Act (lov om euforiserende stoffer) per 10,000 inhabitants aged 18 or over exceeds 2.7 per cent (average for the past two years);
The proportion of persons aged between 30 and 59 who do not have an education beyond compulsory school [i.e. 9 years of basic education] exceeds 50 per cent;
Average income for residents aged between 15 and 64 (excluding those attending schools or other educational programmes) is less than 55 per cent of the average income of the same group in the whole region.”
According to figures published by the Danish Government there are 25 such areas in Denmark as of December 2016, down from 33 in 2012.
Since the early years of the present century, policies have been developed by the Danish government to counter the emergence of “ghetto areas”. Investment in higher-quality housing and the refurbishment of substandard housing have gone hand in hand with measures resulting in the rejection of prospective new residents who are out of work.
Article 12 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights provides as follows:
“1.  Everyone lawfully within the territory of a State shall, within that territory, have the right to liberty of movement and freedom to choose his residence.
Everyone shall be free to leave any country, including his own.
The above-mentioned rights shall not be subject to any restrictions except those which are provided by law, are necessary to protect national security, public order (ordre public), public health or morals or the rights and freedoms of others, and are consistent with the other rights recognized in the present Covenant.
No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of the right to enter his own country.”
In its relevant part, Article 22 of the American Convention on Human Rights provides as follows:
“1.  Every person lawfully in the territory of a State Party has the right to move about in it, and to reside in it subject to the provisions of the law.
...
The exercise of the foregoing rights may be restricted only pursuant to a law to the extent necessary in a democratic society to prevent crime or to protect national security, public safety, public order, public morals, public health, or the rights or freedoms of others.
The exercise of the rights recognized in paragraph 1 may also be restricted by law in designated zones for reasons of public interest. ...”