The case originated in an application (no. 7183/11) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Mr Kristijan Letinčić (“the applicant”), on 13 December 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Đurović, a lawyer practising in Zagreb. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged, in particular, a violation of his right to a fair trial under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 17 July 2013 this complaint was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The applicant was born in 1988 and lives in Zagreb.
In 1993 the applicant’s father, Ž.L., who was a war veteran, killed the applicant’s mother and her parents and then committed suicide.
In 1996 the applicant, represented by his grandmother, sought family disability benefit in connection with the suicide of his father, arguing that the suicide was a consequence of mental derangement caused by his participation in the war.
On 19 June 1996 his request was dismissed by the competent Zagreb Office of the Ministry of Defence (Ministarstvo obrane) in charge of war veterans’ affairs on the grounds that the war veteran status of his father had not been established. In July 1996 the applicant challenged that decision before the Ministry of Defence, which accepted his appeal and on 12 December 1997 quashed the first-instance decision and remitted the case for re-examination on the grounds that the nature of the applicant’s request had not been adequately established.
Following several procedural decisions of the Zagreb Municipality Office with responsibility for war veterans’ affairs (hereinafter: the “Zagreb Office”) and the Ministry in charge of war veterans’ affairs (Ministarstvo branitelja i međugeneracijske solidarnosti; hereinafter: the “Ministry”), on 3 June 2004 the Administrative Court (Upravni sud Republike Hrvatske) ordered the Zagreb Office and the Ministry to examine the applicant’s request for family disability benefit on the merits, which the applicant should have a possibility to challenge if he was not be satisfied with the outcome.
On 8 November 2005 the Zagreb Office dismissed the applicant’s request on the grounds that nothing from the materials available in the case file suggested that the death of his father was a result of his participation in the war.
The applicant challenged this decision before the Ministry, and on 15 January 2006 the Ministry found that the facts of the case connecting the suicide of the applicant’s father to his participation in the war had never been clearly established. It thus ordered the Zagreb Office to clarify the matter by commissioning an expert report from the competent medical institution and to obtain the relevant witness statements concerning the applicant’s father’s wartime service.
On the basis of the Ministry’s instructions, the Zagreb Office commissioned an expert report concerning the question whether the suicide of the applicant’s father was related to his participation in the war from the Psychiatric Clinic of the Clinical Hospital Dubrava, Reference Centre of the Ministry of Health and Social Care for Stress-Induced Disorders, Regional Centre for Psychotrauma in Zagreb (Klinička bolnica Dubrava, Klinika za psihijatriju, Referentni centar Ministarstva zdravstva i socijalne skrbi za poremećaje uzrokovane stresom, Regionalni centar za psihotraumu Zagreb; hereinafter: the “Centre”), a public health care institution authorised by law to give expert opinions on matters related to war veterans’ psychiatric disorders (see paragraph 28 below). It also questioned two witnesses concerning the applicant’s father’s wartime service.
In an expert report dated 10 June 2007 addressed to the Zagreb Office, the Centre concluded, on the basis of the available medical reports and the statements of witnesses, that the applicant’s father had not developed any symptoms resulting in a psychiatric diagnosis linked to his participation in the war and that his suicide could not be attributed to his wartime service. This expert report was not forwarded to the applicant.
On 26 September 2007 the Zagreb Office dismissed the applicant’s request for the family disability benefit referring to the Centre’s expert report, which had not established any link between his father’s suicide and his participation in the war.
The applicant challenged the above decision before the Ministry, seeking remittal of the case to the Zagreb Office for further examination. He alleged that the Centre’s report was superficial, since it had not been commissioned with regard to all aspects of the events, such as the triple murder committed by his father. The applicant also considered the report to be illogical, given that before the war his father had had no psychiatric problems whereas after his wartime activities he had committed a triple murder and suicide, which made it difficult to accept that he had not developed some mental condition. The applicant further contended that another expert report should be commissioned from one of the permanent court experts in psychiatry, since the report produced by the Centre raised the issue of its independence. He also stressed that any expert opinion on the matter should necessarily be forwarded to him for comments before the adoption of a decision.
On 2 April 2008 the Ministry dismissed the applicant’s appeal on the grounds that the Centre’s report was conclusive that the suicide of his father had not been related to his participation in the war.
The applicant lodged an administrative action in the Administrative Court against the above decision, asking the Administrative Court to decide the case on the merits instead of remitting it to the administrative bodies. He pointed out that the proceedings had already lasted excessively long and that the administrative bodies had failed to comply effectively with the previous instructions of the Administrative Court. He therefore considered that the Administrative Court should itself decide the case on the merits, as provided under section 63 of the Administrative Disputes Act (see paragraph 25 below). The applicant also contended that, if the Administrative Court did not decide the case on the merits, it should quash the Ministry’s decision and remit the case for re-examination.
In his administrative action the applicant in particular pointed out that the Ministry had failed to reply to the specific arguments set out in his appeal against the first-instance decision of the Zagreb Office and had merely reiterated the findings of the first-instance decision. He also reiterated his appeal arguments that the Centre’s expert report was superficial and illogical, since it had not been commissioned with regard to all aspects of the events, such as the triple murder committed by his father, and that it had failed to take into account that before the war his father had had no psychiatric problems whereas after his wartime activities he had committed a triple murder and suicide. In these circumstances, the applicant stressed that under section 191 of the Administrative Disputes Act another expert report ought to be commissioned from the permanent court experts in psychiatry.
On 4 December 2008 the Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s action as ill-founded. In particular, it stressed:
“During the proceedings an expert report was commissioned, under section 123 § 1 (8) of the [Veterans Act], from the [Centre] and the report was produced on 10 June 2007. The report concluded that based on the relevant documents from the case file it did not find that Ž.L. had developed any symptoms resulting in a psychiatric diagnosis linked to his participation in the war ...
Having these facts in mind, this court is of the opinion that the defendant acted lawfully when dismissing the appellant’s appeal against the first-instance decision ... It should also be noted that this court already held that the formation of an expert team [competent to determine] a possible link [between death and participation in the war], which [provides for] a decisive evidence within the meaning of section 123 § 1 (8) of the [Veterans Act], is a precondition for any further proceedings concerning the status of the family member of a deceased war veteran.
The defendant therefore correctly dismissed the appeal against the first-instance decision and thereby it did not act contrary to the relevant law. This court did not find it necessary to act under section 63 of the Administrative Disputes Act given that, as already noted above, the administrative body complied with the instruction from the judgement no. Us-2377/00 [see paragraph 9 above] concerning the appellant’s request for family disability benefit, which is the subject matter of the proceedings at issue. Although the defendant did not expressly reply to the appeal arguments concerning the necessity to request a report with regard to [Ž.L.’s] act of triple murder, [the court finds] that it could not be a decisive factor for a decision in the proceedings at hand. This is because such a criminal act cannot be a basis for the establishment of a link between the death of the war veteran and his participation in [the war]...”
On 18 February 2009 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske) arguing that his right to a fair trial in the proceedings had been violated. He contended in particular that the administrative bodies and the Administrative Court had ignored his request for an expert report to be commissioned from the permanent court experts and that he had been offered neither the possibility of participating in the choice of experts nor the opportunity to take cognisance of and comment on the expert opinion before the adoption of a decision during the proceedings.
On 27 May 2010 the Constitutional Court declared the applicant’s constitutional complaint inadmissible as manifestly ill-founded, noting that:
“In his constitutional complaint, the complainant was unable to show that the Administrative Court had acted contrary to the constitutional provisions concerning human rights and fundamental freedoms or had arbitrarily interpreted the relevant statutory provisions. The Constitutional Court therefore finds that the present case does not raise an issue of the complainant’s constitutional rights. Thus, there is no constitutional law issue in the case for the Constitutional Court to decide on. ...”
The decision of the Constitutional Court was served on the applicant’s representative on 14 June 2010.
The relevant provision of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette nos. 56/1990, 135/1997, 8/1998 (consolidated text), 113/2000, 124/2000 (consolidated text), 28/2001 and 41/2001 (consolidated text), 55/2001 (corrigendum), 76/2010, 85/2010 and 05/2014) reads:
“In the determination of his rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law.”
The Administrative Procedure Act (Zakon o općem upravnom postupku, Official Gazette nos. 53/1991 and 103/1996) in its relevant parts provides:
“(1) Before a decision is adopted, a party has to be provided with an opportunity to express his or her opinion about facts and circumstances important for adopting the decision.
(2) A decision may be adopted if a party has not expressed his or her opinion first only if so expressly permitted by law.”
“(1) A party shall have the right to participate in the examination of evidence and, in order to achieve the aim of the proceedings, to provide the relevant information and to protect his or her rights and legal interests.
(2) A party shall have the right to put forward all the facts which could be relevant for the determination of the matter and to challenge submissions contrary to his or her arguments. ...
(3) The official conducting the proceedings shall ensure that a party can: comment on all the circumstances and facts raised in the proceedings [and] on the proposals and evidence; participate in the examination of evidence and question the other parties, witnesses and expert witnesses, either through the official conducting the proceedings or, with his or her permission, directly, and take cognisance of and have the opportunity to comment on all the evidence adduced. The competent body shall not adopt a decision before allowing the party an opportunity to comment on the facts and circumstances relevant for the decision in the case if the party has not already had an opportunity to do so.”
“(1) When obtaining an expert report, the official conducting the proceedings shall, as a matter of course or at the request of the party concerned, commission such a report from one expert witness or, if the matter is complex, from two or more.
(2) [The expert report shall be commissioned from] experts who are competent in the matter, and primarily from experts who are specially authorised to give opinions on a specific matter.
(3) The party shall, in principle, be consulted as regards the choice of expert.”
“(1) ... [T]he expert shall be instructed that he or she must carefully examine the object of the expertise and correctly state his or her findings in the report, as well as that his or her reasoned conclusions must be given impartially and in compliance with the relevant scientific and professional competences.
...”
“(1) If the expert report is not clear or complete, ..., or if it is not sufficiently reasoned, or there is a reasonable doubt as to the accuracy of the findings, and these omissions cannot be remedied by a questioning of the expert witness, the expert report shall be commissioned again from the same or different expert ...”
“...
(2) The second instance body may dismiss the appeal, quash the [impugned] decision wholly or in part, or reverse it.”
“(1) When the second-instance body finds that facts were incompletely or erroneously established in the first-instance procedure, that the rules of the procedure that might have had an impact on the adjudication of the matter have not been taken into account in the procedure or that the operative part of the contested order is unclear or in contradiction with the explanation, it shall supplement the procedure and remedy the observed deficiencies either by itself or through the first-instance body or another requested body. If the second-instance body finds that based on the facts established in the additional procedure the matter has to be decided differently than in the first-instance order, it shall annul the first-instance order and decide the matter by itself.
(2) If the second-instance body finds that the deficiencies of the first-instance procedure would be remedied faster and more efficiently by the first-instance body, it shall by its order annul the first-instance order and return the matter to the first-instance body for a re-examination. In that case, the second-instance body is obligated to indicate to the first-instance body in its order in which way the procedure has to be supplemented, and the first-instance body is obligated to observe the second-instance order in all respects and without delay, at the latest within the period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the matter, adopt a new order. ...”
“(1) If the second-instance body finds that in the first-instance procedure evidence was incorrectly assessed, that a wrong conclusion was drawn from the established facts with respect to the state of facts, that the relevant law on the basis of which the matter is being decided was erroneously applied, or if it finds that, on the basis of discretion, a different decision should have been adopted, it shall quash the first-instance decision and decide on the matter by itself.
(2) If the second-instance body finds that the decision is correct with respect to the established facts and with respect to the application of law, but that the purpose, because of which the decision was adopted may be achieved by other means that are more favourable for the party, it shall reverse the first-instance decision in that respect.”
“ ...
(2) In the reasoning of the second-instance decision, all appeal arguments have to be assessed. If the first-instance body has correctly assessed the appeal arguments in the reasoning of its decision, the second-instance body may refer to the reasoning of the first-instance decision.”
The relevant provision of the Administrative Disputes Act (Zakon o upravnim sporovima, Official Gazette nos. 53/1991, 9/1992 and 77/1992) reads:
“(1) The [Administrative] Court resolves the matter, in principle, on the basis of the facts established in the administrative proceedings.
(2) If the court finds that the dispute cannot be settled on the basis of the facts established in the administrative proceedings because there are inconsistencies related to the operative facts, or [the operative facts] are not fully or correctly established, or if [the administrative bodies] failed to observe the procedural rules of relevance for the outcome of the proceedings, the court shall adopt a judgment quashing the impugned administrative act. The administrative body is then obliged to comply with the findings in the judgment ...
(3) If the quashing of the impugned administrative act and re-examination of the case by the administrative body as provided under paragraph 2 of this section would cause serious damage to the claimant, or if it is obvious from the public documents or other evidence available in the case file that the facts are different from the one established during the administrative proceedings, or an administrative act in the same proceedings had already been quashed, and the competent body has failed to fully comply with the judgment, the court can establish the facts on its own and adopt a judgment or a decision on the basis of those facts.”
“(1) The court adjudicates the matter by a judgment.
(2) By a judgment, [the court] upholds or dismisses as unfounded the [administrative] action. If the action is upheld, the court quashes the contested administrative act.
(3) When the court finds that a contested administrative act has to be quashed, it may adjudicate on the administrative matter by a judgment if the nature of things allows and if the information from the procedure provides a reliable basis. Such judgment replaces the quashed [administrative] act in all respects.
...”
“(1) When the court quashes an [administrative] act against which an administrative dispute was initiated, the proceedings shall be reinstated to the stage in which they were prior to the adoption of the quashed act. If by the nature of the matter in dispute a new act has to be adopted instead of the annulled administrative act, the competent body is obligated to adopt it without any delay, at the latest within the period of thirty days from the day of service of the judgement.
(2) The competent body is bound by the legal standpoint of the court and by the comments of the court concerning the procedure.”
“(1) If the competent body, after the annulment of an administrative act, adopts an administrative act contrary to the legal standpoint of the court or contrary to the comments of the court regarding the procedure, and the claimant therefore submits a new complaint, the court shall annul the contested act and, as a rule, adjudicate the matter on its own by a judgement. Such judgement replaces the act of the competent body in all respects.
...”
The relevant provision of the amended Administrative Disputes Act (Zakon o upravnim sporovima, Official Gazette nos. 20/2010, 143/12 and 152/2014) provides:
“(1) The proceedings terminated by a judgment shall be reopened upon a petition of the party:
if, in a final judgment, the European Court of Human Rights has found a violation of fundamental rights and freedoms in a manner differing from the [Administrative Court’s] judgment, ... “
The relevant provisions of the Act on the Rights of Croatian Homeland War Veterans and their Family Members (Zakon o pravima hrvatskih branitelja iz Domovinskog rata i članova njihovih obitelji; Official Gazette nos. 174/2004, 92/2005, 2/2007 and 107/2007; hereinafter: the “Veterans Act”) read:
“...
(2) Any armed resistance to the aggressor and any activity in the direct link with that resistance (assignment to a unit, combat position, as well as return from the exercise and preparation for the front) in the period between 5 August 1990 and 30 June 1996 shall be considered to constitute participation in the defence of the independence, territorial integrity, sovereignty of the Republic of Croatia, during the immediate danger for the sovereignty of the Republic of Croatia (hereinafter: the defence of the sovereignty of the Republic of Croatia).”
“(1) A fallen Homeland War veteran is any veteran who:
...
committed a suicide as a result of mental illness caused by his participation in the defence of the sovereignty of the Republic of Croatia; ...”
“(1) Family disability benefit is a basic right derived from the death of a family member and all other rights shall be acquired on the basis of that right, if not otherwise provided by this Act.
(2) Family members of a fallen Homeland War veteran shall be entitled to family disability benefit subject to the conditions and in the amounts laid down in this Act.”
“(1) Pursuant to this Act, the fact that a wound, injury or death occurred in the circumstances set out in section 2 paragraph 2 of this Act, can be proven only by written evidence, which, within the meaning of this Act, shall include:
...
Medical documentation attesting that ... death or suicide of the Homeland War veteran is the direct consequence of his or her participation in the [war], which must be issued by the medical institution, ambulance or head of the military health unit dating back to his or her participation in the [war] or ten years after the end of his or her participation in the [war], and exceptionally, after the expiry of this period, by the expert opinion provided by an expert team of a medical institution finding that the illness is a possible consequence of the participation in the [war]. Medical institutions as consultants for the expert opinions on the facts referred to in this section shall be appointed by the Minister of [war veterans], with the agreement of the Minister of health and social care.”
The relevant provisions of the Regulations authorising medical institutions to provide expert opinions (Pravilnik o utvrđivanju zdravstvenih ustanova za vještačenje, Official Gazette no. 45/2005; hereinafter: the “Regulations”) adopted by the Minister for war veterans, with the agreement of the Minister for health and social care (see paragraph 27 above; section 123 § 1(8) – in fine of the Veterans Act), provide:
“These Regulations establish the medical institutions which shall act as consultants for the purpose of providing expert opinions on facts suggesting that an illness, or the deterioration or appearance of an illness, or death after 31 December 1997 as a result of an illness ..., or the suicide of a Homeland War veteran might possibly be a consequence of his or her participation in the defence of the sovereignty of the Republic of Croatia, where the relevant medical documentation dates back more than ten years after the end of his or her participation in the defence of the sovereignty of the Republic of Croatia.”
“The expert analysis of the existence of a possible cause-effect relationship between ... the suicide of a Homeland War veteran and his or her participation in [the war] shall be conducted by a team of three authorised court experts, who are specialised physicians in the relevant medical field, with a professional experience of at least five years and who at least hold a master of science degree.”
“The medical institutions set out in section 2 of these Regulations shall be remunerated on the basis of a special decision issued by the Minister ...”
“The competent regional office of the state administration, ..., shall commission from one of the medical institutions set out in section 2 of these Regulations an expert report concerning the facts referred to in section 2 of these Regulations taking into account the type of illness with regard to which a Homeland War veteran has requested recognition of his status of a disabled Homeland War veteran or the illness from which the Homeland War veteran died.”
“When producing an expert report concerning the relationship of ... a suicide of a Homeland War veteran and his or her participation in the [war], the experts shall [in their report] describe in detail the beginning, course and development of the illness and its consequences and shall competently and professionally [make their conclusions].”
In its decision no. U-III-1001/2007 of 7 July 2010 the Constitutional Court elaborated on the applicability of the guarantees of a fair trial under Article 29 § 1 of the Constitution (see paragraph 23 above) in the administrative proceedings. The relevant part of the decision reads:
“10. The rules and means of proof are part of the overall procedural rules of the administrative proceedings set out in the Administrative Disputes Act and as such form an intrinsic part of the procedural guarantees of a fair trial, protected by the Constitution.
The Constitutional Court protects the guarantees of a fair trial (decision-making) by examining whether there have been possible procedural violations before the courts and other state bodies, that is to say bodies with public functions. When providing for such a protection, the Constitutional Court examines the proceedings as a whole and assesses whether they were conducted in a manner securing the fair trial (decision-making) to the appellant, that is to say whether during the proceedings there has been such a [procedural] breach that would render the proceedings as a whole unfair.
When examining the case at issue in the light of the above-noted considerations, the Constitutional Court finds that the conduct of the competent administrative bodies and the Administrative Court ... led to a violation of the appellant’s constitutional right to a fair trial (decision-making), guaranteed under Article 29 § 1 of the Constitution ...”
In the decision nos. U-III-38107/2009 and U-III-41630/2009 of 10 September 2013 the Constitutional Court applied the above-noted principles concerning the applicability of the guarantees of a fair trial under Article 29 § 1 of the Constitution in the context of the impossibility for the parties to effectively participate in obtaining the expert report before the administrative authorities and the failure of the Administrative Court to remedy the situation at issue. It thus quashed the lower authorities’ decisions and remitted the case for a re-examination.
In its judgment no. Us-5467/2011-5 of 3 September 2014 the High Administrative Court (Visoki upravni sud Republike Hrvatske) dealt with the question of the alleged procedural breaches before the administrative bodies concerning an appellant’s pension request. The relevant part of the judgment reads:
“In so far as the appellant was not provided with the expert report, the court would point out that under the Administrative Disputes Act the party should have a possibility to participate in the proceedings ... However, the procedural omission [complained of], related to the fact that the defendant did not give the appellant an opportunity to examine the case file ..., does not lead to unlawfulness of the impugned decision because in his appeal and the [administrative] action [against that decision] the appellant has challenged the correctness of the factual findings and his complaint was examined in the impugned decision and in this administrative dispute.”