The case originated in an application (no. 54145/10) against the Republic of Iceland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Icelandic national, Ms Erla Hlynsdóttir (“the applicant”), on 31 August 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr Gunnar Ingi Jóhannsson, a lawyer practising in Reykjavik. The Icelandic Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Ragnhildur Hjaltadóttir, Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of the Interior.
The applicant alleged that the Icelandic Supreme Court´s judgment of 11 March 2010 entailed an interference with her right to freedom of expression under Article 10 of the Convention that was not “necessary in a democratic society”.
On 6 September 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant, Ms Erla Hlynsdóttir, is an Icelandic national who was born in 1978 and lives in Reykjavík. She is a journalist, working for the newspaper DV.
In May 2007 the Director of Public Prosecutions issued an indictment against two individuals for importing cocaine into Iceland. The cocaine had been hidden in a Mercedes Benz vehicle, where it had been discovered by customs officers. The police had removed the cocaine and put another substance in its place. One of the accused, Mr A, had collected the car from customs and had paid customs duties for it. He and the other accused had driven the vehicle to a garage, where the substance had been removed.
The newspaper DV published an article on 5 July 2007 on the ongoing criminal proceedings against Mr A and his co-accused before the Reykjavík District Court. A picture of Mr A was published on the front page of the newspaper showing him walking into the courtroom. There was a large headline under the photograph which read “Scared cocaine smugglers” and underneath that it was written that both the accused were afraid of retaliation by their accomplices and had therefore refused to identify them. Mr A´s name also appeared on the front page, with a report that he and his co-accused could expect prison sentences of seven to eight years and three to four years respectively for removing the substance.
The article itself was reproduced on page 2 of the newspaper and the applicant was identified as its author. Next to the article appeared another photograph of Mr A, again using his name. The article stated that Mr A had been afraid to reveal the identity of the man he claimed had actually been behind the importation, and that he feared for his family’s and his own safety. The article contained the following passage:
“The Director of Public Prosecutions is requesting a punishment of seven to eight years´ imprisonment in respect of [Mr A], who has been indicted for importing nearly 3.8 kilograms of cocaine, intended for sale, together with an unknown accomplice. A punishment of three to four years is requested in respect of [Mr B], who is also charged in the case with removing the alleged drug from the vehicle, in cooperation with [Mr A],”.
In the next paragraph it was stated:
“The cocaine was hidden in a vehicle which [Mr A] imported into the country and took possession of in February 2007, believing that the cocaine was still in the vehicle, but the police had already confiscated the cocaine and replaced it with a decoy drug.”
This sentence was a verbatim rendering of a part of the description of the facts contained in the indictment, without explicit reference being made to that document.
By a judgment of 12 July 2007 the District Court acquitted both Mr A and his co-accused of all charges, and on 29 May 2008 the Supreme Court upheld the acquittal.
On 21 October 2008 Mr A lodged defamation proceedings before the Reykjavík District Court against the applicant and Mr S.M.E., who was the editor of DV at the time. In his writ he requested that the headline (“Scared cocaine smugglers”) which had appeared on the front page of the newspaper published by DV on 5 July 2007 and the passage quoted in paragraph 9 above be declared null and void. In addition, Mr A requested that the respondents jointly and severally be ordered to pay him 2,500,000 Icelandic krónur (ISK) in respect of non-pecuniary damage and ISK 500,000 to cover the costs of publishing the judgment in the case in three newspapers.
Mr A argued that the responsibility for the statements lay with the applicant as the author of the article, in accordance with section 15 (2) of the Printing Act no. 57/1956. No one had been identified as the author of the front-page headline, and therefore the publisher or editor was responsible for it (see section 15 (3) of the same Act, at paragraph 23 below).
By a judgment of 26 June 2009 the District Court found for the applicant and the editor. In its reasoning it referred to the right to freedom of expression and protection of private life, as guaranteed by the Icelandic Constitution. It further stated:
“When there is an overlap of the defendant’s aforementioned interest in the enjoyment of freedom of expression and the plaintiff’s interest in the enjoyment of respect for his private life, it must be examined whether the publication of the material, for which the defendants are responsible, can be considered to have taken place in the context of a general public debate and therefore to be of interest to the public. The disputed comments appeared in newspaper coverage of public criminal proceedings in which the plaintiff had been accused of a serious crime. The proceedings were open to the public and to those who wanted to observe, in accordance with the usual practice, and the defendants’ account is in accordance with what was revealed at the proceedings. News reporting of criminal cases being tried before the domestic courts must be considered normal and part of a journalist’s work. It cannot be a requirement that news reporting must await the outcome of a trial before publication. It makes no difference that the plaintiff was later acquitted of the charges. It must therefore be held that the published material, at the time it was published, was relevant to the public and was newsworthy. Although the headline on the front page is sensationalist, it has to be kept in mind that it refers to what was revealed during the testimony of the plaintiff in the criminal case, namely that he did not want to reveal the name of the person on whose behalf he was acting in respect of the charge of importing the drugs, as he feared for his own and his family’s safety. In view of all this, the statements are not considered to have been insulting or hurtful to the plaintiff, as defined in Article 234 of the Penal Code, or to contain an insinuation, as in Article 235 of the same Code. Moreover, they will not be deemed to entail an illegal injury to his character and honour ...”
Mr A appealed against the District Court’s judgment to the Supreme Court.
By a judgment of 11 March 2010, the Supreme Court overturned the District Court judgment. It declared null and void the words “cocaine smugglers” on the front page and the statement “... believing that the cocaine was still in the vehicle” and ordered the applicant and the editor jointly and severally to pay the appellant ISK 100,000 (approximately 575 euros (EUR)) in compensation for non-pecuniary damage, plus interest, and ISK 50,000 for the costs of publishing the judgment. Its judgment contained the following reasons:
“When the statements at issue in the present case appeared in DV on 5 July 2007, the criminal proceedings against the appellant and another man were pending before the District Court. This was clearly stated in the article, in which the substance of the charges against them was reproduced, along with a few essential points from the prosecution’s evidence and the statements which they had given at the hearing. It is not argued that the narrative was in any way incorrect, with the exception of those statements which are at issue in this case. The material published concerned a serious criminal case, which was being tried at a public hearing. It was therefore not subject to any limitations under Article 10 of the Code of Criminal Procedure no. 19/1991, in force at the time, which would have prevented the media from utilising its freedom [of expression] under Article 73 of the Constitution, to report on the case, including freedom to identify the accused. However, in that discussion special weight ought to be attached to the fact that it is the role of the courts, not the media, to determine whether an accused person is guilty of an offence.
... The appellant was acquitted of the ... criminal charges by a judgment of the District Court exactly one week after the publication of the statements in DV, and that conclusion was unaltered after the adoption of the Supreme Court judgment of 29 May 2008. By virtue of that conclusion the courts had rejected the accusation that the appellant and the co-accused in this case had been guilty of being ‘cocaine smugglers’, and also that the appellant in February 2007 had taken possession of the aforementioned vehicle ‘believing that the cocaine was still in the vehicle’. However, these two assertions were made in the statements which the appellant seeks to have declared null and void, without any reservation being made with reference to the fact that the assertions were based on an indictment which was contested in court. Bearing in mind the outcome of the criminal proceedings that had been instituted by that indictment, the statements in question contained an insinuation against the appellant, and there is no ground for rejecting his request for them to be declared null and void. As regards the other statements which the appellant claims should be declared null and void, it must be held that the word ‘scared’ in the headline on the front page contained a value judgment, and was also supported by comments made by the appellant and the co-accused during the criminal proceedings. The narrative in the article inside the newspaper, stating that the cocaine had been hidden in the vehicle which the appellant had imported into the country and had taken possession of in February 2007, after the police had confiscated the drugs and replaced them with another substance, was merely a description of facts that were later substantiated during the criminal proceedings. There are therefore no grounds for declaring the statements relating to this matter null and void.
The statements which are declared null and void were published in an article, of which [the applicant] was named as the author, except for one word [kókaínsmyglarar] in the headline on the front page. She is liable to pay compensation for them, as provided for in section 15(2) of the Printing Act. On the other hand, since the author of the front-page headline was not identified, liability to pay compensation for that statement falls on the defendant [Mr S.M.E.] as the editor of the newspaper, under section 15 (3) of the same Act. The statement in the front-page headline and those in the article on page two were linked to such a degree [voru þau tengsl] that the defendants must be ordered jointly to pay compensation for them. It is considered that since, in the present case, declaring the statements null and void alone rectifies the appellant’s position to a great extent, compensation in the amount of ISK 100,000 is appropriate, with default interest, as further specified in the operative part of the present judgment. With reference to Article 241 § 2 of the Penal Code, the defendants must also be ordered to pay ISK 50,000 to the appellant to cover the costs of publication of the outcome of this case; he has not claimed interest on that amount.”
After his acquittal, Mr A initiated proceedings before the domestic courts, seeking compensation from the Icelandic State for unlawful detention during the above-mentioned criminal investigation, but to no avail. The Supreme Court, in its judgment of 16 June 2010, found the detention to have been justified even though he was later acquitted.
In April 2009, Mr A was again arrested for involvement in importing drugs into Iceland, and in December 2009 he was sentenced by a final judgment to ten years´ imprisonment for his part in the crime.
Article 70 of the Constitution of the Republic of Iceland, Act No. 33/1944, reads:
“Everyone shall, for the determination of his rights and obligations or in the event of a criminal charge against him, be entitled, following a fair trial and within a reasonable time, to the resolution of an independent and impartial court of law. A hearing by a court of law shall take place in public, except if the judge decides otherwise as provided for by law in the interest of morals, public order, the security of the State or the interests of the parties.
Everyone charged with criminal conduct shall be presumed innocent until proven guilty.”
Article 71 of the Constitution reads:
“Everyone shall enjoy freedom from interference with privacy, home, and family life.
A body or personal search or a search of a person´s premises or possessions may only be conducted in accordance with a judicial decision or a statutory law provision. This shall also apply to the examination of documents and mail, communications by telephone and other means, and to any other comparable interference with a person´s right to privacy.”
Article 73 of the Constitution reads:
 “Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and belief.
Everyone shall be free to express his thoughts, but shall also be liable to answer for them in court. The law may never provide for censorship or other similar limitations on freedom of expression.
Freedom of expression may only be restricted by law in the interests of public order or the security of the State, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights or reputation of others, if such restrictions are deemed necessary and in agreement with democratic traditions.”
Chapter XXV of the Penal Code No. 19/1940, entitled ‘Defamation of character and violations of privacy’, contained the following relevant provisions:
Article 234
“Any person who harms the reputation of another person by an insult in words or in deed, and any person spreading such insults, shall be subject to fines or to imprisonment of up to one year.”
Article 235
“If a person alleges against another person anything that might be harmful to his or her honour or spreads such allegations, he shall be subject to fines or to imprisonment of up to one year.”
Article 236
“If an injurious insinuation is made or spread against a person´s better knowledge, this shall be subject to up to two years´ imprisonment.
If an insinuation is published or spread in a public manner, even where the person spreading the allegation did not have a plausible reason to believe it to be correct, this shall be subject to fines or up to two years’ imprisonment.”
Article 241
“In a defamation action, defamatory remarks may be declared null and void at the request of the injured party.
A person who is found guilty of a defamatory allegation may be ordered to pay the injured person, at the latter’s request, a reasonable amount to cover the cost of publication of a judgment, its main contents or reasoning, as circumstances may warrant, in one or more public newspapers or publications.”
Section 25(1) of the Tort Liability Act No. 50/1993, provided:
“If two or more parties are liable in solidum for damages, their liability shall be divided as is considered reasonable in light of the nature of their liability and the particulars in other respects.”
Section 26(1) of the same Act provided:
“A person who
deliberately or through gross negligence causes physical injury or
is responsible for an unlawful injury against the freedom, peace, honour or person of another party
may be ordered to pay non-pecuniary damages to the injured party.”
Section 15 of the Printing Act No. 57/1956 provided:
Section 15
“As regards liability for newspapers or magazines other than those listed in section 14, the following rules shall apply.
The author is subject to criminal liability and liability for damages if he or she is identified and either resident in Iceland when the publication is published or within Icelandic jurisdiction at the time proceedings are initiated.
If no such author is identified, the publisher or editor are liable, thereafter the party selling or distributing the publication, and finally the party responsible for its printing or lettering.”
The Code of Ethics of the Icelandic Journalists’ Association included the following provisions:
Article 1
“A journalist shall endeavour to do nothing which will bring discredit upon his or her profession or professional association, paper or newsroom. A journalist shall avoid any actions which could undermine the public opinion of journalists’ work or damage the interests of the profession. A journalist shall always exhibit fairness in dealings with colleagues.”
Article 2
“A journalist is aware of his or her personal responsibility for what he or she writes. He or she shall bear in mind that he or she will generally be regarded as a journalist in his or her writings and speech, even when he or she is acting outside his or her profession. A journalist shall respect the confidentiality of his or her sources.”
Article 3
“A journalist shall exercise care in his or her gathering of material, the use of the material and presentation as far as possible, and show due consideration in sensitive matters. A journalist shall avoid any actions which could cause unnecessary distress or dishonour.”
Article 4
“... In the reporting of court- and criminal cases, journalists shall respect the principle that everyone shall be presumed innocent until proved guilty.”