The case originated in an application (no. 41604/11) against the Republic of Finland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Finnish national, Mr Alexander Boman (“the applicant”), on 4 July 2011.
The applicant was represented by Mr Marcus Måtar, a lawyer practising in Mariehamn. The Finnish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Arto Kosonen of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the ne bis in idem principle had been violated in his case.
On 15 March 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1992 and lives in Jomala.
On 26 March 2010 the applicant was charged with, inter alia, causing a serious traffic hazard (törkeä liikenneturvallisuuden vaarantaminen, grovt äventyrande av trafiksäkerheten) and operating a vehicle without a licence (ajoneuvon kuljettaminen oikeudetta, olovlig körning), both acts having been committed on 5 February 2010. The prosecutor requested that, in relation to the charge of causing a serious traffic hazard, a driving ban be imposed.
On 22 April 2010 the District Court (käräjäoikeus, tingsrätten) convicted the applicant as charged and sentenced him to 75 day-fines, amounting to 450 euros (EUR). A driving ban was also imposed until 4 September 2010 on the basis of section 44 of the Driving Licence Act of the Province of Åland.
No appeal was made against the judgment and it became final.
On 28 May 2010 the police imposed a new driving ban on the applicant from 5 September to 4 November 2010 on the basis of section 46 §§ 1 (c) and 3 of the Driving Licence Act of the Province of Åland. In their decision the police referred to the fact that on 5 February 2010 the applicant had been driving a vehicle without a licence and that the District Court had convicted him for this by final judgment on 22 April 2010.
By letter dated 22 June 2010 the applicant appealed to the  (hallinto-oikeus, förvaltningsdomstolen), claiming that he had been tried and convicted twice in the same matter. He referred to Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention.
On 20 July 2010 the  rejected the applicant’s appeal and upheld the driving ban. The court found that the District Court had imposed the driving ban for causing a serious traffic hazard whereas the police had imposed it for operating a vehicle without a licence. Therefore, the applicant was not punished twice for the same offence and his rights protected by Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention were not violated.
By letter dated 12 August 2010 the applicant appealed to the Supreme Administrative Court (korkein hallinto-oikeus, högsta förvaltningsdomstolen), reiterating the grounds of appeal already presented before the Administrative Court. He stressed that both the criminal and the administrative proceedings had related to the same facts which had taken place on 5 February 2010.
On 19 January 2011 the  upheld the Administrative Court’s decision. It found that the District Court had imposed the driving ban for causing a serious traffic hazard whereas the police had imposed it for operating a vehicle without a licence. Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention had therefore not been violated. The decision was not unanimous and one of the judges expressed a dissenting opinion. In her opinion, it was not to be ruled out that a driving ban constituted a criminal sanction. Referring to the case Zolotukhin v. Russia, she considered that after the applicant’s final conviction by the District Court, a new driving ban based on the same facts on the basis of which he had already been convicted could no longer be imposed. Therefore, she would have quashed the police decision as well as the Administrative Court’s decision.
Section 44 of the Driving Licence Act of the Province of Åland (körkortslagen för landskapet Åland; Act no. 79/1991, as modified by Act no. 29/2004) reads as follows:
“Anyone who is found to have made himself or herself guilty of causing a serious traffic hazard, of drunken driving or of aggravated drunken driving while operating a motor vehicle shall have a driving ban imposed by a court of law. However, if the driver is not sentenced to a punishment for the act, the court may waive imposing a driving ban.
The driving ban referred to in subsection 1 may be imposed for a maximum period of five years. The decision of the court shall specify the last day of validity of the driving ban. The decision shall be enforced despite any appeal.
In determining the time of validity of the driving ban, account shall be taken of the impact of the ban on the recipient’s subsistence and other circumstances. The time for which a driving ban or a temporary driving ban has been imposed on the driving licence holder in an administrative procedure shall be deducted from the time of validity of the driving ban imposed by the court. If, thereafter, no time remains, the driving ban shall expire on the day when the decision is delivered or issued.
When the driving ban is imposed, the driving licence holder must leave the licence with the police. If the driving licence holder refuses to leave the licence, it shall be taken from him or her. The driving licence holder shall regain the right to operate vehicles requiring a driving licence when the licence is returned to him or her. If the police have not taken possession of the licence, the driving licence holder shall regain the right to operate vehicles requiring a driving licence when a new licence is delivered.
Anyone on whom a driving ban has been imposed under the provisions of subsection 1 shall, during the validity of the driving ban, have no right to drive a vehicle requiring a driving licence, to take driver training under Chapter 2 of this Act or to train drivers under Chapter 3 of this Act.”
Section 46 of the same Act provides the following:
“The police shall impose a driving ban on a driving licence holder if the latter
a)  no longer fulfils the preconditions for obtaining a driving licence;
b)  has failed to present a medical certificate within a prescribed time or to pass a new test ordered for him or her;
c)  when operating a motor vehicle, has made himself or herself guilty of an act not referred to in Section 45 which is punishable under the Traffic Offence Act of the Province of Åland (Act no. 28/2004) and indicates serious disregard for traffic safety, or has made himself or herself guilty of operating a vehicle without a licence; (Act no. 29/2004)
d)  three times within one year or four times within two years or, as a holder of a driving licence with a trial period, twice within one year has made himself or herself guilty of an act punishable under sections 2, 7 and 11 of the Traffic Offence Act of the Province of Åland (Act no. 28/2004), with the exception of acts punishable by a petty fine other than speeding offences, or guilty of a detector offence referred to in the Act on Applying, in the Province of Åland, the Act Prohibiting Devices that Hamper Traffic Supervision (Act no. 11/2003), or guilty of an offence against the Act of the Province of Åland on Vocational Competence of Lorry and Bus Drivers; (Act no. 86/2008)
e)  has operated a vehicle despite a valid driving ban; (Act no. 36/1993) or
f)  has been sentenced for drunken driving abroad or has made himself or herself guilty of such an act abroad.
The driving ban referred to in subsection 1, paragraphs a and b, shall be valid for an indefinite period.
The driving ban referred to in subsection 1, paragraphs c, d, e and f, shall be valid for the maximum period of six months. In cases referred to in these paragraphs the police may, instead of imposing a driving ban, order that the driving licence holder must take a driving test again. (Act no. 38/1993)
Anyone on whom a driving ban has been imposed under the provisions of subsection 1, paragraph c, except on the basis of operating a vehicle without a licence, has the right to have his or her matter reviewed by a court of law if he or she refers the matter to the court within a week from the date of being informed about the decision. In the case of such a referral the court shall, without delay, inform the police about the pendency of the matter. In such cases the police shall, without delay, return the driving licence. If the court holds that the driving ban is justified, it shall determine how long the ban is to be valid. However, the period of validity must not exceed the original period determined by the police. The court may not declare the driving ban conditional. (Act no. 5/2004)”
The Supreme Administrative Court has considered in its case-law (KHO:2009:60) that under Finnish law a driving ban was both an administrative security measure as well as a criminal sanction. In that case, after the imposition of a driving ban by the police, the District Court had delivered a final judgment by which the charges against the applicant had been dropped. As the applicant was not found guilty of the sole act on the basis of which the driving ban had been imposed by the police, there was no basis for imposing the driving ban and it had to be quashed.
After the delivery of the Court’s judgments in cases Nykänen and Glantz (see Nykänen v. Finland, no. 11828/11, § 52, 20 May 2014; and Glantz v. Finland, no. 37394/11, § 62, 20 May 2014), the Swedish Supreme Administrative Court found in its judgment of 11 December 2014 (no. 1833-14) that the Swedish practice had been accepted by the Court. The court found that it was clear that a withdrawal of a driving license on the basis of a conviction or other equivalent decision concerning a traffic offence was not considered as new criminal proceedings. This situation differed from that of tax surcharges and criminal proceedings for tax fraud for the same incorrect information and did not therefore violate against the ne bis idem principle in Article 4 § 1 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention.