The case originated in an application (no. 19847/07) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Daniel Sobolewski.
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged that his right to a fair trial had been violated in that the appeal hearing in his criminal case had been held in his absence as the court had refused his request to be brought to the hearing from prison.
On 19 October 1997 the President of the Fourth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility (Article 29 § 3 of the Convention).
The applicant was born in 1963. He is currently serving a prison sentence.
The applicant was charged with multiple counts of fraud and unlawful possession of a firearm. The trial took place before the Grodzisk Wielkopolski District Court. The applicant, represented by a legal-aid lawyer, was present during the trial. On 19 May 2006 the court convicted the applicant of multiple counts of fraud, acquitted him of the charge of unlawful possession of a firearm and sentenced him to two years’ imprisonment.
The applicant’s legalaid lawyer, who had represented him during the proceedings, filed an appeal against this judgment with the Poznań Court of Appeal. He maintained, in particular, that the firstinstance court had committed errors when applying the relevant provisions of substantive law; that the court had erred in refusing to admit a further expert opinion in evidence; that the presumption of innocence had thereby been breached as the court had refused to admit this evidence because the applicant had in the past been convicted in different criminal proceedings; and that the court had wrongly established the relevant facts of the case which had led it to make a wrong decision.
By a letter dated 2 July 2006 the applicant lodged his own appeal with the court. He argued, inter alia, that the firstinstance court had committed errors in the assessment of the evidence, that the establishment of the facts had been erroneous and that the court’s reasoning, leading to the finding of guilt, was arbitrary. He argued that the principle of the presumption of innocence had thereby been breached. The prosecuting authorities also appealed against the judgment.
By a letter of 10 October 2006 the applicant, who was in detention at that time, requested leave to be brought from prison to the hearing before the Poznań Court of Appeal. His request read:
“On the basis of Article 451 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, I hereby request to be brought to a hearing to be held on 22 November 2006 before the court of appeal during the appeal proceedings against the judgment of the Grodzisk Wielkopolski District Court.”
By a decision of 25 October 2006 the court refused leave. The decision read as follows:
“Under Article 451 of the Code of Criminal Procedure an appellate court shall order that a detained accused be brought to the hearing, unless it decides that the presence of a lawyer is sufficient.
The  is of the view that the [applicant’s] request is very brief and vague and that its author has limited himself to saying that he would like to attend the hearing, failing to specify reasons why his presence was necessary or required.
The [applicant] is represented by a legal-aid lawyer, whose presence at the appeal hearing is obligatory. In those circumstances his right to an effective defence will be fully secured.”
On 22 November 2006 the Court of Appeal held a hearing. The applicant’s lawyer was present. In his oral pleadings the lawyer reiterated the arguments advanced in his appeal.
The Court of Appeal dismissed the appeals against the firstinstance judgment. The court examined the grounds for the appeals adduced by the applicant’s lawyer and by the applicant himself. It was of the view that the lower court had thoroughly assessed the evidence and had carefully considered the applicant’s guilt. Its conclusions were logical, thorough and meticulously explained in the light of the voluminous evidence obtained in the case.
By a letter of the same date the applicant’s legal-aid lawyer informed him that he had attended the hearing and that the court had dismissed the appeals lodged by the prosecution and by the applicant. He further informed the applicant that he had requested the court to prepare written grounds for the judgment, but that under no circumstances would he prepare a cassation appeal against the judgment.
That judgment, together with its written grounds, was served on the applicant’s lawyer on 2 January 2007. Subsequently, the applicant requested to be granted legal aid for the purposes of cassation proceedings and his request was granted. Advocate K.J. was assigned to represent the applicant. She informed the court, by a letter of 24 January 2006, that she saw no grounds on which to prepare a cassation appeal. She was, inter alia, of the view that the applicant’s legal-aid lawyer had attended the hearing before the appellate court and had actively conducted the applicant’s defence. She further emphasised that the applicant’s request to attend the hearing had been very brief.
By a letter of 26 January 2007 the court notified the applicant of the lawyer’s refusal to act on his behalf. It also informed the applicant that the thirtyday timelimit for the lodging of a cassation appeal started to run from the date on which that letter was served on the applicant.
In 1997 a new Code of Criminal Procedure was enacted. Article 451 of the Code provided that an appellate court could order that a defendant be detained on remand (under Polish law detention on remand is terminated only by a secondinstance judgment) and be brought to the courtroom to attend a hearing before that court.
Article 452 of the Code of Criminal Procedure reads:
“§ 1. A court of appeal shall not be allowed to conduct evidentiary proceedings 	pertaining to the merits of the case.
§ 2. In exceptional cases the appellate court, if it finds the completion of a judicial examination necessary, may nevertheless accept new evidence directly at the hearing, if 	this will expedite the judicial proceedings and there is no necessity to conduct the whole of the proceedings, or a major part thereof, anew. Before the hearing the court may issue an order on the admission of evidence.”
In 1999 the Supreme Court adopted a resolution stating that during a hearing before an appellate court a defendant should have, at least, an opportunity to defend him- or herself, or to be represented by a defence lawyer (5 October 1999, IV KKN 334/99).
In a judgment of 29 March 2000 the Supreme Court stated that it was mandatory to bring the defendant to a hearing before the appellate court, regardless of whether he or she had made a relevant request (V KKN 111/98).
In a judgment of 4 October 2000 the Supreme Court stated that in cases in which the arguments made in the statement of appeal were limited to challenging exclusively the legal aspects of a case or where only the sentence was challenged, a decision not to bring a defendant represented by a lawyer before the appellate court was correct (III KKN 164/2000).
In July 2000 Article 451 of the Code was amended, in response to the Court’s judgment in the case of Belziuk v. Poland (Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1998II). The amended provision read:
“The appellate court shall order an accused, who is detained, to be brought to the appellate hearing, unless it finds that the presence of his lawyer is sufficient. If the court decides not to bring an accused who has no defence counsel to the hearing it shall appoint for him ex officio a legal-aid lawyer.”
In 2001 the Supreme Court examined the Ombudsman’s request for clarification of issues relating to the presence of the accused at the appeal hearing. In its resolution of 18 October 2001 it expressed the view that the right to a fair hearing demanded that the person convicted by the first-instance court should be informed of his right to request to be brought before the appellate court and should be brought to such a hearing. It stated:
“...Finally, it should be underlined that even if the accused requests to be brought to the appeal hearing, the court may establish that the presence of the lawyer at the appeal hearing would be sufficient. If the accused does not have counsel, it is necessary to appoint for him a legal-aid lawyer whose presence at the hearing would be obligatory. It should however be noted that if an accused deprived of liberty requests to be brought to the appeal hearing, granting such a request should be a rule... Finding that the presence of the lawyer would be sufficient could occur in particular if the appeal hearing concerned only questions of law.”
In 2003 Article 451 was further amended in that it became obligatory for an appellate court to inform the accused of his or her right to request leave to attend the hearing before that court.
The Supreme Court has examined, in numerous judgments, cassation appeals based on the allegation that the absence of an accused at the appeal hearing was a flagrant breach of law that could significantly affect the substance of the ruling in question, within the meaning of Article 523 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The Supreme Court on many occasions found that the refusal to bring the accused to the appeal hearing was a flagrant breach of law that could significantly affect the substance of the second-instance judgment. In such cases, the Supreme Court quashed the appeal judgment and remitted the case (judgment of 10 August 2000, III KKN 192/00, judgment of 5 June 2001, III KKN 28/01).
Under Article 83 of the Code, an accused may appoint a lawyer to represent him or her in criminal proceedings. If he or she cannot afford lawyers’ fees, a request for legal aid may be made under Article 78 of the Code. Legal representation for the purposes of cassation proceedings is mandatory. In its decisions of 13 March and 17 September 2002 the Supreme Court expressed the view that when a legal-aid lawyer refused to represent a convicted person before the Supreme Court, the appellate court was not obliged to assign a new lawyer to the case (II KZ 11/02, II KZ 36/02).