The case originated in an application (no. 31477/05) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Andrzej Słowik (“the applicant”), on 16 August 2005.
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant complained, in particular, that he had been deprived of access to the Supreme Court.
On 9 July 2009 the President of the Fourth Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1969. He is currently serving a prison sentence in Strzelce Opolskie prison.
In January 2002 the applicant was detained on suspicion of murder and membership of a criminal gang.
On 21 June 2004 the  convicted the applicant of murder and sentenced him to fifteen years' imprisonment. The applicant appealed.
On 25 November 2004 the Katowice Court of Appeal in part quashed and in part upheld the first-instance judgment.
On 18 January 2005 the applicant was served with written grounds for that judgment. The court informed him that it was open to him to lodge a cassation appeal against it with the Supreme Court.
By a decision of 16 February 2005 the court allowed the applicant's request for legal aid.
In a letter to the Court of Appeal dated 3 March 2005 the legalaid lawyer informed the court that she had found no grounds on which to prepare a cassation appeal. A copy of that letter was served on the applicant on 14 March 2005.
By a letter of 13 April 2005 the court informed the applicant about the legal-aid lawyer's refusal to prepare and lodge a cassation appeal with the Supreme Court. By the same letter the court informed the applicant that as he had already been granted legal aid, no grounds existed on which to grant him assistance by another legal aid lawyer.
The court further informed the applicant that the thirty-day timelimit for lodging a cassation appeal would start to ran anew on the day on which the applicant was served with that letter.
On 6 June 2005 the Katowice Court of Appeal refused to entertain a cassation appeal filed by the applicant himself as it did not comply with the applicable formal requirements.
The relevant domestic law and practice concerning the procedure for lodging cassation appeals with the Supreme Court against judgments of the appellate courts are stated in the Court's judgments in the cases of Kulikowski v. Poland, no. 18353/03, §§ 19-27, ECHR 2009... (extracts) and Antonicelli v. Poland, no. 2815/05, §§ 14-22, 19 May 2009).
In particular, on 26 February 2002 the Supreme Court examined a situation where a legal-aid lawyer had refused to represent a convicted person for the purposes of cassation proceedings, finding that a cassation appeal would offer no prospects of success. It held that in such a situation the appellate court was obliged to instruct the defendant that the time-limit for lodging a cassation appeal started to run only on the date on which the defendant was served with the lawyer's refusal and not on the earlier date when the judgment of the appellate court was served on the defendant himself. It stated that it was not open to doubt that a defendant faced with a legal-aid lawyer's refusal had the right to take other measures to seek legal assistance necessary for effective lodging of a cassation appeal (III KZ 87/01). The Supreme Court reiterated its position in a decision of 6 May 2008 and in a number of similar decisions given in 2008. It observed that there had been certain discrepancies in the judicial practice as to the manner in which the time-limit in such situations was calculated, but the strand of the case-law originating the decision given in February 2002 was both dominant and correct, and also accepted by doctrine as providing to defendants adequate procedural guarantees of access to the Supreme Court within a reasonable time frame (II KZ 16/08).