The case originated in an application (no. 50098/07) against the , lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Igor Yuryevich Rozhin (“the applicant”), on 8 November 2007.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had not been given an opportunity to attend hearings before domestic courts and thus had been unable to present his civil case effectively.
On 18 May 2010 the President of the First Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1). Further to the applicant’s request, the Court granted priority to the application (Rule 41 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was born in 1963 and lives in Minusinsk.
On 28 December 2001 the  found the applicant guilty of membership of an organised criminal group, several counts of attempted aggravated murder, intentional destruction of property and arms possession and sentenced him to fourteen years’ imprisonment, which he was sent to serve in correctional colony no. 2, Tomsk Region.
On 11 November 2004 the applicant brought an action with the , complaining of various violations of his rights by the administration of correctional colony no. 2. In particular, he complained that on a number of occasions in 2003 and 2004 the director of the correctional colony had ordered him to be placed in a punishment cell, which had entailed a serious worsening of the general conditions of his detention and limitation or deprivation of his rights as a detainee. The applicant also argued that the colony authorities had unlawfully seized his writing utensils, and had forbidden him to use the colony library and to purchase newspapers, magazines and books. He further alleged that they had not allowed him to have meetings with counsel and to make paid phone calls to his relatives, counsel and the European Court of Human Rights. His biggest grievance, however, was that the administration had refused to post his complaints to various authorities in  and had monitored or even intercepted his correspondence with the Court. The applicant also requested that the  ensure that he could be present at a court hearing during the examination of his complaint.
Following a number of refusals by the  to grant the applicant’s request, and the subsequent revocation of those decisions by the , on 3 October 2006 the  granted leave to bring an action for an examination on the merits, and set a preliminary hearing for 6 October 2006. Subsequent hearings were held on 12 and 30 October 2006. The applicant was not informed of either of those hearings. In fact, on 17 October 2006 he was transferred to another correctional colony in the town of Verkhneuralsk, Chelyabinsk Region, more than 1,500 km from his previous place of detention.
On 26 January 2007 the applicant was transferred to detention facility no. 77/2 in .
On 12 February 2007 the Asino Town Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint, having found that either the restrictions on the applicant’s rights had been lifted following an inquiry by prosecution authorities or they had been warranted by the applicant’s placement in the punishment cell, in view of numerous instances of unlawful behaviour on his part, such as refusal to keep his cell tidy, destruction of colony property, and so on. The applicant was not brought to the hearing. Representatives of the colony administration attended the hearings before the  and made oral submissions.
By a separate decision issued on 12 February 2007 the  responded to the applicant’s request to be present at the hearings. In particular, the  held as follows:
“[The applicant], having been convicted by the judgment of 28 December 2001 of the , is currently serving his sentence. It appears from the case file materials that he was transferred outside the Tomsk Region. [The applicant] lodged a complaint about the actions of the head of [correctional colony no. 2],  Region...; accordingly, his complaint is being examined by the  within the civil procedure. The Execution of Sentences Act of the Russian Federation, in force at the material time, does not provide for an opportunity to transfer convicts to [ensure] their participation in court hearings in civil cases; therefore it is impossible for the court to ensure [the applicant’s] presence at the hearings in the present civil case.”
The applicant appealed, arguing, inter alia, that the  had unlawfully refused to ensure his presence at the hearings, despite the fact that the majority of the circumstances in dispute were exclusively within his personal knowledge and it was important for the  to hear both parties to the proceedings, the applicant and the administration.
At a hearing on 22 May 2007, held in the applicant’s absence, the  upheld the judgment of 12 February 2007, endorsing the ’s reasoning, including that on the subject of the applicant’s attendance.
The Code of Civil Procedure of the Russian Federation (CCP) provides that individuals may appear before a court in person or may act through a representative (Article 48 § 1).
The Penitentiary Code provides that convicted persons may be transferred from a correctional colony to an investigative unit if their participation is required as witnesses, victims or suspects in connection with certain investigative measures (Article 77 § 1). The Code does not mention any possibility for a convicted person to take part in civil proceedings, whether as a plaintiff or a defendant.
On several occasions the  has dismissed as inadmissible complaints by detainees whose requests for leave to appear were refused by civil courts. It reasoned that the relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure and the Penitentiary Code did not, as such, restrict a detainee’s access to court. The  has emphasised nonetheless that an imprisoned person should be able to make submissions to a civil court, either through a representative or in any other way provided by law. If necessary, a hearing should be held at the convict’s place of detention, or the court committed to hear the civil case may instruct the court with territorial jurisdiction over the convict’s place of detention to obtain his/her submissions or to take any other procedural steps (decisions 478-O of 16 October 2003, 335-O of 14 October 2004 and 94-O of 21 February 2008).
Under Articles 58 and 184 of the CCP a court may hold a session elsewhere than in a court-house if, for instance, it is necessary to examine evidence which cannot be brought to the court-house.
Article 392 of the CCP contains a list of situations which may justify the reopening of a finalised case on account of newly discovered circumstances. By a ruling of 26 February 2010 the Russian Constitutional Court indicated that this Article should be interpreted as, in principle, allowing a procedure to be launched to have a final judgment re-examined on account of newly discovered circumstances, such as the finding of a violation of the European Convention on Human Rights in a given case by the European Court of Human Rights.