The case originated in an application (no. 53173/10) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Romanian national, Mr Ioan Horhat (“the applicant”), on 4 August 2010.
The applicant was represented by Ms I.C. Bogoş, a lawyer practising in Alba-Iulia. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Ms C. Brumar and Simona-Maya Teodoroiu, of the Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
On 1 September 2015 notice of the applicant’s complaint under Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1948 and lives in Jidvei.
On 1 November 2006 the National Anticorruption Department (Departamentul Național Anticorupție – “the DNA”) instituted criminal proceedings against the applicant for embezzling European Union funds.
On 5 December 2006 a prosecutor attached to the DNA discontinued the criminal proceedings against the applicant on the ground that the acts committed by him were not serious enough to constitute an offence and ordered the applicant to pay an administrative fine of 1,000 Romanian Lei (RON – approximately 291 euros (EUR)). The prosecutor also held that the penalty was to be enforced in accordance with the relevant criminal procedure rules.
The applicant never contested this decision before a court and on 5 January 2007 he paid the administrative fine. He never asked for the fine to be reimbursed because he alleged that it had never been cancelled.
On 9 August 2007 a superior prosecutor attached to the DNA reviewed the decision of 5 December 2006 of her own motion. Relying on Article 270 § 1 (c) and Article 273 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCP”), the superior prosecutor quashed the aforementioned decision and reopened the criminal proceedings previously instituted against the applicant for embezzling European Union funds. She contended that according to the available evidence in the case-file, and as also acknowledged by the lower prosecutor, the applicant had intentionally misappropriated European Union funds which had not been recovered during the criminal proceedings. As a result, the superior prosecutor considered the decision of 5 December 2006 to be unlawful.
On 21 September 2007 the DNA indicted the applicant for embezzling European Union funds and sent his case for trial to the Blaj District Court (“the District Court”).
In an interlocutory judgment of 23 June 2009 the District Court noted that, according to the applicant’s lawyer’s arguments, the DNA’s initial decision in the case had been to fine the applicant, who had paid that fine and reimbursed the embezzled funds.
On 27 October 2009 the District Court examined the case on the merits and acquitted the applicant on the ground that the acts committed by him did not constitute an offence. The DNA appealed against the judgment.
On 18 January 2010 the Alba County Court allowed the DNA’s appeal, quashed the first-instance court’s judgment, convicted the applicant of embezzling European Union funds and sentenced him to a suspended sentence of six months’ imprisonment. It held that the acts committed by the applicant formed the elements of an offence. The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law against the judgment.
By a final judgment of 11 March 2010 the Alba-Iulia Court of Appeal, by a majority, dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law as ill-founded. In a separate opinion, the dissenting judge was of the view that the acts committed by the applicant had not been serious enough to constitute an offence and that it would have been sufficient to impose an administrative penalty on the applicant.
The relevant parts of the Criminal Code and of the CCP, as in force at the material time, concerning the imposition and enforcement of administrative fines, the discontinuation and reopening of criminal proceedings and the final nature of a public prosecutor office’s decision; the relevant domestic practice concerning the interpretation and application of the res judicata principle; the relevant parts of the Explanatory Report on Protocol No. 7 to the Convention; and the relevant international-law materials, European Union law and the case-law of the Court of Justice of the European Union are set out in Mihalache v. Romania ([GC], no. 54012/10, §§ 33-43, 8 July 2019).