The case originated in an application (no. 4619/12) against the Kingdom of Belgium lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Belgian national, Ms Fouzia Dakir (“the applicant”), on 22 December 2011.
The applicant was represented by Ms I. Wouters a lawyer practising in Brussels. The Belgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr M. Tysebaert, Senior Adviser, Federal Justice Department.
The applicant complained that the ban on wearing in public places clothing designed to conceal the face deprived her of the possibility of wearing the full-face veil. She alleged a violation of Articles 8, 9 and 10 of the Convention, taken separately and in conjunction with Article 14 of the Convention. She alleged, further, that she had not had an effective remedy before the Conseil d’Etat (Articles 6 § 1 and 13 of the Convention).
On 9 July 2015 the Government were given notice of the above-mentioned complaints and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The non-governmental organisation Liberty and the Human Rights Centre of Ghent University were given leave to submit written comments (Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3).
The applicant was born in 1977 and lives in Dison.
The applicant stated that she was a Muslim and had decided, on her own initiative, to wear the niqab – a veil covering the face except for the eyes – in accordance with her religious beliefs. She said that she had taken the decision to wear the full-face veil when she was sixteen years old. She explained that her choice had been accepted by her family and friends and by her husband. She also stated that she had always agreed to remove her veil for identification purposes as required by the authorities, such as when issuing her identity card.
On 18 February 2008 the Vesdre district administrative authorities proposed an amendment to the district regulations regarding the wearing of the burqa in public thoroughfares and in public places ... .
The president of the police district invited the Verviers public prosecutor to express an opinion on that proposal. On 18 March 2008 the public prosecutor replied that he did not have any observations to make.
The municipal councils of the three municipalities belonging to the police district – the municipal council of Pepinster on 23 June 2008, Dison on 26 June 2008 and Verviers on 30 June 2008 – enacted the following provisions of the consolidated by-laws of the Vesdre police district, which differed, moreover, from the original proposal.
“Article 113. Save where authorised by the mayor (Bourgmestre) of the municipality, wearing a mask or using any strategem whatsoever for the purposes of concealing personal identity shall be forbidden at all times, at any public meeting and in all public places and in public thoroughfares.
...
Article 113bis. The wearing of clothing concealing the face shall be forbidden at all times and in all public places.
However, a helmet, balaclava or other headgear may be worn where authorised by the legislation on the safety of workers or other legislation.
...
On 29 August 2008 the applicant lodged an application with the Conseil d’État for annulment of Article 113bis. She argued that the provision in question expressly targeted the Islamic veil, which she wore, and that the resulting ban constituted an interference with her rights guaranteed by Articles 8, 9 and 10 of the Convention and discrimination in breach of Article 14 of the Convention. She contended that the interference did not pursue a legitimate aim as the principle of secularism was not a constitutional principle and there could therefore be no blanket ban on wearing the veil. In any event, even supposing that the aim could be regarded as legitimate, the applicant maintained that the means were disproportionate in the absence of public disorder or threat of public disorder and thus of a pressing social need. In their memorial in reply of 18 April 2011, the three municipalities submitted that the impugned provision sought to guarantee public safety and not to regulate or restrict the exercise of any form of worship.
The auditeur at the Conseil d’État delivered a detailed 26-page report in which he concluded that in his opinion the applicant’s above-mentioned submission was well founded because public safety could not serve as a basis for a ban on wearing the full-face veil in all places generally open to the public, as no specific public disorder was associated with it as such.
In judgment no. 213.849 of 15 June 2011, the Conseil d’État, refusing to follow the opinion of the auditeur, dismissed the application for annulment of the provision ... .
That judgment was served on the applicant on 23 June 2011.
In Belgium the wearing of the full-face veil was first banned by municipal by-laws passed by a number of municipalities among which were the provisions being challenged in the instant case (see paragraph 10 above).
A Law prohibiting the wearing of any clothing entirely or substantially concealing the face was enacted on 1 June 2011 and came into force on 23 July 2011.
The relevant provisions of the Law of 1 June 2011 are worded as follows:
“Art. 2. Article 563bis, worded as follows, shall be inserted into the Criminal Code:
563bis. Unless otherwise provided by law, persons who appear in a place that is accessible to the public with their faces completely or partially covered or hidden, such as not to be identifiable, shall be liable to a fine of between fifteen and twenty-five euros [read: between 120 and 200 euros] and imprisonment of between one and seven days, or to one of those penalties alone.
However, paragraph 1 hereof shall not concern persons who are present in a place that is accessible to the public with their faces completely or partially covered or hidden, such as not to be unidentifiable, where this is provided for by employment regulations or by an administrative ordinance in connection with festive events.”
In judgment no. 145/2012 of 6 December 2012 the Constitutional Court dismissed applications for judicial review of the Law of 1 June 2011, whilst setting out an interpretative reservation in respect of the Law concerning places of worship.
With regard to the background to the Law and its aims, the Constitutional Court made the following observations:
“B.4.2. The authors of the bill [which led to the enactment of the impugned Law] sought to endorse a societal model where the individual took precedence over his or her philosophical, cultural or religious ties. Accordingly, they recommended a ban on wearing clothing designed to fully or substantially conceal one’s face in public places, stressing the fact that the ban was not based only on public-order considerations but more fundamentally on social considerations, which were crucial, in the view of the authors of the bill, to the notion of ‘living together’ in a society which sought to emancipate its members and protect the rights of each and every one of them (Doc. parl., Chamber, 2009-2010, DOC 52-2289/001, p. 5, and Doc. parl., Chamber, S.E. 2010, DOC 53-0219/001, p. 5).”
Regarding the public-safety and legal aim, the Constitutional Court found as follows:
“In so far as anyone present in public thoroughfares or in a public place must be identifiable, wearing clothing which completely conceals the face poses obvious problems in terms of public safety.
In order to ban conduct of that type, many municipalities have enacted by-laws with a view to banning the wearing of such clothing, while permitting exemptions from the rules at specific events. However, the court cannot but note that, in one and the same city, certain municipalities do not prescribe the same bans. Those differences in regime result in a form of untenable legal uncertainty for citizens and for the authorities responsible for punishing that type of conduct.
The authors of the bill therefore recommend that the question be determined at federal level so that the same rule applies throughout the country (Doc. parl., Chamber, 2009-2010, DOC52-2289/001, pp.5-6, and Doc. parl., Chamber, S.E.2010, DOC 53-0219/001, pp. 5-6).”
As to whether the ban on wearing the veil met a pressing social need and was proportionate to the legitimate aims pursued by the legislature, the Constitutional Court found as follows:
“B.17.  It can be seen from the explanatory memorandum to the bill which became the Law at issue ... that the legislature sought to defend a societal model where the individual took precedence over his philosophical, cultural or religious ties, with a view to fostering integration for all and to ensuring that citizens shared a common heritage of fundamental values such as the right to life, the right to freedom of conscience, democracy, gender equality, or the principle of separation between Church and State.
... the legislative history shows that three aims were pursued: public safety, gender equality and a certain conception of ‘living together’ in society.
...
21.  The legislature further justified its intervention by a certain conception of ‘living together’ in a society based on fundamental values, which, in its view, derive therefrom.
The individuality of every subject of law (sujet de droit) in a democratic society is inconceivable without his or her face, a fundamental element thereof, being visible. Taking into account the essential values that the legislature sought to defend, it was entitled to take the view that the creation of human relationships, being necessary for living together in society, was rendered impossible by the presence in the public sphere, which quintessentially concerned the community, of persons who concealed this fundamental element of their individuality. Whilst pluralism and democracy entail the freedom to display one’s beliefs, in particular by the wearing of religious symbols, the State must pay attention to the conditions in which such symbols are worn and to the potential consequences of wearing such symbols. To the extent that the concealment of the face has the consequence of depriving the subject of law, a member of society, of any possibility of individualisation by facial appearance, whereas such individualisation constitutes a fundamental condition related to its very essence, the ban on the wearing of such clothing in a public place, even though it may be the expression of a religious belief, meets a pressing social need in a democratic society.
22.  As to the dignity of women, here too the legislature was entitled to take the view that the fundamental values of a democratic society precluded the imposing of any obligation on women to conceal their face, under pressure from members of their family or their community, and therefore their deprivation, against their will, of their freedom of self-determination.
23.  However, ... the wearing of the full-face veil may correspond to the expression of a religious choice. That choice may be guided by various reasons with many symbolic meanings.
Even where the wearing of the full-face veil is the result of a deliberate choice on the part of the woman, the principle of gender equality, which the legislature has rightly regarded as a fundamental value of democratic society, justifies the opposition by the State, in the public sphere, to the manifestation of a religious conviction by conduct that cannot be reconciled with this principle of gender equality. As the court has noted in point B.21, the wearing of a full-face veil deprives women – to whom this requirement is solely applicable – of a fundamental element of their individuality which is indispensable for living in society and for the establishment of social contacts.
24. The court must further examine whether recourse to a criminal sanction to guarantee compliance with the prohibition imposed by the Law has no disproportionate effects in relation to the aims pursued.
...
28 In so far as the individualisation of persons, of which the face is a fundamental element, constitutes an essential condition for the functioning of a democratic society, of which each member is a subject of law, the legislature was entitled to consider that the concealment of the face could endanger the functioning of society as thus conceived and, accordingly, should be punished by criminal sanctions.
...”
...
...
The relevant provisions appearing in other international instruments and the situation in other European countries are set out in the judgment S.A.S. v. France [GC] (no. 43835/11, §§ 35-52, ECHR 2014 (extracts)).