PROCEDURE
Civil application no. 24/92
Proceedings before the District Court of
Appeal proceedings before the Supreme Court
Civil application no. 132/00
Civil action no. 3740/01
The Legal Aid Law of 2002 (no. 165 (I), provides in so far as relevant, as follows:
“3. Legal aid free of expense shall be granted to the proceedings provided in sections 4, 5 and 6 below, to the extent and under the conditions laid down therein.
- (1) This section applies-
(a) In criminal proceedings before a court, against any person, for an offence that he may have committed in violation of any legislative provision, for which an imprisonment sentence is provided for exceeding one year and includes preliminary interrogation and every other stage of interrogation or other procedure taking place before the commencement of subsequent criminal proceedings that relate to it;
(b) Except for criminal proceedings provided in paragraph (b) of subsection (1) of section 5 below, in any other proceedings before a court exercising its criminal jurisdiction.
(2) For the purposes of the application of this section, the term “court” means the District Court, ,  and includes the Supreme Court, when examining any issue raised in criminal proceedings, in exercising its first or second instance jurisdiction.
(3) In proceedings provided for in subsection (1) above, legal aid free of expense will be granted that would include advice, assistance and representation.
(1) For the purposes of application of this section, the term “proceedings for determined violations of human rights” means any:
(a) Civil proceedings before a court, at any stage, lodged against the Republic for damages sustained by a person due to determined violations of human rights; or
(b) Criminal proceedings lodged by any person, where the offence in examination concerns determined violations of human rights.
(2) Legal aid will be granted, free of expense, to proceedings concerning determined violations of human rights.
(3) Legal aid granted by virtue of this section:
(a) In the case of a civil proceedings lodged in the Republic or criminal proceedings, will include advice, assistance and representation; and
(b) In civil proceedings lodged outside the Republic, will include only advice.
(4) The Ministerial Council may by an order published in the Official Gazette of the Republic amend the Table.
(1) For the purposes of this section, the term “proceedings before a family court” means:
(a) Proceedings raised in respect to family relations on the basis of provision of bilateral or multilateral treaties to which the Republic has acceded; or
(b) Proceedings concerning parental care, alimony, recognition of child, adoption, proprietary relations of spouses and any other marital or family dispute.
(2) Free legal aid is provided for proceedings before a family court, which includes advice, assistance and representation.”