The case originated in an application (no. 36487/12) against the Republic of Finland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Finnish nationals, Ms M.P. and her minor daughter E.B. (“the applicants”), on 13 June 2012. The President of the Section acceded to the applicants’ request not to have their names disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicants were represented by Ms Helena Molander, a lawyer practising in Helsinki. The Finnish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Arto Kosonen of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The applicant mother alleged, in particular, that her freedom of expression under Article 10 of the Convention had been violated as she had been convicted of defamation for having expressed her concerns about her daughter.
On 24 March 2014 the complaint under Article 10 of the Convention concerning the applicant mother was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application, including all complaints concerning the applicant child, was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. Accordingly, the applicant mother remains the only applicant in this case.
The applicant was born in 1971 and lives in Helsinki.
The applicant and her partner began to cohabit in 2003. Their daughter was born in November 2004. In the spring of 2006 the applicant felt that, in her view, the child’s father was behaving strangely with the child and that the child did not want to stay at home alone with her father. She also started to fear for her own and her child’s safety as the father was, in her view, violent. In May 2006 the applicant and her daughter left the child’s father.
In July 2006 the child’s father initiated custody and contact rights proceedings vis-à-vis his daughter.
In August 2006 the Kouvola District Court (käräjäoikeus, tingsrätten) gave an interim decision that the father was to meet his daughter for two hours every other weekend under supervision. This arrangement continued for about a year but was disrupted for some time in 2007. According to the applicant, the child was often restless and talked strangely after the meetings with her father.
On 15 June 2007 the Kouvola District Court gave another interim decision according to which the father had a right to meet with his daughter for 2 to 4 hours at a time without supervision.
On 21 August 2007 the Kouvola District Court held an oral hearing about the custody and contact rights.
On 4 September 2007 the Kouvola District Court gave both parents joint custody of the child. She was to live with her mother and to meet her father every other weekend from Friday to Sunday and during the holidays, unsupervised. The meetings were, however, temporarily discontinued for the duration of the pre-trial investigation (see below). On 9 January 2008 the Kouvola Appeal Court upheld the District Court’s decision.
The applicant claimed that after the third unsupervised visit with the father in August 2007, her almost three-year-old daughter’s behaviour changed radically and she was showing strong symptoms. The child was using vulgar language and was restless and anxious. The child had told her mother about things that her father did to her. She kept repeating these issues and suffered from increasingly bad nightmares. The applicant contacted a child psychiatrist. On 16 August 2007 she contacted the child welfare authorities in Helsinki reporting her suspicions of sexual abuse.
On 29 August 2007 the child welfare authorities reported the matter to the police. They recommended that the meetings with the father be discontinued for the duration of the investigation.
On 5 September 2007 the pre-trial investigation conducted by the Helsinki Police Department commenced. Both parents were questioned. On 14 September 2007 the Forensic Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Centre received an official request for assistance from the Helsinki Police Department. At the time the child was two years and ten months old. The Centre replied that children under three years old could not be interviewed within the forensic-psychological interview framework as it was not possible to obtain reliable information on possible sexual abuse from children under three years of age, especially in situations involving custody disputes. Such interviews became effective only in respect of children aged four years or more.
On 20 September 2007 a physiological examination was carried out to determine whether the child showed any signs or symptoms of the alleged abuse, but no such external signs were revealed. The pre-trial investigation was concluded on 15 October 2007 as there was no appearance of any crime.
After having received information about the conclusion of the pretrial investigation, the applicant contacted the Forensic Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Centre on 18 October 2007 and expressed her surprise that no psychological assessment had been conducted in the matter.
In a telephone conversation of 19 October 2007 the applicant expressed to the social worker her fear that her child continued to be at risk of being subjected to sexual abuse when meeting her father and insisted on another investigation. She was concerned that the pre-trial investigation by the police had not been complete and that the social workers would be responsible if something happened to her child while the meetings with the father were not supervised. The social worker in turn explained to the applicant that the pretrial investigation had not brought to light any somatic signs or symptoms that would suggest sexual abuse of the child. Moreover, concerning the visiting rights, the social worker explained that the decision of 4 September 2007 by the Kouvola District Court was still in force and that if the applicant was not satisfied with it, she would have to appeal against it in courts of law instead of complaining about it to the child welfare authorities. However, the applicant insisted on making the second report to the child welfare authorities, claiming that she had been threatened with loss of her custody rights if she did not allow the meetings with the father. The father of the child received information about this report from the police.
On 18 January 2008 the applicant submitted another child welfare report and the second report to the police, insisting on another investigation and stating that she suspected that someone was abusing her child during visits to the child’s father. She also reported the matter to the social workers in Helsinki.
On 25 and 28 January 2008 respectively the applicant took her daughter to an emergency clinic for examination as she had trouble sleeping and was behaving oddly. No somatic signs or symptoms of sexual abuse were found.
The Kouvola Police Department started to investigate the matter. As the applicant had taken the child to a doctor on 25 and 28 January 2008, no new physical examination was carried out. The pre-trial investigation was concluded on 4 May 2008 as there was no appearance of any crime.
On 18 February 2008 the applicant lodged a complaint with the National Authority for Medico-legal Affairs (Terveydenhuollon oikeusturvakeskus, Rättsskyddscentralen för hälsovården) about the fact that the child had not been heard at all during the pre-trial investigation in autumn 2007. The case was transferred ex officio to the regional State Provincial Office (lääninhallitus, länsstyrelsen).
On 18 February 2008 the applicant also lodged a complaint with the Parliamentary Ombudsman (eduskunnan oikeusasiamies, riksdagens justitieombudsman), asking him to investigate why the police did not hear her child during the pre-trial investigation.
.  On 16 April 2008 the Parliamentary Ombudsman decided not to take any measures as the police investigation was still pending before the Kouvola Police (see paragraph 20 above). He did not have competence to give orders to the police concerning the investigation of the matter as he could not examine the actions of private individuals.
On 24 November 2008 the regional State Provincial Office found that there was no minimum age for hearing a child and that the three-year agelimit for child psychiatric interviews was only a recommendation. The child had only been two years and ten months old at the time of the first police investigation. No new physical examination had been carried out during the second pre-trial investigation as such an examination had been carried out on 25 and 28 January 2008. The Office decided to take no action in the applicant’s case.
On an unspecified date, the father of the child asked the police to investigate whether the applicant had defamed him as she had given false information about him to the social worker on 19 October 2007, claiming that the child was in danger of being sexually abused by her father during their upcoming meetings (see paragraph 17 above). He claimed that these allegations were not true and that the applicant’s motive for such accusations was that she wanted to have sole custody of the child and hamper the meetings between the father and the child.
On 17 February 2009 the Public Prosecutor pressed charges against the applicant for having insisted on 19 October 2007 that the child was in danger of being sexually abused by her father after the police had already investigated the matter and, on 15 October 2007, found no appearance of any crime.
On 11 September 2009 the Helsinki District Court convicted the applicant of defamation and sentenced her to 45 day-fines, amounting to 630 euros (EUR). She was ordered to pay the father EUR 1,000 in nonpecuniary compensation and his costs and expenses amounting to EUR 1,885.66. The court’s reasoning was the following:
By letter dated 12 October 2009 the applicant appealed against the judgment of the District Court to the Helsinki Appeal Court (hovioikeus, hovrätten). She claimed only to have voiced her previous concern as the child was not heard at all during the concluded pre-trial investigation. Her concerns were not directed at the father but at the fact that a danger to the child’s health still existed. It had been the child welfare authorities who had qualified these concerns as relating to sexual abuse. Sexual abuse did not always leave physical marks which could be revealed by medical examination but it was a grave procedural mistake not to interview the child during the pre-trial investigation. She considered this mistake to be so substantial that the danger to her child’s health still existed despite the outcome of the investigation. She also referred to the case Juppala v. Finland, no. 18620/03, 2 December 2008.
.  On 5 January 2011, after having held an oral hearing, the Helsinki Appeal Court upheld the District Court judgment. The court found the following:
.  By letter dated 7 March 2011 the applicant appealed to the Supreme Court (korkein oikeus, högsta domstolen), reiterating the grounds of appeal already presented before the Appeal Court.
.  On 14 December 2011 the Supreme Court refused the applicant leave to appeal.
On 18 March 2010 the father of the child requested the Helsinki District Court to order that the child live with him.
On 25 January 2011 the Helsinki District Court ordered that the child was to live with her father in Kouvola. This decision was upheld by the Helsinki Appeal Court on 2 December 2011. On 11 May 2012 the Supreme Court refused the applicant leave to appeal.
The applicant has complained to the Court about these proceedings in a separate application (see application no. 71785/12 M.P. and E.B. v. Finland) which was declared inadmissible on 17 April 2014.
On an unspecified date the applicant asked the Ministry of the Interior (sisäasiainministeriö, inrikesministeriet) to investigate whether the decision not to hear the child was acceptable. On 7 May 2012 the Ministry of the Interior transferred the matter to the National Police Board (Poliisihallitus, Polisstyrelsen).
On 3 August 2012 the National Police Board found that police conduct in the matter had been appropriate. The police had conducted an adequate pre-trial investigation without leaving any issues unclarified.
The Finnish Constitution (Suomen perustuslaki, Finlands grundlag, Act no. 731/1999) provides in relevant parts:
.  Chapter 24, section 9, subsections 1 and 2, of the Penal Code (rikoslaki, strafflagen, Act no. 531/2000) provided, at the relevant time, as follows:
.  The above-mentioned provision was amended in 2013 (Act no. 879/2013). The amended provision entered into force on 1 January 2014 and reads currently as follows:
“A person who
1) spreads false information or a false insinuation of another person so that the act is conducive to causing damage or suffering to that person, or subjecting that person to contempt, or
2) disparages another in a manner other than referred to in point 1)
shall be sentenced for defamation to a fine.
Also a person who spreads false information or a false insinuation about a deceased person, so that the act is conducive to causing suffering to a person to whom the deceased was particularly close, shall be sentenced for defamation.
Criticism that is directed at a person’s activities in politics, business, public office, public position, science, art or in comparable public activity and that does not obviously exceed the limits of propriety does not constitute defamation referred to in subsection 1, point 2).
Presentation of an expression in the consideration of a matter of general importance shall also not be considered defamation if its presentation, taking into consideration its contents, the rights of others and the other circumstances, does not clearly exceed what can be deemed acceptable.”
.  The relevant provisions of the Child Welfare Act (lastensuojelulaki; barnskyddslagen, Act no. 683/1983) and the domestic practice are outlined in the Court’s judgment in Juppala v. Finland, cited above, §§ 19-22.