The case originated in an application (no. 34999/16) against the Republic of Austria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Serbian national, Mr D.L. (“the applicant”), on 20 June 2016.
The applicant was represented by Mr O. Dietrich, a lawyer practising in Vienna. The Austrian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr H. Tichy, Head of the International Law Department at the Federal Ministry for Europe, Integration and Foreign Affairs.
The applicant complained under Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention that he would run risk of torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or even death if he were extradited to Kosovo.
On 22 June 2016 the Vice-President of the Section to which the case had been allocated decided to apply Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, indicating to the Government that the applicant should not be extradited to Kosovo for the duration of the proceedings before the Court, and granted priority to the application under Rule 41 of the Rules of Court.
On 5 September 2016 the complaints concerning Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. At the same time, the President of the Section granted anonymity to the applicant under Rule 47 § 4 and decided that the case file be treated confidentially (Rule 33).
The parties submitted observations in writing and subsequently replied to each other’s observations. In addition, third-party comments were received from the Serbian Government, having exercised their right to intervene (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 of the Rules of Court). The parties replied to those comments.
The applicant was born in 1973, lives in Austria since 2001 and is currently in detention pending extradition at Vienna-Josefstadt Prison.
The application concerns proceedings for extradition from Austria to Kosovo, which have the following background:
S.Lu. is the former husband of the applicant’s sister, T.L. In the course of an argument on 9 October 2001, S.Lu. stabbed the applicant in the chest. On 27 May 2002 S.Lu. was convicted in Austria of attempted intentional homicide (versuchter Totschlag) committed in a comprehensible state of emotion (in einer allgemein begreiflichen heftigen Gemütsbewegung) under Articles 15 and 76 of the Criminal Code (Strafgesetzbuch) and sentenced to five years’ imprisonment. The applicant testified as a witness during that trial.
After S.Lu. was released from prison in 2005, the applicant’s sister reported him to the police for having repeatedly raped her during their marriage, and for threatening to kill her and her family. Out of fear of her husband, she changed her and her children’s names. An order to determine S.Lu.’s whereabouts (Ausschreibung zur Aufenthaltsbestimmung) was issued by the Vienna public prosecutor’s office in 2008 and is in effect until 2 February 2018.
On the basis of an international arrest warrant issued by the Mitrovica District Court (Kosovo) on 26 November 2010 and 6 May 2011, the applicant was apprehended and taken into detention pending extradition by a decision of the Vienna Regional Criminal Court (Straflandesgericht Wien – hereinafter “the Criminal Court”) of 15 January 2016. On 20 January 2016 the Ministry of Justice of Kosovo requested the applicant’s extradition. According to the arrest warrant, the applicant was suspected of aggravated murder under Article 147 § 7 in conjunction with Article 24 of the Kosovo Criminal Code. He had allegedly ordered L.Q. in July 2010 to murder S.Lu. (his former brother-in-law) for a payment of 30,000 euros (EUR). On 3 August 2010 L.Q. fired gunshots at a car in the vicinity of the intended victim S.Lu., but instead killed N.Lu., S.Lu.’s cousin.
During the extradition proceedings, the applicant alleged that he had nothing to do with the murder in Kosovo. He claimed that the accusations had been invented by S.Lu. as revenge for the applicant’s having testified against him during the criminal proceedings in Austria. Furthermore, the “Lu. clan” (the family of S.Lu.) was very influential in Kosovo and had connections to the highest Government officials and the justice authorities there, which is why the applicant could not expect a fair trial in that jurisdiction. In addition, the conditions of detention in Kosovo prisons were deplorable and would amount to torture, inhuman and degrading treatment. Because of the threat emanating from S.Lu. and his family, the applicant would have to fear for his life there. They could easily get to him in prison by using their connections.
On 24 February 2016, after having held an oral hearing, the Criminal Court declared the applicant’s extradition to Kosovo permissible. It held that during the extradition proceedings, the court was not called on to examine whether the applicant was guilty or innocent, but merely to assess whether there was enough evidence to raise suspicions against him, which according to the documents submitted by the Kosovo authorities was the case. None of the evidence offered by the applicant had been capable of dispelling these suspicions immediately and without doubt, as would have been required by section 33(2) of the Extradition and Legal Aid Act (Auslieferungs- und Rechtshilfegesetz – hereinafter “the Extradition Act”). The fact that S.Lu. had been convicted of attempted intentional homicide in 2002 and the allegation that he wanted to take revenge on the applicant did not dispell the suspicion either. Furthermore, the court remarked that S.Lu.’s cousin had actually been killed, which called into question the applicant’s theory of that being a contrived story. It could equally be argued that the applicant had wanted to take revenge on S.Lu. for stabbing him. Concerning the applicant’s fear for his life in Kosovo, the court stated that the mere possibility of inhuman or degrading treatment did not suffice. The applicant had failed to adduce specific evidence of an actual, individual threat of treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Convention. Furthermore, in case of extradition to a member state of the Convention, the responsibility of the extraditing state was limited, as the person concerned could seek protection against a violation of the Convention in the receiving state.
On 24 March 2016 the applicant appealed. He submitted that if extradited to Kosovo, he risked treatment contrary to Article 3, because Lu. Clan wished to take revenge on him. In fact, Sm. Lu., a very influential member of that clan, was detained at Mitrovica prison and following extradition to Kosovo, he would be detained at that prison as well. Security in prison in Kosovo was a problem, as prisoners became frequently victims of aggression, and he would therefore also risk to become the victim of an assault.
On 31 May 2016 the Vienna Court of Appeal (Oberlandesgericht Wien  hereinafter “the Court of Appeal”) dismissed the applicant’s appeal. It confirmed the Criminal Court’s finding that the applicant had failed to substantiate a real and individual risk of being subjected to torture, inhuman or degrading treatment, or that the Kosovo authorities would not be able to protect him from third, private parties. Furthermore, members of the allegedly influential Lu. clan were themselves imprisoned in Kosovo. In particular, on 21 January 2008 S.Lu. was convicted in Kosovo for issuing a dangerous threat against the applicant, which demonstrated that the Kosovo authorities were indeed capable of taking adequate measures to protect the applicant. Moreover, the Lu. clan could not be that influential if it was not capable of keeping its own members out of prison. Concerning the conditions of detention, the court held that the report on Kosovo by the Committee for the Prevention of Torture (hereinafter “the CPT”) of 2011 (see paragraph 30 below) did not state that ill-treatment was the rule in Kosovo prisons, but that there were merely sporadic incidents of violence. The mere possibility of ill-treatment by prison officers did not suffice to stop the applicant’s extradition. In relation to the material conditions of detention in Mitrovica Detention Centre, where the applicant alleged he would most likely be held if extradited, the Court of Appeal again quoted the above-mentioned CPT report of 2011, where it was found that inmates were able to move freely within that facility during the day and could exercise outside on a daily basis for three and a half hours, and that fitness and computer rooms have recently been installed.
On 13 June 2016 the Austrian Federal Minister of Justice (Justizminister) approved the applicant’s extradition to Kosovo.
On 20 June 2016 the applicant requested that the Court indicate to the Austrian Government to stay his extradition to Kosovo under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court. He complained under Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention that he would run the risk of torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or even death, as the Lu. clan wanted to take revenge on him and the Kosovo authorities were not willing or able to afford him protection.
On 22 June 2016 the Court granted the applicant’s request.
On 17 June 2016 the applicant lodged applications for the reopening (Wiederaufnahme) of the extradition proceedings and a stay of the extradition with the Criminal Court. He produced a certified declaration by L.Q., who had retracted his previous confession to the police that the applicant had ordered the murder of S.Lu. He asserted that he had been tortured by the Kosovo police during his questioning and had been pressured into blaming the applicant for ordering the murder. L.Q. alleged that he had fallen unconscious several times because of the “mental and physical torture”. L.Q. averred that he did not even know the applicant in person. The applicant further submitted into evidence several sworn statements from family members and friends, who attested that his life was in danger in Kosovo because of threats from S.Lu. and his clan.
On 23 June 2016 the Criminal Court dismissed the applicant’s applications. It held that in accordance with section 33(2) of the Extradition Act, the applicant had failed to adduce evidence which would have been capable of immediately dispelling the suspicion against him raised in the extradition request. L.Q.’s declaration did not constitute objective evidence and did not indicate any violations in Kosovo of the applicant’s rights under the Convention either. The applicant appealed.
On 18 July 2016 the applicant lodged an application for a renewal (Erneuerung) of the extradition proceedings with the Supreme Court under Article 363a of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Strafprozessordnung – hereinafter “the CCP”), requesting suspensive effect at the same time.
On 6 September 2016 the Supreme Court rejected the applicant’s application. It found that the new evidence the applicant had produced in the proceedings before it were a matter for the pending reopening proceedings, not for requesting a renewal of the extradition proceedings. In relation to the alleged violations of Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention in the event of his extradition, the Supreme Court found that mere allegations referencing general reports on the human rights situation were not capable of substantiating a real and immediate risk to the applicant under these provisions. Furthermore, the Supreme Court held that the applicant did not have a right under the law to request suspensive effect, which is why that request had to be rejected.
On 24 January 2017 the Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal against the Criminal Court’s decision of 23 June 2016 (see paragraph 20 above). The court found that the applicant had failed to produce objective evidence which would have indicated a real and immediate risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Convention if extradited to Kosovo and therefore would have warranted a reopening of the extradition proceedings. While the sworn statement by L.Q. in principle raised doubts in relation to the suspicions against the applicant, it had not constituted the only evidence against him. More pertinent had been the fact that, during the criminal proceedings against L.Q. in Kosovo, a microcassette had been put into evidence by S.Lu. which had allegedly contained a conversation confirming his statements that the applicant had been to blame for the murder. In addition, L.Q.’s initial incriminating statements against the applicant had been made in the presence of his lawyer. Moreover, L.Q. had not specified what exactly the police had allegedly done to him, which had made it impossible to evaluate whether the alleged treatment had actually amounted to torture, inhuman or degrading treatment. The Court of Appeal reiterated that it was in any event for the Kosovo courts to evaluate the evidence against the applicant. In sum, it confirmed that the statement by L.Q. was not capable of immediately dispelling the suspicion against the applicant on which the extradition request was based. Lastly, the Court of Appeal found that despite not being a State Party to the Convention or the Council of Europe, Article 22 of the Constitution of Kosovo granted the Convention direct effect under and superiority to national law, therefore domestic law equally offered protection from violations of the Convention. The Court of Appeal’s decision to dismiss the applicant’s appeal was served on his counsel on 30 January 2017.
Following an exchange of diplomatic communiqués between Kosovo (which is recognised by Austria as a subject of international law) and Austria, the bilateral agreement on extradition between the Republic of Austria and the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Federal Law Gazette no. 546/83) continues to apply between them. Article 4 § 2 of that agreement provides that an extradition shall not be granted if incompatible with the obligations of the requesting State stemming from multilateral agreements.
Section 19 of the Extradition Act stipulates that extradition is not permissible:
“if it is to be feared that
the criminal proceedings in the requesting State will not be or have not been in compliance with the principles of Articles 3 and 6 of the Convention ...,
the penalty or preventive measure imposed or expected in the requesting State will be executed in a manner not in compliance with the requirements of Article 3 of the Convention ..., or
the person to be extradited will be subjected to persecution because of his or her origin, race, religion or affiliation with a particular ethnic or social group, nationality or political views, or owing to one of these reasons will have to expect severe repercussions (extradition asylum).”
Section 33 § 2 of the Extradition Act provides as follows:
“It is to be examined only whether the person concerned is sufficiently suspected of having committed the offence he or she is accused of according to the extradition request where there are serious doubts in that respect, in particular where evidence is available or offered which would be capable of dispelling the suspicion without delay.”
In examining the permissibility of an extradition, section 33 (3) of the Extradition Act requires the courts to take into account all possible obstacles emanating from inter-State obligations and constitutional requirements, including the Convention and the Additional Protocols thereto in accordance with the Court’s case-law.
Under the heading “Renewal of criminal proceedings” (Erneuerung des Strafverfahrens), Article 363a of the CCP provides, in so far as relevant:
“1.  If it is established by a judgment of the European Court of Human Rights that there has been a violation of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (Official Gazette [Bundesgesetzblatt] no. 210/1958) or one of its Protocols on account of a decision or order of a criminal court, a retrial shall be held upon request, in so far as it cannot be ruled out that the violation might have affected the decision in a manner detrimental to the person concerned.
All applications for the renewal of proceedings shall be decided by the Supreme Court. Such an application may be lodged by the person affected by the violation or the Prosecutor General’s Office; ...”
On 1 August 2007 (in case no. 13 Os 135/06m) the Supreme Court allowed an application for the renewal of criminal proceedings under Article 363a of the CCP, where the applicant had not previously lodged a human-rights complaint with the Court. In so far as relevant, the Supreme Court stated:
“Given that Article 13 of the Convention requires a Contracting State to provide any person who shows with some plausibility that there has been a violation of his or her rights under the Convention and its Protocols with an effective remedy, in other words to ensure that there is a court at domestic level which examines questions of whether there has been a violation of Convention rights, Article 363a § 1 of the CCP must not be interpreted so as to allow an application for the renewal of criminal proceedings only in those cases where the European Court of Human Rights has already issued a judgment finding a violation of the Convention.”
For an extensive summary of the Supreme Court judgment, see ATV Privatfernseh-GmbH v. Austria ((dec.), no. 58842/09, § 19, 6 October 2015).
Pursuant to section 19 of the Proceedings before the Federal Office for Migration and Asylum Act (Bundesamt für Fremdenwesen und AsylVerfahrensgesetz, Federal Law Gazette vol. I no. 87/2012), Kosovo is regarded as a “safe country of origin” by Austria.
In its report to the United Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) on its visit to Kosovo from 8 to 15 June 2010 (published on 6 October 2011, CPT/Inf (2011) 26), the CPT stated the following:
“37. Contrary to the situation found in 2007, some allegations of physical illtreatment (such as slaps and/or punches to the head or face) by custodial staff were received at the detention centres in Mitrovica/Mitrovicë, Prishtinë/Priština and Prizren. ...
At Dubrava Prison, the delegation once again received many consistent and persistent allegations of physical ill-treatment and/or excessive use of force (slaps, kicks, punches, and blows with batons, etc.) by members of the establishment’s special intervention group. Allegedly, such incidents often occurred during cell-search operations at night. The delegation also heard allegations that certain prisoners had ‘hired’ members of the establishment’s special intervention group to physically assault other prisoners who were causing them trouble.
Moreover, in contrast to the situation found in 2007, a number of allegations were heard about physical ill-treatment of prisoners by custodial staff at Dubrava Prison. Several prisoners also affirmed to the delegation that they had been warned by prison officers not to complain to (or have any contact with) EULEX monitors.
To sum up, the situation seems to have deteriorated since the 2007 visit both at Dubrava Prison and elsewhere. ...
Material conditions of detention had significantly improved since the 2007 visit in most of the establishments visited, and can be described as generally satisfactory. It is particularly noteworthy that overcrowding was not a problem in any of the establishments visited. ...
The situation was less satisfactory at the Prishtinë/Priština Detention Centre where access to natural light and ventilation in certain cells was still poor, and the fire alarm system in this establishment was out of order. Further, at the Prizren Detention Centre, ventilation was insufficient in most of the cells (with temperatures rising to more than 30o C in the summer). ...
... At the Mitrovica/Mitrovicë Detention Centre, sentenced prisoners also had the possibility to move freely within the detention area during the day; they could also go out into the open air and engage in sports activities (football, basketball or volleyball) for 3 ½ hours per day. ...”
In its report to UNMIK on its visit to Kosovo from 15 to 22 April 2015 (published on 8 September 2016, CPT/Inf (2016) 23), the CPT noted the following on the issues of corruption, favouritism and illtreatment in Kosovo prisons and places of detention:
“A. Police establishments
...
In the course of the visit, the delegation received a significant number of allegations of physical ill-treatment by KP officers from detained persons (including juveniles). Most of the allegations concerned slaps, punches and kicks, in the context of police questioning, with a view to extracting confessions or obtaining other relevant information. ... Further, a number of allegations referred to punches and kicks at the time of apprehension after the person concerned had been brought under control.
Notwithstanding the above, the delegation gained the impression that, as compared to 2010, the overall situation had somewhat improved in terms of both the number and severity of allegations of police ill-treatment. However, it is clear from the information gathered during the visit that there are no grounds for complacency. Additional vigorous action is still required to combat the phenomenon of ill-treatment by the Kosovo Police, which often appears to be related to an overemphasis on confessions during criminal investigations. ...
The delegation observed further improvements regarding material conditions in various police stations. In particular, at Gračanica/Graçanicë, Leposavić/Leposaviq, Mitrovicë/Mitrovica South and Obiliq/Obilić, police custody cells have been newly constructed or renovated, and most of the deficiencies observed during previous visits to other police stations have been remedied.
That said, at Pejë/Peć Police Station, artificial lighting in the custody cells was very poor and, in several of the police stations visited, cells were not equipped with a call system. Steps should be taken to remedy these deficiencies.
Prison establishments
...
The CPT’s delegation carried out follow-up visits to the following establishments under the authority of the Kosovo Correctional Service (KCS): Dubrava Prison, Lipjan/Lipljan Correctional Centre for Women and Juveniles, and the detention centres in Gjilan/Gnjilane, Mitrovica/Mitrovicë, Pejë/Peć and Prishtinë/Priština. ...
As compared to the findings of the 2010 visit, the situation seemed to have improved significantly in most of the KCS establishments as regards the manner in which prisoners were treated by staff. In particular, at Dubrava Prison, the delegation received no allegations of recent physical ill-treatment or excessive use of force by members of the establishment’s special intervention group or by custodial staff. Further, no allegations of ill-treatment were heard at Lipjan/Lipljan Correctional Centre and the detention centres in Mitrovica/Mitrovicë, Pejë/Peć and Prishtinë/Priština.
However, a number of allegations of physical ill-treatment (such as punches and/or kicks) as well as threats of being beaten by prison officers were received (for the first time) at Gjilan/Gnjilane Detention Centre and at the High Security Prison. In some cases, the allegations made were supported by medical evidence. ...
Compared to the situation found in 2010, inter-prisoner violence did not appear to be a major problem at Dubrava Prison, nor in any of the other KCS establishments visited. ...”
In the executive summary of the 2016 report, the CPT summarised the material conditions of detention in Kosovo prisons as follows:
“Material conditions varied widely amongst the different KCS establishments. At Lipjan/Lipljan Correctional Centre, conditions for all inmates remained on the whole adequate, and improvements were observed at Dubrava Prison and Mitrovica/Mitrovicë Detention Centre. The CPT welcomes the existing plans to close down the detention centres in Gjilan/Gnjilane, Pejë/Peć and Prishtinë/Priština where material conditions are generally poor. Conditions at the High Security Prison were generally good, the establishment being virtually brand new. ...”
In its Kosovo country report of May 2015, the German Federal Office for Migration and Refugees (Bundesamt für Migration und Flüchtlinge) noted the following (page 23):
“Nevertheless, the judiciary is the weakest of all institutions and still has significant flaws, despite some progress. In addition to insufficient resources and skills of the staff, they often lack the willingness to enforce the law and anti-corruption measures. Salaries and social security of the staff are poor. The strong network of traditional clan and extended family structures means that officials are often exposed to strong social pressure and bribery attempts. According to the recent progress report of the EU of October 2014, the rule of law, including an independent judiciary, and limited results in combating crime and corruption are still a major problem. The Constitution states that the judiciary is independent. The local judicial organs are, however, exposed to external influences and a fair trial is not always ensured. There are constantly reports of corruption, political interference and lack of efficiency in the judiciary. The fight against crime is still in need of improvement.”
In relation to the prison and detention centre conditions in Kosovo, the United States Department of State noted in its Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 (page 6):
“Prison and detention center conditions generally met international standards, but significant problems persisted for prisoners in penitentiaries, specifically, the lack of rehabilitative programs, prisoner-on-prisoner violence, corruption, and substandard medical care. ...
During the year the Kosovo Rehabilitation Center for Torture Victims (KRCT) received complaints from prisoners regarding inappropriate behavior, verbal harassment, and, in one instance, physical mistreatment by correctional officers, mainly at the Dubrava KRCT and the High Security Prison. ...
[I]nternal complaint mechanism mandated by law did not function in prisons as inmates were not able to report human rights violations and other concerns confidentially. ...
Physical Conditions: According to the KRCT, physical and living conditions remained substandard in some parts of the Dubrava Prison, which held 750 prisoners. Deficiencies at Dubrava included poor lighting and ventilation in some cells, dilapidated kitchens and toilets, lack of hot water, and inadequate or no bedding, as well as poor-quality renovations and significant delays in repairs. ...
As of October the KRCT received seven complaints from prisoners that correctional staff verbally, and in some cases physically, abused them in the Dubrava Prison and the High Security Prison. ...
Due to corruption and political interference, authorities did not always exercise control over the facilities or their inmates. According to the KRCT, inmates complained that officials at the Dubrava and the Smrekovnica prisons unlawfully granted furloughs and additional yard time due to nepotism or bribery...”
In its Kosovo 2016 Report (9 November 2016), the European Commission stated the following:
“[A]dministration of justice is slow and inefficient, and there is insufficient accountability of judicial officials. The judiciary is still vulnerable to undue political influence and rule of law institutions suffer from lack of funding and human resources.” (page 12)
“As regards prevention of torture and ill treatment, there were no reports of violations of internationally recognised human rights standards. In January 2016, in compliance with the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture, a National Preventive Mechanism against Torture was established. This is a separate body within the Ombudsman Institution responsible for inspecting all places in which persons are deprived of their full liberty.
In the prison system, compliance with the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners and European Prison Rules has continued. ... Serious concerns remain over privileges for certain high-profile detainees.” (page 22)
The following are extracts from a report of the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada titled “Kosovo: Blood feuds and availability of state protection” (KOS104577.E, 10 October 2013):
“1. Historical Overview
Blood feuds ... are part of a centuries-old tradition in Kosovo .... They trace back to the Dukagjin code [also known as the Kanun or Code] ..., a set of customary laws dating back to at least the fifteenth Century. According to the Kanun, if a man’s honour is deeply affronted, his family has the right to kill the person who insulted him. However, after such a killing, the victim’s family can avenge the death by targeting male members of the killer’s family, possibly setting off a pattern of reprisal killings between the families. ...
Prevalence of Blood Feuds
... Statistics on blood feuds during 2010-2013 could not be found among the sources consulted by the Research Directorate. The Professor said that, to his knowledge, neither the government nor other organizations keep statistics about blood feuds in Kosovo (Professor 18 Sept. 2013). He was aware of at least 10 cases of blood feuds between 2010 and 2013, but also indicated that some of these may have traced back to murders committed in earlier years (ibid.). He noted that because there are no statistics, it is hard to know the full extent of the blood feud problem (ibid.). ...
In contrast, both the Ombudsperson and Partners Kosova expressed the opinion that there has not been an increase in the number of blood feuds (Kosovo 12 Sept. 2013; Partners Kosova 12 Sept. 2013). The Mediation Manager at Partners Kosova Centre for Conflict Management ... said that blood feuds are ‘not a large-scale problem’ but that there are still a few cases each year (Partners Kosova 13 Sept. 2013). ...
Causes
Sources indicate that current triggers to blood feuds in Kosovo include: property disputes (Kosovo 13 Sept. 2013; Partners Kosova 13 Sept. 2013; Professor 18 Sept. 2013); moral disputes (Kosovo 13 Sept. 2013); and issues related to family honour (Partners Kosova 13 Sept. 2013).
...
Legislation
Sources state that there is no legislation that specifically addresses the issue of blood feuds (Kosovo 13 Sept. 2013; Partners Kosova 13 Sept. 2013; Professor 13 Sept. 2013). However, the Ombudsperson explained that the practice of blood feuds is ‘implicitly forbidden by the Constitution and legislation in force in Kosovo’ and noted that law enforcement authorities are obliged to provide protection to individuals who are threatened (Kosovo 13 Sept. 2013). He further stated that ‘[b]lood feud, as a deed, is banned by law. No one is entitled to take justice into his/her hands’ (Kosovo 13 Sept. 2013).
Article 178 of Kosovo’s criminal code prescribes a minimum punishment of 5 years imprisonment for murder, and Article 179 prescribes a minimum punishment of 10 years for ‘aggravated murder’, which includes murder that ‘deprives another person of his or her life because of unscrupulous revenge’ (2012a, Art. 178-179). In correspondence with the Research Directorate, the spokesperson for the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)’s mission in Kosovo said blood feud motivated crimes are not listed as separate offenses in the criminal code, but the blood feud motive is considered an aggravating circumstance when courts determine the punishment (OSCE 16 Sept. 2013).
...
State Protection
The spokesperson for the OSCE mission in Kosovo said that there are no institutions that deal with the issue of blood feuds (16 Sept. 2013). Similarly, both the Professor and the Mediation Manager at Partners Kosova said that they are unaware of any state programs or special protection for people involved in blood feuds (Partner Kosova 13 Sept. 2013; Professor 18 Sept. 2013).
The Ombudsperson indicated that in the two cases reported to its institution between 2010 and 2013, state authorities did not ‘react properly and in compliance with the law’ (Kosovo 13 Sept. 2013). In particular, threats from victims’ families to perpetrators’ families ‘are not taken seriously and accordingly’ (ibid.).
The Mediation Manager said that someone who feels threatened by a blood feud can go to the police, and that the police may patrol the area more frequently, but that there is no protective custody and the police are unable to guard people ‘24 hours’ a day (Partners Kosova 13 Sept. 2013). The Professor said that the police generally have a ‘fairly good reputation’ but often do not want to get involved in blood feuds ‘due to personal safety issues’ (18 Sept. 2013). ...”
In its report “Kosovo: blood feuds” of 1 July 2016, the Swiss Refugee Council stated the following (page 5):
“According to information given by Bernd Fischer, Professor at the University of Indiana, ... there have been reports in the past years of killings due to blood feuds. However, to his knowledge, there was no organisation which systematically collected such information. While the Kosovo press was not very reliable, the Government tended to ignore the topic, as they considered it to be primitive and not worthy of a State which aimed at accession to the EU. Like in Albania, official reports underestimated the extent of the phenomenon. The Ombudsman of Kosovo stated in June 2016 ... that there was no category ‘blood feud’ in the database of the Kosovo police, and that respective cases were registered under ‘murder’, but the motive for the murder was mentioned in the decisions of the justice authorities. ...”