The application concerns the right not to be tried or punished twice. After serving a three-day administrative-offence sentence for minor disorderly acts, the applicant was subsequently convicted of disorderly acts in relation to the same facts in criminal proceedings.
The applicant was born in 1965 and lives in Sumy. The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms G.V. Ovdiyenko, a lawyer practising in Kharkiv.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 20 June 2007 the applicant was arrested for an administrative offence.
On 21 June 2007 the Zarichnyy District Court of Sumy established that at about 10 p.m. on 20 June 2007 the applicant, being drunk outdoors on Prokofyeva Street in Sumy, had uttered obscenities, reacted aggressively to remarks made by police officers, cursed them in obscene language and attempted to start a fight, and that he had thus breached public order and the peace and had offended human dignity and morals. The court found the applicant guilty of “minor disorderly acts”, an offence under Article 173 of the Code of Administrative Offences, and sentenced him to three days’ administrative detention.
This decision became final and could not be appealed against.
The applicant served his sentence from 21 June to 23 June 2007.
On 28 January 2008 the prosecutor lodged an objection (протест) against the decision. The relevant excerpt of the objection reads as follows.
“... [The applicant] was found liable in administrative proceedings for breaches of public order and offences against human dignity and morals, as manifested in an attempt to start a fight, not reacting to remarks made by police officers and uttering obscenities. The offences took place on 20 June 2007 at about 10 p.m. near building no. 6 on Prokofyeva Street in Sumy.
On 16 July 2007 M., a prosecutor of the Zarichnyy District of Sumy, opened a criminal case under Article 296 § 1 of the Criminal Code of Ukraine on the basis of these facts ... at present O.G. Chernov is facing charges under Article 296 § 3 for committing a crime.
According to Article 9 of the Code of Administrative Offences, administrative liability for offences set out in the Code is triggered if the underlying facts of the offence do not lead to criminal liability. In the present case, the actions committed by O.G. Chernov give rise to criminal liability ...”
On 6 February 2008 the Zarichnyy District Court of Sumy annulled its decision of 21 June 2007.
The applicant appealed against that decision to the Sumy Regional Court of Appeal.
On 25 February 2008 the Sumy Regional Court of Appeal upheld the decision of the Zarichnyy District Court of Sumy of 6 February 2008.
On the basis of a referral of 21 June 2007 issued by an assistant prosecutor of the Zarichnyy District of Sumy, a forensic examination of two people, Mu. and P., was carried out on 22 June 2007. It was established that they had minor physical injuries, which may have been inflicted on 20 June 2007.
On 16 July 2007 a prosecutor of the Zarichnyy District of Sumy opened a criminal case against the applicant on suspicion of committing a criminal offence of disorderly acts within the meaning of Article 296 of the Criminal Code on 20 June 2007. The prosecutor established that on 20 June 2007, at about 10 p.m., on Prokofyeva Street in Sumy, the applicant, in an act of hooliganism, had caused physical injuries to Mu. and P.
On 4 August 2007 the applicant was placed on a wanted list.
On the basis of a decision of 20 August 2007 issued by an investigator of the Zarichnyy police department in the Sumy Region, another forensic examination of Mu. and P. was carried out on 14 September 2007. With reference to the descriptive part of the forensic examination of 22 June 2007, an expert concluded that Mu. and P. had minor physical injuries which may have been inflicted by blunt objects.
On 23 December 2007 the applicant was arrested, under Article 296 § 3 of the Criminal Code, on suspicion of committing disorderly acts, namely causing physical injuries to Mu. and P. on 20 June 2007 at around 10 p.m. on Prokofyeva Street in Sumy.
On 29 January 2008 the applicant was indicted for disorderly acts under Article 296 § 3 of the Criminal Code.
On 14 July 2008 the Zarichnyy District Court of Sumy convicted the applicant under Article 296 § 3 of the Criminal Code of disorderly acts and sentenced him to two years’ imprisonment. The court made no mention of the administrative-offence proceedings or his three-day administrative detention. The applicant, his two representatives and a prosecutor appealed against that decision to the Sumy Regional Court of Appeal.
On 7 October 2008 the Sumy Regional Court of Appeal quashed the conviction on account of inconsistencies between the facts of the case and the court’s conclusion (the first-instance court had specified 5 p.m. as the time of the offence, whereas the resolution on the opening of the criminal case and the victims’ statements had referred to 10 p.m.; and the firstinstance court had not described the “disorderly acts” in the way that they were defined in the relevant provision of the law (не виклав диспозицію цього закону)), and on the grounds that the sentence was too lenient. It remitted the case for fresh examination.
On 29 October 2008 Judge Ma. at the Zarichnyy District Court of Sumy, who had considered the applicant’s administrative case and delivered the decision in the administrative-offence proceedings, withdrew from hearing the criminal case. Her application for withdrawal reads, in its relevant parts, as follows:
“A criminal case, no. 1-464/08, has been allocated to me, concerning the indictment of [the applicant] under Article 296 § 3 of the Criminal Code of Ukraine.
... I consider that the following circumstances impede my involvement in the examination of this case. ... [O]n 21 June 2007 I considered administrative case no. 312128/07 on the administrative liability of O.G. Chernov under Article 173 of the Code of Administrative Offences. After examination of that case, a decision was adopted finding Mr Chernov liable for administrative offences and imposing a sanction of three days’ administrative detention. I annulled the said decision following an objection [протест] lodged by the Zarichnyy district prosecutor, as during the course of an additional investigation carried out by the public prosecutor’s office into the actions for which Mr Chernov was found liable in the administrative proceedings, the corpus delicti of a crime under Article 296 of the Criminal Code became apparent. It is for this reason that I have decided to withdraw.”
On 29 December 2008 the Zarichnyy District Court of Sumy established that on 20 June 2007, at around 10 p.m., the applicant, who had been drunk while on Prokofyeva Street in Sumy, had come across Mu. and for no reason had pulled on the latter’s gold neck chain and damaged it. The applicant, uttering obscenities, had started beating Mu., kicking and punching his head and elsewhere on his body and in doing so had inflicted minor bodily injuries on him.
Another victim, P., explained at the court hearing that she already knew Mu., as they had previously worked together at a police station. On 20 June 2007 at around 10 p.m., P. had met Mu. on Prokofyeva Street and had been talking to him when the applicant had started a fight. P. began to call out that she would contact the police. The applicant then left. Mu. was calling the police on his mobile phone when the applicant came back over to him, took his phone and threw it on the road. The applicant then left again. Mu. called the police on P.’s mobile phone. As Mu. was speaking on the phone with a duty police officer, the applicant came back over to him again. P. tried to stop the applicant by pulling the latter’s shirt sleeve, but the applicant, while resisting, damaged her tshirt and punched her in the face, causing minor bodily injuries and damaging her glasses. He then departed again. At that point, the police arrived. P. and Mu. explained what had happened and gave a description of the applicant’s physical appearance. After a few minutes, the police stopped the applicant. Mu. and P. confirmed that it was the same person who had started the fight. The applicant was subsequently brought to a police station.
In its decision, the Zarichnyy District Court of Sumy stated that the victims’ statements should be accepted as the basis for a conviction, as the statements were logical, consistent and supplemented by other evidence. The court classified the applicant’s behaviour as “disorderly conduct” within the meaning of Article 296 § 3 of the Criminal Code and sentenced the applicant to two years and one month’s imprisonment.
The applicant, his representative and the prosecutor appealed to the Sumy Regional Court of Appeal. The applicant complained, inter alia, that the Zarichnyy District Court of Sumy had not taken his three-day administrative sentence into consideration when sentencing him to two years and one month’s imprisonment.
On 10 March 2009 the Sumy Regional Court of Appeal upheld the decision of the first-instance court in so far as it concerned the applicant’s conviction, but reduced the sentence from a term of two years and one month’s imprisonment to a term of two years. The sentence was reduced on the grounds that in its decision of 7 October 2008, the panel of the Sumy Regional Court of Appeal had not made reference to the term of imprisonment and that, notwithstanding any arguments about the leniency of the sentence, the Zarichnyy District Court of Sumy had no right to worsen the applicant’s position by extending the sentence to two years and one month, thus departing from the previous decision at first instance, which had sentenced the applicant to only two years’ imprisonment. The prosecutor, the applicant and his representative all lodged cassation appeals. The applicant complained, inter alia, that he had been tried twice for the same offence.
On 24 September 2009 the Supreme Court of Ukraine upheld the decision of the appellate court. In response to the applicant’s complaint that he had been tried twice for the same offence, the court explained that the Zarichnyy District Court of Sumy had allowed the prosecutor’s objection seeking the annulment of the decision of 21 June 2007 and had “closed” the administrative-offence case. For that reason, the court concluded that the applicant had not been tried twice for the same offence.
Article 61 of the Constitution of 28 June 1996 provides:
“No one shall have to bear legal responsibility of the same type for the same offence twice.
The legal responsibility of a person is of an individual character.”
The Code of Administrative Offences of 7 December 1984 (as in force at the material time) read, in its relevant parts, as follows.
Article 9 – Notion of an administrative offence
“... Administrative liability for offences set out in this Code shall be triggered if the underlying facts of the offence do not lead to criminal liability.”
Article 173 – Minor disorderly acts
“Minor disorderly acts, that is, the utterance of obscenities in public places, offensive behaviour towards others and other similar acts that breach public order and the peace shall be punishable by a fine ranging from three to seven times the nontaxable minimum income of citizens or by one to two months’ correctional work combined with the withholding of twenty per cent of the offender’s wages, or – if, in the circumstances of the case and having regard to the offender’s character, these measures are not deemed to be appropriate – by up to fifteen days’ administrative detention.”
Article 287 – Right to appeal against an administrative-offence decision
“A decision in the case of an administrative offence is open to appeal by the person against whom it was issued and by any victims.
A ... court decision imposing an administrative sanction shall be final and may not be appealed against ...”
Article 290 – Objection against a decision 
with regard to an administrative-offence case
“The prosecutor may lodge an objection [протест] against a decision imposing an administrative sanction.”
Article 296 of the Criminal Code of Ukraine of 5 April 2001 (as in force at the material time) read as follows:
Article 296 – Disorderly acts
“1.  Disorderly acts such as a serious breach of public order motivated by flagrant disrespect of the community, combined with particular impudence and exceptional cynicism, shall be punishable ... by up to five years’ deprivation of liberty.
...
The acts referred to in the first ... paragraph of this Article, if connected to resisting a public official ... [or] other citizens who were attempting to stop the disorderly acts, shall be punishable by imprisonment for a period of between two and five years.”
Article 6 § 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 28 December 1960 (as in force at the material time) read as follows:
Article 6 – Circumstances excluding proceedings in a criminal case
“A criminal case shall not be initiated and an opened case shall be closed [if]:
...
(9)  in relation to the same person and in relation to the same charge there exists a final judgment or a final court resolution or ruling terminating the proceedings on the same ground;
...”