The case originated in an application (no. 3142/11) against the Kingdom of Spain lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Spanish national, Mr Vicente Manuel Cano Moya (“the applicant”), on 4 January 2011.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was initially represented by Mr A. Bañón López, a lawyer practising in Alicante, and later by Ms M.M. Díez Perello, a lawyer practising in Madrid. The Spanish Government (“the Government”) were initially represented by their Agent, Mr F. Irurzun Montoro, and later by their Agent, Mr F. Sanz Gandasegui.
The applicant alleged that sanctions imposed upon him had amounted to violations of his right to be presumed innocent and his right to freedom of expression. He also complained – without formally citing Article 34 of the Convention – that the post-sentencing judge in question had refused to provide him with his case file so as to hinder his right of individual petition to the Court.
On 6 September 2011 the application was communicated to the Government. A decision was also made to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1972 in Villahermosa (Ciudad Real) and is currently serving a prison sentence in Spain.
At the time of the facts the applicant was in prison on remand in Foncalent (Alicante).
On 20 October 2009 the applicant was found guilty of a disciplinary offence by the disciplinary board of Alicante Prison and punished under the General Prison Rules. The punishment was: four weekends in isolation for having threatened prison officers (Rule 108 (b)); twenty days without group recreational activities for having disobeyed the orders given by prison officers in the fulfilment of their duties (Rule 109 (b)); and twenty days without group recreational activities for having damaged prison property (Rule 109 (e)).
The applicant appealed against the sanction before the Comunidad Valenciana post-sentencing judge no. 2 (Juzgado de Vigilancia Penitenciaria n.o 2).
On 17 November 2009 the post-sentencing judge found partially in the applicant’s favour and revoked the sanction imposed under Rule 109 (b).
On 19 November 2009 a State agent in charge of judicial communications attempted unsuccessfully to serve the applicant in person with the post-sentencing judge’s decision. The applicant had been transferred to a prison in Villena (Alicante).
On 28 January 2010 the applicant was served in person with the post-sentencing judge’s decision of 17 November 2009. He signed an acknowledgment of receipt.
The applicant lodged a reforma appeal with the same post-sentencing judge, who on 18 February 2010 confirmed her previous decision. A copy of the decision on appeal was served on the applicant. He signed an acknowledgment of receipt.
The applicant lodged an amparo appeal with the Constitutional Court. He invoked Articles 20 (freedom of expression) and 24 (right to be presumed innocent) of the Constitution.
By a communication of 22 March 2010 the Constitutional Court asked the post-sentencing judge to provide it with a copy of the applicant’s case file.
On 12 April 2010 the post-sentencing judge transferred the applicant’s case file to the Constitutional Court.
By a decision of 30 September 2010 the Constitutional Court declared the applicant’s amparo appeal inadmissible as devoid of any special constitutional significance. That decision was served on the applicant on 7 October 2010.
On 22 December 2010 the applicant asked the post-sentencing judge for a copy of his case file for submission to the European Court of Human Rights. He relied on sections 234 and 454 of the Judicature Act (see paragraph 31 below). He did so from a prison in Zuera (Saragossa) to which he had been transferred.
On 4 January 2011 the applicant sent his first letter to the Court giving notice of his intention to lodge an application under Article 34 of the Convention.
On 14 January 2011 the Court’s Registry acknowledged receipt of the applicant’s letter and invited him to submit a duly completed application form by 11 March 2011.
On 26 January 2011 the post-sentencing judge refused the applicant’s request for a copy of his case file on the grounds that his case “was still pending before the Constitutional Court”.
On 2 February 2011 the applicant sent his application form to the Court. He raised complaints under Article 6 § 2 and Article 10 § 1 of the Convention. He enclosed a copy of the Constitutional Court’s decision declaring his amparo appeal inadmissible. He further referred to the post-sentencing judge’s decisions of 17 November 2009 and 18 February 2010 in field “17. Other decisions” of the application form. However, he did not enclose a copy of those decisions.
On 4 February 2011 the applicant sent a communication to the post-sentencing judge. He stated that the Constitutional Court had delivered a decision in his case on 30 September 2010; that he intended to initiate proceedings before the European Court of Human Rights; and that in order to do so he should be provided with a certified copy of his case file without delay and before the deadline of 11 March 2011.
On 22 February 2011 the post-sentencing judge’s registrar rejected the applicant’s request, referring to the decision of 12 April 2010 (see paragraph 15 above) and stating that the European Court of Human Rights had the power to request the case file itself. That decision was served on the applicant on 4 March 2011.
On 3 March 2011 the Court acknowledged receipt of the applicant’s application form and invited him to send in all relevant domestic decisions by 3 June 2011.
On 4 March 2011 the applicant informed the Court that he had unsuccessfully requested a certified copy of his complete case file from the post-sentencing judge. He complained that the domestic authorities were hindering his right to a defence.
On 14 March 2011 the applicant resubmitted his request for a copy of the whole case file to the post-sentencing judge. He referred to the Court’s letter of 3 March 2011.
On 1 April 2011 the post-sentencing judge rejected the applicant’s request and refused to provide him with a copy of his case file. She informed the applicant that, for the purposes of subsequent applications before other courts, those courts could request the case files from the domestic courts directly. That decision was served on the applicant on 6 April 2011.
On 7 April 2011 the applicant informed the Court that the post-sentencing judge had refused to provide him with a copy of his case file.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution read:
“1. The following rights are recognised and protected:
(a) the right to freely express and disseminate thoughts, ideas and opinions through words, in writing or by any other means of communication; ...
These freedoms are limited by respect for the rights recognised in this Part, by the legal provisions implementing it, and especially by the right to honour, to privacy, to personal reputation and to the protection of youth and childhood. ...”
“1. Every person has the right to obtain the effective protection of judges and the courts in the exercise of his or her legitimate rights and interests, and in no case may he go undefended.
Likewise, all persons have the right of access to the ordinary judge predetermined by law; to the defence and assistance of a lawyer; to be informed of the charges brought against them; to a public trial without undue delay and with full guarantees; to the use of evidence appropriate to their defence; to not make self-incriminating statements; to not declare themselves guilty; and to be presumed innocent. ...”
Where an amparo appeal is admitted, the Chamber shall urgently request the body or authority with which the decision, act or circumstance originated or the judge or court that heard the previous proceedings, to provide it with the court records or the supporting documents within a period of not more than ten days.
The body, authority, judge or court shall immediately acknowledge receipt of the request, shall dispatch the documents within the prescribed period and shall invite the persons who were parties to the former proceedings so that they may appear in the constitutional proceedings within ten days.
The relevant provisions of the General Prison Rules read:
“An inmate shall be guilty of a very serious offence if he:
assaults, threatens or coerces any person within the prison premises, or any official or judicial or prison officer within or outside the prison premises in the event that he has been duly authorised to leave while serving his sentence, and the officer was performing his or her duties in an official capacity. ...”
“An inmate shall be guilty of a serious offence if he:
...
deliberately renders useless any prison property, items or effects, or causes minor or serious damage to anyone’s property through wanton negligence. ...”
The relevant provisions of the Judicature Act read:
“1. The appropriate registrars and officials within a court’s office shall provide any authorised person with whatever information he may request about the state of the proceedings, and he shall be able to access reports unless they are or have been classified as restricted pursuant to the relevant legislation. They shall draft a verbatim report of the proceedings as set out in this law.
The parties and any other person proving a legitimate interest shall enjoy the right to obtain copies of the briefs and documents included in a case file which have not been classified as secret or confidential.”
“...
[Court registrars] shall provide to the parties and to whoever declares and proves a legitimate and direct interest in the action any information they may request about the state of the proceedings which has not been declared secret or confidential.”
The relevant provisions of Regulation 1/2005 read:
“Court registrars and appropriate civil servants within the court office shall provide to the interested parties and to whoever declares and proves a legitimate and direct interest in the proceedings any information they may request about the state of the proceedings, which shall be made available to them for examination and consultation, unless [the information] is or has been declared secret in conformity with the law.
The information shall be provided in clear and accessible language whenever the parties or interested persons are not legal professionals.
...
Court registrars shall provide certificates or copies of the court proceedings to the parties who so request, save those which have been declared secret or confidential, specifying the intended recipient and the purpose for which they have been requested ...”