The case originated in an application (no. 9348/14) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Andrey Igorevich Resin (“the applicant”), on 17 December 2013.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Molostov, a lawyer practising in the Chelyabinsk Region. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant complained about excessive restrictions on family visits.
On 17 March 2017 the Government were given notice of the above complaint and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1974 in Khabarovsk and is serving a life sentence in the Sverdlovsk Region.
From 25 May 2012 to 10 April 2014 the applicant was held in penal colony IK-56 in the Sverdlovsk Region. He was able to have five short visits in 2013 and one short visit in 2014.
On 15 July 2013 the applicant asked the governor to allow him a short meeting with four adult relatives, his mother, sister and two cousins. He also asked for the meeting to be held without a glass partition between him and his visitors or the presence of a prison officer. The governor signed his decision on the petition: “Rejected. Not allowed under the Code of Execution of Sentences”.
From 15 May to 16 July 2014 the applicant was transferred to remand prison SIZO-1 in Khabarovsk – where his family still lived – to take part in another investigation.
On the day after his arrival at the prison, he asked the prison governor to authorise a short meeting with four family members – his sister, two cousins and aunt – without a physical partition between him and the visitors or the presence of prison officers. By a letter of 21 May 2014, the governor rejected his request. He pointed out that, pursuant to section 18 of the Pretrial Detention Act, visits are subject to written authorisation from the official or authority in charge of the criminal case. Furthermore, the Rules of Internal Order in Remand Prisons required that visiting rooms be equipped with a physical partition and that visits be supervised by a prison officer.
On 3 June 2014 the applicant asked the governor to authorise a long meeting with his mother and sister. He relied on Article 89 of the Code of Execution of Sentences (CES) and emphasised that the remand prison was equipped with rooms for long-stay visits which could be used by convicted prisoners serving their sentence in that prison. Three days later the governor replied that the applicable law did not make a provision for long-stay visits in respect of remand prisoners. He referred the applicant to Article 77.1 of the CES.
The applicant subsequently asked the authorities in charge of the criminal case to authorise short visits from his family members. On 11 June and 1 August 2014 the investigator and the deputy head of the investigations department, respectively, rejected his request. They informed the applicant that “the authorities in charge of the investigation were not preventing [him] from having short visits from his family members as long as it did not contradict Russian law, including the Code of Execution of Sentences”.
The applicant challenged the restrictions on family visits before a court of general jurisdiction. According to the information from the Government, all of his challenges were dismissed as unfounded.
According to a certificate issued by the governor on 27 April 2017, the applicant did not have any short or long-stay visits during his time in the Khabarovsk remand prison.
Article 77.1 of the Code of Execution of Sentences (CES) regulates the manner in which convicted prisoners may be involved in further investigative actions. Paragraph 1 establishes that they may be transferred to a remand prison for that purpose. Paragraph 3 specifies that they exercise their right to family visits in accordance with the provisions of the Pre-trial Detention Act. Section 18 of the Pre-trial Detention Act (Federal Law no. 103-FZ of 15 July 1995) provides as follows:
“Subject to written authorisation from the official or authority in charge of the criminal case, suspects and defendants may have no more than two visits per month from their family members and other persons, each visit lasting for up to three hours.
Visits from family members and other persons shall be supervised by an officer of the custodial facility; should there be an attempt to pass prohibited objects, substances or food, or to communicate information capable of preventing the truth from being established in the criminal proceedings or contributing to the commission of an offence, the visit will be cut short.”
Article 89 of the CES provides that convicted prisoners are entitled to short visits lasting for up to four hours and to long-stay visits of up to three days, on the prison premises (paragraph 1).  A short visit takes place in the presence of a prison officer; prisoners may stay together with their family members during long visits (paragraph 2).
Section XVI of the Rules of Internal Order in Remand Prisons, as approved by the Ministry of Justice’s Order no. 189 of 14 October 2005, governs the arrangements for organising visits in remand prisons. Rule 139 establishes the following limitations: no more than two visits per month; the written authorisation to be valid for one visit only; no more than two adult visitors each time. Rule 143 specifies that meetings should be held in purpose-built rooms equipped with a partition or separator that prevents any objects from being passed but does not obstruct oral or visual contact. Detainees may talk to visitors on an intercom system and their discussion may be listened to by prison guards.
Section XIV of the Rules of Internal Order in Penal Facilities, as approved by the Ministry of Justice’s Order no. 205 of 3 November 2005, as in force at the material time, described the arrangements for long-stay and short visits in penal facilities. Rule 74 set the number of adult family members who could pay a short or long-stay visit to a convicted prisoner at no more than two people. Rule 78 provided that visitors who refused a search of their body and belongings would not be allowed to have a longstay visit. The long-stay visit would be replaced with a short visit.
The current version of the Rules of Internal Order in Penal Facilities was approved by the Ministry of Justice’s Order no. 295 of 16 December 2016. Rule 70 establishes that short visits are conducted under the supervision of a prison officer, while long-stay visits allow prisoners to live together with their family members. The number of long-stay visitors is determined by reference to the accommodation capacity of long-stay visit rooms and the visiting schedule. Rule 78 was reproduced verbatim in the new version.