The case originated in an application (no. 59102/08) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Slovak national, Ms Alena Vojtěchová (“the applicant”), on 19 November 2008.
The applicant was represented by Ms I. Rajtáková, a lawyer practising in Košice. The Government of the  (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková.
The applicant alleged that proceedings concerning the termination of a tenancy agreement were unfair contrary to Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 14 March 2011 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1964 and lives in Košice.
In 2000 a cooperative sued the applicant’s mother for termination of a tenancy agreement in respect of a flat in which she lived with the applicant and the latter’s daughter. It was argued that the tenant had failed to pay the rent and service charges. In her reply the defendant explained that she was an immobile invalid, and that her daughter had taken care of her for twenty years and was unemployed. They were in financial need and unable to pay the rent.
The defendant authorised the applicant to represent her at hearings before the Košice I District Court on 15 January 2002 and 17 May 2002. Subsequently, the District Court examined the case in the presence of the applicant who attended hearings but had no authority to represent her mother.
On 9 September 2004 the District Court allowed the action with reference to Article 711 § 1 (d) of the Civil Code. It ordered the applicant’s mother and the other persons living with her to move out of the flat within fifteen days after they have been provided with substitute accommodation. The court held it established that the tenant had failed to pay the rent for a period exceeding three months.
The applicant’s mother appealed on 8 November 2004. She described her and her daughter’s difficult situation. At the hearing the applicant submitted that a substantial part of the debt had been paid in the meantime.
On 26 April 2005 the  upheld the firstinstance judgment. With reference to the reasons for that judgment the  held that the District Court had established the relevant facts and had applied the relevant law correctly.
On 24 June 2005 the applicant’s mother filed an appeal on points of law. She subsequently appointed a lawyer to represent her in the proceedings.
In the appeal on points of law it was argued that the applicant’s mother had been prevented from protecting her rights at first-instance as the court had proceeded with the case at several hearings without having duly summoned her. The  had not redressed the shortcomings in the first-instance proceedings. The applicant’s mother relied on Article 30 of the Code of Civil Procedure and maintained that the District Court had not complied with its obligation to inform her of the possibility of having a lawyer appointed to represent her in the proceedings. She also argued that the courts had made their decision in disregard of Article 712b of the Civil Code.
On 24 February 2006 the applicant’s mother died. The applicant joined the proceedings as a defendant on 13 August 2007.
On 25 October 2007 the Supreme Court dismissed the appeal on points of law. It noted that the applicant had been authorised to represent her mother at two hearings, that she had attended further hearings and could have thus informed her mother, who had been the defendant, of the date when they took place. Furthermore, the first-instance court had sent summonses to the applicant’s mother, for example, for the hearing scheduled for 9 March 2004. Similarly, she had been summoned to a hearing before the court of appeal held on 26 April 2005 but had neither appeared nor excused her absence. The Supreme Court concluded that the lower courts had not prevented the applicant’s mother from exercising her rights.
On 19 February 2008 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint in which she alleged a breach of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention in the above-mentioned proceedings leading to the Supreme Court’s decision of 25 October 2007. She argued, among other things, that her mother had not been duly summoned to hearings before the District Court and that both that court and the court of appeal had decided arbitrarily in that they had failed to examine the facts of the case in the light of Article 712b in conjunction with Article 879c of the Civil Code.
On 6 May 2008 the  declared the complaint manifestly ill-founded. It found that the Supreme Court’s decision was neither arbitrary nor otherwise contrary to Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
In February 2009 the cooperative which owns the flat initiated proceedings before the Košice I District Court with a view to having the applicant removed from the flat. The proceedings are pending.
Article 711 § 1 (d) entitles landlords, subject to approval by a court, to terminate tenancy agreements where tenants fail to pay the rent and service charges for more than three months.
Article 712b provides that a court should not allow the termination of a tenancy agreement for reasons set out in Article 711 § 1 (d) where the tenant and members of his or her household are in material need and where the situation cannot be imputed to them.
That provision was repealed with effect from 1 September 2001. However, under Article 879c § 1, the courts were bound to continue applying that and related provisions in proceedings concerning the termination of tenancy agreements which had started before that date.
Article 30 entitles courts to appoint a lawyer at the request of a party who qualifies for exemption from the obligation to pay court fees. With effect from 1 September 2003, Article 30 was amended in that it obliges courts to advise a party to proceedings of that possibility.
Article 212 § 1 provides that appeal courts are bound by the scope and reasons for an appeal. Paragraph 3 of Article 212 provides that appeal courts should consider shortcomings in proceedings at first instance where they entail an erroneous decision on the case.
Pursuant to Article 228 § 1 (d), a party is entitled to challenge a final judgment by means of a request for a reopening of the proceedings where the European Court of Human Rights concluded in a judgment that a court’s decision or the proceedings preceding it were in breach of the fundamental human rights or freedoms of the party, unless the just satisfaction granted eliminated the serious consequences of the breach.