The case originated in an application (no. 52623/14) against the Republic of Iceland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Icelandic national, Mr Ragnar Þórisson (“the applicant”), on 9 July 2014.
The applicant was represented by Mr Heiðar Ásberg Atlason, a lawyer practising in Reykjavik. The Icelandic Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Einar Karl Hallvarðsson, the State Attorney General.
On 13 June 2017 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1971 and lives in Reykjavík.
On 21 October 2010 the Directorate of Tax Investigation (Skattrannsóknarstjóri ríkisins) initiated an audit of the applicant’s tax return for the income year 2006. On 5 November 2010, the applicant was interviewed by the Directorate.
The investigation was concluded with a report issued on 13 January 2011. By a letter of 14 January 2011 the Directorate informed the applicant that the case would be referred to the Directorate of Internal Revenue (Ríkisskattstjóri) for reassessment of his taxes. It also informed the applicant about the Directorate of Tax Investigation’s upcoming decision on possible criminal proceedings, listed possible ways of finalising the criminal procedure in the case and gave the applicant 30 days to comment. By letter of 18 February 2011, 5 days after the deadline, the applicant replied and requested the finalisation of the case with a decision by the Directorate, ordering him to pay a fine, or for the case to be sent to the State Internal Revenue Board (Yfirskattanefnd).
On the basis of the Directorate of Tax Investigation’s report, the Directorate of Internal Revenue, ruling on 23 November 2011, found in particular that the applicant had failed to declare significant capital gains received in 2006. Therefore, it revised upward the amount declared as capital gains in his tax return for the income year 2006 and, consequently, re-assessed his taxes and imposed a 25% surcharge. The applicant paid the additional tax and tax surcharges.
The applicant did not appeal to the State Internal Revenue Board against the decision, which thus acquired legal force three months later, in February 2012, when the time-limit for an appeal had expired.
On 28 March 2012 the Directorate of Tax Investigation reported the matter to the Special Prosecutor. By a letter of the same day, the applicant was informed about it. On 14 September 2012 the applicant was interviewed by the police for the first time.
On 10 October 2012 the Special Prosecutor indicted the applicant for aggravated tax offences. In particular, the applicant was charged with having under declared his income in his tax return of 2007. This included failure to declare significant capital gains received in 2006.
By judgment of 16 May 2013, the District Court found that the applicant had acted with gross negligence, which was sufficient for criminal liability under the relevant provisions of the tax law, and therefore convicted the applicant of the charges against him. The court sentenced him to three months’ imprisonment, suspended for two years, and the payment of 24,006,000 Icelandic krónur (ISK; approximately 152,000 euros (EUR) at the material time). Furthermore, the applicant was ordered to pay legal costs of ISK 878,500 plus value added tax for his defence counsel.
The applicant lodged an appeal against the District Court’s judgment.
By a judgment of 22 May 2014, the Supreme Court rejected the applicant’s request to dismiss the case on the basis of Article 4 of Protocol No. 7 to the Convention. The court upheld the applicant’s conviction and confirmed his prison sentence. However, the Supreme Court sentenced the applicant to pay a fine of ISK 21,000,000 (approximately EUR 136,000 at the material time). In fixing the fine, the court had regard to the tax surcharge imposed. The applicant was ordered to pay legal costs of ISK 1,286,614, ISK 1,255,000 of that amount for his defence counsel.
The relevant Sections of the Income Tax Act (Lög um tekjuskatt, no. 90/2003) read as follows:
“If an entity that is obliged to submit a tax return does not do so within the given deadline, the Director of Internal Revenue is permitted to add up to a 15% charge to his tax-base estimate. The Director of Internal Revenue is nonetheless required to take notice of the extent to which taxation has taken place through withheld taxes. The Director of Internal Revenue sets further rules on that point. If a tax return on which the levying of taxes will be based is submitted after the filing deadline, but before a Local Tax Commissioner completes assessing taxes, there can only be added a 0.5% charge to the tax base for each day that the filing of a tax return has been delayed after the given deadline, although no more than a 10% charge.
If a tax return is incorrect, as noted in Article 96, or specific items declared wrongly, the Director of Internal Revenue can add a 25% charge to estimated or wrongly declared tax bases. If a tax entity corrects the errors or adjusts specific items in the tax return before taxes are assessed, the charge of the Director of Internal Revenue may not be higher than 15%.
Additional charges, in accordance with this Section, are to be cancelled if a tax entity can show with justification that it is not to blame for limitations in the tax return, or the failure to file, that force majeure made it impossible to file the tax return in the given time, it rectifies errors in the tax return or corrects specific items therein.
Complaints to the Directorate of Internal Revenue and the State Internal Revenue Board are subject to the provisions of Article 99 of the Act and the provisions of Act No. 30/1992 on the State Internal Revenue Board.”
“If a taxable person, intentionally or out of gross negligence, makes false or misleading statements about something that matters in relation to its income tax, such person shall pay a fine of up to tenfold the tax amount from the tax base that was concealed and never a lower fine than double the tax amount. Tax from a charge in accordance with Article 108 is deducted from the fine. Paragraph 1 of Article 262 of the Penal Code applies to major offences against this provision.
If a taxable person, intentionally or out of gross negligence, neglects to file a tax return, the violation calls for a fine that is never to be lower than double the tax amount from the tax base that was lacking, if the tax evaluation proved to be too low when taxes were re-assessed in accordance with paragraph 2 of Article 96 of this Act, in which case the tax on the added charge shall be deducted from the amount of the fine in accordance with Article 108. Paragraph 1 of Article 262 of the Penal Code applies to major offences against this provision.
If a taxable person gives false or misleading information on any aspects regarding his tax return, then that person can be made to pay a fine, even if the information cannot affect his liability to pay taxes or tax payments.
If violations of paragraph 1 or paragraph 2 of the provision are discovered when the estate of a deceased person is wound up, then the estate shall pay a fine of up to quadruple the tax amount from the tax base that was evaded and never less than the tax amount plus half of the tax amount. Tax from a charge in accordance with Article 108 is deducted from the fine. Under circumstances stated in Paragraph 3, the estate may be fined.
Any person who wilfully or by gross negligence provides tax authorities with wrongful or misleading information or documentation regarding the tax returns of other parties or assists a wrongful or misleading tax return to tax authorities, shall be subject to punishment as stated in Paragraph 1 of this Article.
If a person, intentionally or out of gross negligence, has neglected his duties according to the provisions of Articles 90, 92 or 94 he shall pay a fine or be sentenced to imprisonment for up to 2 years.
An attempted violation and accessory to a violation of this Act is punishable according to the provisions of Chapter III of the Penal Code and is subject to a fine up to the maximum stated in other provisions of this Article.
A legal entity may be fined for a violation of this Act, irrespective of whether the violation may be attributable to the criminal act of an officer or employee of the legal entity. If its officer or employee has been guilty of violating this Act, the legal entity may be subject to a fine and withdrawal of its operating licence in addition to a punishment inflicted, provided the violation is committed for the benefit of the legal entity and it has profited from the violation.”
“The State Internal Revenue Board rules on fines in accordance with Article 109 unless a case is referred for investigation and judicial treatment in accordance with paragraph 4. Act 30/1992 on the State Internal Revenue Board, applies to the Board’s handling of cases.
The Directorate of Tax Investigations in Iceland appears before the Board on behalf of the state when it rules on fines. The rulings of the Board are final.
Despite the provision of paragraph 1, the Directorate of Tax Investigations or its representative learned in law is permitted to offer a party the option to end the penal proceedings of a case by paying a fine to the Treasury, provided that an offence is considered proved beyond doubt, and then the case is neither to be sent to be investigated by the police nor to fine proceedings with the State Internal Revenue Board. When deciding the amount of a fine, notice is to be taken of the nature and scale of the offence. Fines can amount to between 100 thousand krónur and 6 million krónur. The entity in the case is to be informed of the proposed amount of a fine before it agrees to end a case in such a manner. A decision on the amount of a fine according to this provision is to have been made within six months from the end of the investigation of the Directorate of Tax Investigations.
An alternative penalty is not included in the decision of the Directorate of Tax Investigations. On the collection of a fine imposed by the Directorate of Tax Investigations the same rules apply as to taxes according to this Act, the right to carry out distraint included. The State Prosecutor is to be sent a record of all cases that have been closed according to this provision. If the State Prosecutor believes that an innocent person has been made to suffer a fine in accordance with paragraph 2, or that the closure of the case has been improbable in other ways, he can refer the case to a judge in order to overthrow the decision of the Directorate of Tax Investigations.
The Directorate of Tax Investigations can, of its own accord, refer a case to be investigated by the police as well as at the request of the accused, if he is opposed to the case being dealt with by the State Internal Revenue Board in accordance with paragraph 1.
Tax claims can be upheld and judged in criminal proceedings because of offences against the Act.
Fines for offences against this Act go to the Treasury.
An alternative penalty does not accompany the State Internal Revenue Board’s rulings of a fine. On the collection of a fine issued by the State Internal Revenue Board the same rules apply as to taxes according to this Act, the right to carry out distraint included.
Charges in accordance with Article 109 have a six-year limitation period from the time an investigation by the Directorate of Tax Investigations commences, as long as there are no unnecessary delays in the investigation of a case or the issue of punishment.”
Article 262 of the Penal Code (Almenn hegningarlög, no. 19/1940) stipulates:
“Any person who intentionally or through gross negligence is guilty of a major violation of the first, second or fifth paragraphs of Article 109 of Act No. 90/2003 on income tax, cf. also Article 22 of the act on municipal tax revenues, the first, second or seventh paragraphs of Article 30 of the Act on the withholding of public levies at source, cf. also Article 11 of the Act on payroll taxes, and of the first or sixth paragraphs of Article 40 of the Act on value added tax, shall be subject to a maximum of 6 years’ imprisonment. An additional fine may be imposed by virtue of the provisions of the tax laws cited above.
The same punishment may be imposed on a person who intentionally or through gross negligence is guilty of a major violation of the third paragraph of Article 30 of the Act on the withholding of public levies at source, the second paragraph of Article 40 of the Act on value added tax, Articles 37 and 28, cf. Article 36, of the Act on accounting or Articles 83-85, cf. Article 82, of the Act on annual accounts, including any intent to conceal an acquisitive offence committed by oneself or others.
An action constitutes a major violation pursuant to the first and second paragraphs of this Act if the violation involves significant amounts, if the action is committed in a particularly flagrant manner or under circumstances which greatly exacerbate the culpability of the violation, and also if a person to be sentenced to punishment for any of the violations referred to in the first or second paragraph has previously been convicted for a similar violation or any other violation covered by the provisions.”