The case originated in an application (no. 42360/10) against the Slovak Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Slovak nationals, Mr Jozef Javor (“the first applicant”) and Mrs Eva Javorová (“the second applicant”) (jointly “the applicants”), on 15 July 2010.
The applicants were represented by Mr M. Valachovič, a lawyer practising in Bratislava.
The Government of the Slovak Republic (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková.
The applicants alleged that their third-party claim for damages, which they had attached to criminal proceedings concerning an offence of which they were the victim, had not been determined within a reasonable time as provided for by Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 15 September 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicants were spouses born in 1952 and 1954 respectively. In 2013 the first applicant died, following which the second applicant expressed the wish to continue the application both in her own name and in the name of her late husband. The second applicant lives in Bratislava.
On 11 October 2002 the applicants lodged a criminal complaint with the Bratislava V District Office of Investigation alleging that an individual, A., had obtained an amount of money from them in return for the promise of arranging for the renovation of the flat in which they lived, that she had failed to keep that promise, and that she had not even been in the possession of the appropriate business licence for so doing. They considered that the criminal offence of fraud could have been committed in that connection, alleged that they had suffered the equivalent of some 7,300 euros worth of damage, and submitted that A. had refused to compensate them.
On 3 December 2002 the second applicant was questioned by an investigator. According to the transcript of the questioning, she inter alia referred to Article 43 of the 1961 Code of Criminal Procedure (Law 141/1961 Coll., as applicable at the relevant time – “the 1961 CCP” – see paragraph 19 below), submitted that she wished to join the proceedings as a civil party claiming damages, and proposed that the amount of the compensation be determined by a sworn expert.
On 23 January 2003 a criminal investigation was opened into the suspicion of the offence of fraud having been committed by one or more persons unknown in connection with the events mentioned above.
On 13 March 2003 the investigator appointed a sworn expert to establish the value of the pecuniary damage allegedly sustained by the applicants. The expert filed his report on 22 May 2003.
On 4 November 2004 A. was charged but the charges were quashed by the Bratislava V District Office of the Public Prosecution Service (“the PPS”) on 10 January 2005. The matter was thus remitted to the investigation stage.
Meanwhile, on 3 January 2005, the District Office of the PPS had informed the applicants that unjustified delay had been established in the proceedings, that it was due to the existing caseload and the staffing situation, and that the investigator’s attention had been brought to the need to accelerate the proceedings.
In a letter of 5 February 2005 the Bratislava Regional Office of the PPS responded to the applicants’ repeated complaint by accepting that there had been unjustified delay in the proceedings, which had been repeatedly indicated to the investigator. However, except for flagging up the delays to the investigator, notifying the investigator’s superior, and changing the investigator, the PPS had no means of ensuring acceleration of the proceedings.
.  On 21 January 2008 the District Office of the PPS responded to a further complaint from the applicants by again accepting that the investigation was in general vitiated by significant delays. This had repeatedly been indicated to the investigator’s superior, but had not produced the expected improvement. The case had not been reassigned to another investigator because this did not appear to be efficient in view of the staff shortage. However, the investigator had again been reminded of the delays and if no improvement was to be seen, a new investigator would be appointed.
.  On 14 January 2010 the investigator decided to terminate the proceedings. Referring to evidence from the second applicant, five witnesses and the expert, as well as to documentary evidence, he concluded that there was no criminal case to answer. This decision was upheld by the District Office of the PPS on 1 February 2010, following the applicants’ interlocutory appeal. No further appeal was available.
.  Meanwhile, on 6 October 2009, the applicants had lodged a complaint under Article 127 of the Constitution (Law no. 460/1992 Coll., as amended) with the Constitutional Court. They challenged the length of the proceedings on their third-party claim for damages attached to the above criminal proceedings and alleged a violation of the reasonable-time requirement under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and its constitutional equivalent.
.  On 25 March 2010 the Constitutional Court declared the complaint inadmissible. As to the facts, it observed that the second applicant had attached their third-party claim for damages to the proceedings orally in the interview of 3 December 2002. As to the law, the Constitutional Court referred to the Court’s judgment in the case of Krumpel and Krumpelová v. Slovakia (no. 56195/00, 5 July 2005) and acknowledged that an aggrieved party (obeť) of a criminal offence who attached a third-party claim for damages (adhézny nárok) to the criminal proceedings was entitled to the guarantees of the civil limb of Article 6 of the Convention. However, referring to unspecified practice of the ordinary courts and to the nature of things, the Constitutional Court held that it was a condition for the aggrieved party to benefit from the guarantees in question to have made the claim against a specific person and that that person could be identified no earlier than when charges were brought against him or her. The Constitutional Court further referred to its previous case-law on the subject and held specifically that the aggrieved party claiming damages in the criminal proceedings only benefited from the right to a hearing within a reasonable time under Article 6 after a charge had been brought against a specific person. In that regard, the Constitutional Court noted that the charges against A. of 4 November 2004 had been quashed on 10 January 2005 (see paragraph 10 above). Therefore, at the time of the constitutional complaint, the applicants had no longer benefited from the constitutional guarantees relied on.
The decision was served on 12 May 2010 and no appeal lay against it.
The “right to judicial and other legal protection” is laid down in Section (Oddiel) Seven of Part (Hlava) Two, dealing with “basic rights and freedoms”. The relevant part of Article 46 provides as follows:
“1.  Everyone shall be able to assert his or her rights in a procedure provided for by a statute before an independent and impartial court of law and, in cases defined by a statute, before another organ of the Slovak Republic...
...
Conditions and details of judicial and other legal protection shall be provided for by a statute.”
The 1961 CCP was adopted by the National Assembly of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic in 1961. Standing as an aggrieved party in criminal proceedings is governed by the seventh Section (Oddiel) of its second Chapter (Hlava).
Article 43 §§ 1 and 2 provide, inter alia, that an aggrieved party of a criminal offence may attach a thirdparty claim for damages to the criminal proceedings and request that the court convicting the person charged with a criminal offence order the latter to pay compensation for the damage caused to the aggrieved party by the offence. The aggrieved party further has the right to adduce evidence and to comment on it, to inspect the court file, to take part in the hearing and to make submissions.
If a court convicts a person indicted for an offence (obžalovaný) by which pecuniary damage was caused, it usually orders the defendant to pay the aggrieved party damages (Article 228 § 1), unless the evidence taken is not sufficient for making such a ruling, in which case the court refers the aggrieved party to make the claim before civil courts (Article 229 § 1).
The Plenary session of the Supreme Court of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic summarised the existing judicial practice in respect of third-party claims for damages in criminal proceedings at its session of 22 February 1967 under file no. Pls 3/67. This summary was published in the Collection of Judicial Decisions and Standpoints (Zbierka súdnych rozhodnutí a stanovísk) under no. III/1967.
In so far as relevant, the 1967 summary provides that, in order for a criminal court to be able to rule on compensation for damage suffered by the aggrieved party of the offence in question, a claim to that effect has to have been submitted. In other words, no damages may be awarded of the court’s own motion.
In order for the claim to be validly made, it has to be made properly (for a definition of the term “properly” see paragraph 24 below) and in time.
The definition of the earliest possible moment when a third-party claim may be validly made is particularly relevant from the point of view of the statute of limitation. Criminal proceedings often commence in response to a criminal complaint by the aggrieved party who includes a thirdparty claim for damages. The question is thus whether claims for damages so made may be considered as being validly made and whether as such they may serve as a basis for a judicial ruling on damages.
The relevant provisions do not prevent that and, on the contrary, rather indicate that a third-party claim for damages may be validly made from the very outset of criminal proceedings, that is even before a criminal investigation has commenced. The criminal complaint made by an aggrieved party must be considered an integral part of the criminal proceedings, being the first step in it.
In a decision of 1 August 1967, no. 1 Tz 28/67, published in the Collection of the Supreme Court’s decisions under no. R 5/68, the Supreme Court allowed a complaint in the interests of the law in a case in which three individuals had previously been convicted of a criminal offence and ordered to pay damages to the aggrieved party. In so far as relevant, the reasons for the Supreme Court’s decision were that the order for damages had erroneously been directed against all three of the defendants, although the third-party claim had only been filed against two of them. There was accordingly no legal basis for directing the order against the third defendant.
When referring to the defendants, the decision uses the term for the person charged with a criminal offence.
According to a summary of the relevant judicial practice published in the Collection of Judicial Decisions and Standpoints of the Supreme Court under no. 22/1979, a thirdparty claim for damages is properly made if it specifies the defendant against whom it is made, the ground on which it is made, and its amount.
When referring to the defendant, the summary uses the term for the person charged with a criminal offence. Nevertheless, as regards the earliest possible moment when a third-party claim for damages may be included into criminal proceedings, the 1979 summary refers to the 1967 summary and specifically endorses the premise that it is so immediately with the criminal complaint.
For the territory of Slovakia, subject to amendments, the 1961 CCP remained in force until 31 December 2005. In the Czech Republic, subject to amendments, it is still a valid law. The principles formulated in the summary of 1967 were specifically referred to and found to be still applicable by the Supreme Court of the Czech Republic in a series of decisions and judgments, including a decision of 27 April 2011 in an appeal on points of law no. 25 Cdo 3300/2010 (with further references).
As from 1 January 2006, the 1961 CCP was entirely replaced by the 2005 Code. In so far as relevant, the 2005 Code contains provisions (Article 46 §§ 1 and 3) similar to those of the 1961 CCP (see paragraphs 19 and 20 above).
A third-party claim must specify the ground and scope of the claim and may only be attached to the criminal proceedings if the matter of compensation has not already been decided upon in civil or other proceedings (Article 46 §§ 3 and 4).
Pursuant to Article 287 § 1, where a court convicts a person charged with an offence which has caused damage to third persons within the meaning of Article 46 § 1, as a rule it orders him or her to compensate such damage, provided that the claim has been filed correctly and in due time.
Under Article 288 § 1, a court shall refer a person claiming damages to a civil court (or to another authority) if the evidence available is not sufficient to determine that claim or if the taking of further evidence exceeding the scope of the criminal case is required and the criminal proceedings would thereby be unduly prolonged.
According to an article by JUDr. Jozef Čentéš, PhD., published by the Judicial Academy (Justičná akadémia) of the Slovak Republic (Uplatnenie nároku na náhradu škody v adhéznom konaní), for a third-party claim for damages to be valid, it has to be attached to the underlying criminal proceedings in good time. The 2005 CCP does not regulate specifically when at the earliest is an aggrieved party entitled to attach a third-party claim to the criminal proceedings. However, in the author’s view, its provisions are to be understood so that the condition of being lodged in due time is fulfilled when the thirdparty claim is included in a criminal complaint. Judicial practice indicates that the aggrieved party must make the third-party claim against a specific person charged with a criminal offence. Without this condition being fulfilled, the criminal court has no power to rule on the aggrieved party’s compensation. In that respect, the article refers to the Supreme Court’s decision of 1 August 1967, published in the collection of its decisions under no. R 5/68 (see paragraph 23 above).
Under Article 83, where proceedings have commenced in a specific matter, the same matter cannot be made the subject of other judicial proceedings.
If a third-party claim for damages is duly lodged in criminal proceedings and if the aggrieved party properly pursues it, it is considered a pending matter for the purposes of Article 83 of the Code (Collection of Judicial Decisions and Standpoints no. 22/1979, R 31/1974 and R 29/85).
.  Under Article 112, if creditors make and duly pursue a claim in respect of their rights before a court or another authority, the statute of limitations is stayed from the day the claim is made.
This includes the submission of a civil-party claim for damages in criminal proceedings including in their pretrial stage (see, for example, Collection of Judicial Decisions and Standpoints Nos. III/1967, 131/1974 and 29/1985 and Selection of Decisions and Standpoints (Výber rozhodnutí a stanovísk) No. 27/1984) (for more detail see also paragraphs 21 and 22 above).
The Constitutional Court has held (see for example its judgments in cases nos. I. ÚS 157/02; III. ÚS 183/05; I. ÚS 18/06 and I. ÚS 67/2010) that a third party who attached criminal proceedings with a claim for damages has the right to a hearing “without unjustified delay” (Article 48 § 2 of the Constitution) as such a duly lodged claim excludes the possibility of having it decided upon in civil proceedings (Article 83 of the Code of Civil Procedure).
In a decision of 12 December 2013 in a case no. II. US 660/2013, relying on its previous decisions nos. I. US 212/07, III. US 109/06, III. US 254/10, III. US 508/12 and IV. US 188/13, the Constitutional Court upheld the principle that, in accordance with the Court’s judgment in Krumpel and Krumpelová (cited above), an aggrieved party of a criminal offence, who had attached a third-party claim for damages to the criminal proceedings, was entitled to the guarantees of the civil limb of Article 6 of the Convention. However, the aggrieved party only benefited from the right to a hearing within a reasonable time under Article 6 after a charge had been brought against a specific person. Despite a direct argument by the complainant to that effect, the Constitutional Court gave no answer to the fact that in its judgment in the case of Bíro v. Slovakia (no. 2) (no. 57678/00, § 44, 27 June 2006), the Court had found that, as a matter for principle, civil-party claims for damages made in Slovakia jointly with or subsequently to the lodging of a criminal complaint enjoy the guarantees in question from the moment they were made.