The case originated in an application (no. 3450/09) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Mikhail Yegorovich Sorokin (“the applicant”), on 26 December 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr I. Tokarev, a lawyer practising in Toretsk. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
On 14 February 2018 notice of the applicant’s complaint under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention concerning the alleged unfairness of the proceedings in his case was given to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1957 and lives in Toretsk.
In December 2007 the applicant lodged a claim with the Dzerzhynsk Court against the Social Insurance Fund (“the Fund”), seeking damages for injuries caused by a work-related accident.
By a judgment of 17 January 2008, the above court allowed the claim in part and awarded the applicant certain amounts in damages. The applicant and the Fund both sought to appeal against that judgment.
In particular, on 25 January 2008 the applicant lodged through the Dzerzhynsk Court a statement of intent to lodge an appeal (“the statement of intent”; заява про апеляційне оскарження). The copy of the statement of intent submitted to the Court bears the Dzerzhynsk Court’s stamp with reference number 1561 showing 25 January 2008 as the date of receipt. On 13 February 2008 the applicant lodged the appeal itself, in which he requested that the appellate court quash the judgment of 17 January 2008 and award him the claimed damages in full. A copy of the appeal bears the Dzerzhynsk Court’s stamp, with 13 February 2008 showing as the date of receipt. The applicant stated that no separate procedural decisions had been made about his appeal because it had been mislaid by the court.
In a ruling of 18 March 2008 the Donetsk Regional Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”) examined the appeal lodged by the Fund, rejected it as unsubstantiated and upheld the judgment of 17 January 2008. The ruling did not mention the applicant’s appeal, and only stated that at the hearing, which was held on the same day, the applicant and his representative had contested the Fund’s appeal and had asked the court to reject it.
According to the transcript of the court hearing on 18 March 2008, the applicant’s representative stated during the hearing that the applicant had lodged the statement of intent on 25 January 2008 and the appeal itself on 13 February 2008. She also stated that they were not challenging the judgment of 17 January 2008 as regards the application of the law but rather were merely seeking an award of the full amount of damages claimed by the applicant. The applicant’s representative also asked the Court of Appeal to reject the Fund’s appeal. The applicant submitted that at the hearing his representative had also produced a copy of his appeal and had asked the Court of Appeal to join it to the case file; however, the latter refused to do so.
The applicant appealed in cassation to the Supreme Court of Ukraine. A copy of the appeal in cassation submitted to the Court shows that the applicant had dated it 17 May 2008. In it the applicant stated that he had lodged an appeal against the judgment of 17 January 2008 but that when he had arrived at the appellate hearing on 18 March 2008, it transpired that his appeal had been mislaid and his submissions had therefore not been examined by the Court of Appeal. He thus asked the Supreme Court to quash the ruling of 18 March 2008 and to remit the case for fresh examination.
On 27 June 2008 the Supreme Court refused to grant leave for the applicant’s appeal in cassation. It stated that the Court of Appeal had examined the appeal lodged by the Fund, but that the applicant had not personally appealed against the judgment of 17 January 2008 and for this reason the case could not be reviewed in cassation. It did not address the applicant’s argument that he had indeed lodged an appeal, but that it had been mislaid. The decision of the Supreme Court indicated that the applicant’s appeal in cassation had been lodged in “April 2007”.
Article 220 of the 2004 Code of Civil Procedure of Ukraine (“the Code”) provided at the material time that upon the request of the parties or of its own motion a trial court could adopt an additional judgment if it had not previously ruled on a claim in respect of which a party had provided evidence and explanations.
Article 296 provided that a statement of intent to lodge an appeal and an actual appeal against a trial court’s judgment were to be lodged with the appellate court through the trial court which had adopted that judgment. The latter would then forward the appeal to the appellate court.