The application concerns the alleged unfairness of civil proceedings as a result of the upholding by the Chișinău Court of Appeal of an appeal lodged out of time. It raises questions under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1958 and lives in Chișinău. She was represented by Ms N. Hriplivîi, a lawyer practising in Chișinău.
The Government were represented by their Agent ad-interim at the time, Ms R. Revencu.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant divorced her husband, R., in 1996. In 2003 she sold a plot of land to third parties. Shortly after that R. sought the annulment of the sale contract, arguing that the land was joint marital property.
On 31 March 2006 the Centru District Court rejected R.’s claims as illfounded. R. appealed, but on 14 May 2006 the Chisinau Court of Appeal issued a procedural ruling (încheiere) finding that R. had not paid the court fees and obliging him to do so within twenty days from the date of receiving its ruling. According to a handwritten note by R. on that ruling, he received its copy on 5 October 2006 and undertook to pay the court fees within twenty days.
On 23 November 2006 the Chisinau Court of Appeal found that R. had failed to comply with its ruling of 14 May 2006, namely to pay the court fees within twenty days, and dismissed his appeal on that ground.
On 4 December 2006 R. lodged a new appeal against the judgment of 31 March 2006.
On 8 May 2007, after holding a hearing in the case, the Chișinău Court of Appeal adopted a judgment by which it upheld R.’s appeal and quashed the Centru District Court’s judgment of 31 March 2006. It appears that the applicant was present at the hearing and asked for the appeal to be dismissed. She did not argue that the appeal had been lodged out of time.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court of Justice in which she contended, inter alia, that the Court of Appeal’s upholding of R.’s appeal had been abusive because the appeal had been lodged out of time.
On 30 January 2008 the Supreme Court of Justice dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law and upheld the Court of Appeal’s judgment. The court noted that the argument about R.’s appeal being late could not be raised in cassation proceedings because the applicant had failed to raise it before the Court of Appeal. One of the judges on the panel (I.C.) wrote a dissenting opinion, in which she expressed the view that the Supreme Court of Justice should have upheld the applicant’s contention about R.’s appeal being lodged out of time and should have quashed the judgment of the Court of Appeal. She argued that respecting a time-limit for lodging an appeal was an imperative obligation and that, according to the law, if there had been no request for the extension of the time-limit, the Court of Appeal had been under a duty to dismiss the late appeal on its own motion.
After the annulment of the sale of the plot of land, R. initiated new proceedings against the applicant seeking the recovery of part of the value of that plot. Those proceedings are pending to date.
According to Article 362 (1) of the Code of Civil Procedure in force at the material time, the time-limit for lodging an appeal was twenty days calculated from the date of the communication of the reasoned judgment.
According to Article 369 (1) (b) of the Civil Procedure Code, the court vested with the right to examine an appeal must dismiss it if it has been lodged out of time and the applicant has not requested an extension of the time-limit for lodging it.
According to the case-law of the Supreme Court of Justice, the issue of time-limits for lodging appeals and appeals on points of law is, unlike issues relating to the merits of the case, a matter of public policy which is to be examined by the courts on their own motion, irrespective of whether the parties are raising it or not (see, for instance, the judgments of the Supreme Court of Justice in the cases No. 2r-951/12 S.A. “CET-Nord” vs Ina Soboli and No. 2r-196/15, Mihai Movilă vs Î.S. “Calea Ferată din Moldova”).