The applicant company complained, in particular, that the quashing, upon an extraordinary appeal on points of law filed by the Prosecutor General, of a final and binding judgment in its favour was contrary to its rights under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
The applicant company has its registered seat in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. It was represented by Mr A. Kucek, a lawyer practising in Bratislava.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 13 March 2007, X. initiated proceedings for damages against the State, relying on the latter’s liability for an irregular conduct and unlawful decision of a tax authority related to the registration of the company Y. as VAT payer. The damages claimed included real damages sustained by Y. in the tax proceedings, claim which X. as one of Y.’s shareholders had been in 2006 transferred by Y., and the loss of profit of almost 4 million euros allegedly sustained by X. due to the difference between the sale price of his business share and the profit expected to be gained by Y.
On 18 February 2009, the Bratislava V District Court partially granted the action, rejecting as unfounded the State’s objection that the claim was statute-barred and ordering it to pay X. a sum of almost 4,5 million euros.
By a contract of 27 April 2009, X. transferred the above claim to the applicant company, which was authorised to enter the proceedings on 18 June 2012, upon X.’s request dated 4 June 2012.
On 30 June 2009, the Bratislava Regional Court fully upheld the first-instance court judgment.
Subsequently, the State lodged an appeal on points of law (dovolanie), which was rejected by the Supreme Court on 15 March 2012. It also addressed two petitions to the Prosecutor General inviting him to exercise his discretionary power to challenge the above judgments by way of an extraordinary appeal on points of law (mimoriadne dovolanie) to the Supreme Court.
On 17 August 2010, the Prosecutor General lodged such appeal, being of the view that the courts had reached incorrect legal conclusions since the conditions to grant damages to the plaintiff had not been met and the starting point of the statutory limitation period had been wrongly determined.
On 20 March 2012, the Supreme Court quashed the impugned judgments and remitted the matter to the first-instance court. After having from its own initiative examined whether the proceedings had been flawed within the meaning of Article 237 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the Supreme Court mainly considered that the lower courts’ judgments had not been duly reasoned, notably as regards the defendant’s objection of statutory limitation and the fulfilment of the conditions for the State’s liability, and that, as such, they did not comply with the requirements of the right to judicial protection.
By a judgment of 17 January 2013, the District Court again ordered the State to pay the applicant company a sum of almost 4,5 million euros. In its appeal, the State objected again that X.’s claim was statute-barred and unsubstantiated.
By a judgment of 24 June 2014, final on 22 August 2014, the Regional Court upheld the above decision of the District Court, including the latter’s conclusion that the action had been filed within the statutory limitation period.
The State lodged an appeal on points of law, repeating the objections stated in the appeal, and asked again the Prosecutor General to challenge the incorrect legal assessment made in the above judgments by way of an extraordinary appeal on points of law. After its first petition was set aside by the Prosecutor General because the conditions were not considered to have been met, the State filed a second petition insisting on the fact that an incorrect legal assessment could not be successfully challenged through the appeal on points of law.
Such extraordinary appeal was lodged on 4 June 2015; according to the Prosecutor General, the courts had failed to distinguish between the two claims sought (i.e. real damages and loss of profit) and between their original holders (i.e. Y. and X.), and they had wrongly held the State liable for the loss of profit alleged by X.
On 15 December 2016, the Supreme Court rejected the State’s appeal on points of law as inadmissible, having found no reason for admissibility (incorrect legal assessment not being accepted as such reason) and no procedural errors. It found that, considered together with the District Court judgment, the Regional Court had duly reasoned all its conclusions and responded in detail to the appellant’s arguments; the fact that the defendant had been of a different view and that the reasoning of the courts’ decisions had not met its expectations did not render those decisions unreviewable or arbitrary.
Upon the Prosecutor General’s extraordinary appeal, the Supreme Court decided on 31 July 2017 to quash the impugned judgments, considering that they were vitiated by manifest errors in the application of the substantive law (statutory limitation, lack of evidence as to the existence of damage, causal link between damage and authorities’ conduct) which made the courts deviate, without due reasoning, from the established practice. After having considered the relevant case-law, the Supreme Court considered that those flaws amounted to fundamental errors which were incompatible with the constitutional order and fair trial guarantees and allowed for departing from the principle of legal certainty. Thus the matter was remitted back to the District Court for a fresh examination.
On 26 October 2017, the applicant company challenged the above decision of the Supreme Court by a constitutional complaint. Relying on Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, it asserted that the extraordinary appeal was unsubstantiated, contrary to the principle of legal certainty and clearly inadmissible, given that the defendant had had a possibility to seek redress through an appeal on points of law. The applicant company further maintained that the Supreme Court went beyond the scope of the extraordinary appeal and that its decision was arbitrary and non-compliant with the Constitution and the Court’s case-law.
By a decision of 16 May 2018 (I. ÚS 152/2018), the Constitutional Court dismissed the constitutional complaint mainly as manifestly-ill founded, referring to the unifying opinion of its plenary no. PLz. ÚS 3/2015 and to the Court’s relevant case-law. The Constitutional Court considered that the impugned decision of the Supreme Court was comprehensibly and thoroughly reasoned and supported by the relevant practice. Moreover, the Prosecutor General’s extraordinary appeal was based on a reason (incorrect legal assessment of the case) which could not be successfully relied upon by the defendant in its appeal on points of law; thus the protection of the defendant’s rights could not have been secured by any other means and the Supreme Court’s intervention was justified.
The relevant domestic law and practice and European texts have been summarised in the Court’s judgment in, inter alia, the case of DRAFT - OVA a.s. v. Slovakia (no. 72493/10, §§ 39-56 and 58-61, 9 June 2015).
Pursuant to Article 35 § 2 (j) and (l) of the Code of Civil Procedure (no. 99/1963 Coll.), as applicable at the relevant time, the prosecutor could enter into any pending proceedings to which the State was a party or which concerned the State’s liability for damage caused by an unlawful decision or irregular conduct of a public authority.
On 18 March 2015, the plenary of the Slovak Constitutional Court adopted a unifying opinion no. PLz. ÚS 3/2015 in which it held that, regard being paid to the principle of legal certainty which was set up by a final decision, to the principle of subsidiarity enshrined in Article 127 § 1 of the Constitution, as well as to the exceptional nature of the extraordinary appeal on points of law as an extraordinary remedy lodged by the Prosecutor General, the admissibility of such appeal in civil proceedings was acceptable only if the party to the proceedings exhausted all ordinary and extraordinary remedies which were available to him/her and which he/she could effectively use to protect his/her rights and legitimate interests.
In the joint observations no. 94 of its Civil and Commercial Law Divisions adopted on 20 October 2015, the Supreme Court stated that the procedural admissibility of the extraordinary appeal on points of law filed upon a party’s petition in civil proceedings is conditioned by the fact that the party in question had unsuccessfully used all available ordinary and extraordinary remedies likely to secure him/her a more favourable decision. If such possibility was not used, the extraordinary appeal had to be dismissed.
The new Code of Civil Contentious Procedure (Law no. 160/2015), adopted on 21 May 2015, entered into force on 1 July 2016, i.e. after the relevant procedural steps taken by the applicant company in this case. According to its section 458, the extraordinary appeal on points of law lodged by the Prosecutor General shall be admissible only if a final judicial decision breaches the right to a fair trial or suffers from errors resulting in a severe violation of that right on account of the fact that the legal conclusions reached are arbitrary or untenable and if the need to quash such decision prevails over the interest in preserving its inalterability and the principle of legal certainty.