The case originated in an application (no. 34310/13) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksey Nikolayevich Mandrigelya (“the applicant”), on 8 May 2013.
The applicant was represented by Ms Marina Alekseyevna Dubrovina, a lawyer practising in Novorossiysk. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 30 June 2017 the Government were given notice of the issues under Articles 10 and 11 of the Convention and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1989 and lives in Krasnodar.
The applicant, a member of an environmental NGO, was a candidate for an opposition party in the regional legislative election of 14 October 2012.
According to the applicant, because he was dissatisfied with the largescale fraud alleged to have been committed during the election, on 16 October 2012 he staged a solo demonstration at the central square in Krasnodar; he lit a candle and held a funeral wreath, thus expressing his sorrow about the election.
Several police officers approached the applicant and, allegedly using physical force, took him to a police station. The applicant was allowed to leave the station as soon as he informed the police that he still had election candidate status and thus, under Russian law, could not be subject to an ordinary escort or arrest procedure.
By a judgment of 6 November 2012 a justice of the peace convicted the applicant under Article 19.3 of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”) (non-compliance with a lawful order of a law-enforcement officer) and sentenced him to fifteen days’ detention. The relevant part of the judgment reads as follows:
“[The defendant] disobeyed police officers, behaved in an aggressive manner, refused to go to the police station for an administrative-offence record to be drawn up; he did not react to the order to stop, thereby disobeying lawful orders on the part of police officers ...
The defendant pleaded not guilty. His guilt is confirmed by the administrativeoffence record and reports by the police officers.”
The applicant appealed, arguing that the trial judgment had not specified which specific orders or actions the applicant had disobeyed; in particular, it had not been specified in the trial judgment what the applicant had been ordered to stop; the trial judgment contained no reasoning as to the legality of those orders or actions.
On 9 November 2012 the Leninskiy District Court of Krasnodar upheld the judgment, stating as follows:
“As part of a group of some thirty people the defendant participated in a presumed public event that was held in violation of the Public Events Act ... He refused to comply with [the police officer’s] lawful request to cease the commission of the offence and to follow him to the police station.”
In separate proceedings the applicant was prosecuted for an offence under Article 20.2 § 2 of the CAO for organising and running a group event (in the form of a static demonstration) without giving prior notice to the competent local authority, in breach of the Public Events Act.
The applicant stated that he had come to the square in front of the regional legislature alone to “mourn” the fair elections by way of holding a wreath and burning a candle; the square was full of other people, including journalists and the police; before that he had had a telephone conversation with M. telling her about his intention to go and mourn the elections; he had told the same to Kh., a journalist, who had decided to come and take photographs of the applicant.
M. stated at the trial hearing that she had come to the square to mourn the elections; she had seen the applicant and others holding candles; others (passers-by) had joined them; the police had told her to stop but she had not understood what exactly.
Kh. stated at the trial that he had been present at the square as a journalist and as a blogger interested in covering political events; the applicant had informed him about a planned event; he had joined the applicant and some others on the way to the square.
Officer Ch. stated at the trial that he had seen the applicant conducting himself as a leader during the event, evident on account of him being in the centre of the group and holding a wreath (while others had had lit candles); the applicant had given instructions to others.
Officer R. stated that he had first seen the applicant and two or three others coming to the square; they had then been joined by other people; the applicant had behaved as a leader vis-à-vis the others, who had not seemed to be there by chance.
According to those and some other testimonies, between twenty and thirty people were present at the square at around 8 p.m. on 16 October 2012.
By a judgment of 20 December 2012 a justice of the peace convicted the applicant under Article 20.2 § 2 of the CAO and sentenced him to a fine of 22,000 Russian roubles (approximately 540 euros at the time). The court held as follows:
(a)  The event in question had been held in public; it had been accessible to everyone and had been peaceful; by its nature it had fallen within the realm of a static demonstration and had been aimed at attracting the attention of other citizens to the recent elections; the event had been held in front of the regional administration offices with recourse to means of visual expression (such as the wreath with a specific message and lit candles);
(b)  The applicant had been the event’s organiser, in view of the testimony of M., Ch., R., Kh. and some others. The applicant had informed potential participants of the event by telephone and via the Internet, thereby conducting pre-event campaigning. The applicant’s leadership role could be seen on the video recording of the event, particularly when the applicant had engaged in talks with the police when he had stated “We have come to mourn” on several occasions;
(c)  The statutory requirement addressed to organisers of public events to give notification prior to an event was aimed at ensuring the peaceful and safe running of a public event without burdening rights and interests of others who were not taking part in the event; this requirement was also aimed at preventing disorder and ensuring security.
On 5 March 2013 the Bryukhovetskiy District Court of Krasnodar Region upheld the judgment. The appellate court held that the applicant had exercised his rights to freedom of expression and freedom of peaceful assembly while failing to comply with a statutory obligation imposed on public events’ organisers, namely to give prior notification about the impugned public event.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law and practice see Kasparov and Others v. Russia (no. 21613/07, § 35, 3 October 2013); Navalnyy and Yashin v. Russia (no. 76204/11, §§ 43-44, 4 December 2014); Novikova and Others v. Russia (nos. 25501/07 and 4 others, §§ 67-69, 26 April 2016); and Lashmankin and Others v. Russia (nos. 57818/09 and 14 others, §§ 216312, 7 February 2017).
The provisions of the Public Events Act as in force at the material time directly relevant to the present case are set out below.
Section 2(1) defined a “public event” as an open, peaceful event accessible to all, organised at the initiative of citizens of the Russian Federation, political parties, other public associations, or religious associations with the aims of expressing or developing opinions freely and voicing demands on issues related to political, economic, social or cultural life in the country, and issues related to foreign policy.
The Public Events Act distinguished between five types of a public event: a gathering (собрание); a meeting (митинг); a demonstration (демонстрация); a march (шествие); and a “static demonstration” (пикетирование) (for further details, see Lashmankin and Others, cited above, § 219).
Section 2(6) defined a static demonstration as a form of public expression of opinion that does not involve movement or the use of loudspeaker equipment, where one or more citizens with placards, banners and other means of visual expression station themselves near the target object of the static demonstration.
In accordance with sections 5(4)(1) and 7(1)(3), notification in respect of a static demonstration involving several persons must be submitted no later than three days before the intended static demonstration or, if the end of the time-limit falls on a Sunday or a public holiday, no later than four days before the intended static demonstration. No notification was required for “gatherings” and static demonstrations involving one person.
In accordance with section 7(3), notification must contain the following elements: (a) the purpose of a public event; (b) its form; (c) its place; (d) its date and the time of its beginning and ending; (e) an envisioned number of participants; (f) methods by employing which the organiser of a public event intends to ensure that public order be maintained and emergency medical aid be made available; (g) the full name of the organiser of a public event, his or her address and phone number; (h) the full names of persons authorised by the organiser of a public event to represent him or her in the course of a public event; (i) the date of submitting the notification.
Pursuant to sections 2 and 12 of the Police Act, the police acts in the following areas: preventing (предупреждение) and putting an end to (пресечение) crimes and administrative offences, maintaining order in public places and carrying out action relating to maintaining order and preventing and ending offences.
Pursuant to section 11(2) and section 12(1) of the Police Act, the police have the following duties: to arrive without delay to the site of an administrative offence, to put an end to unlawful actions (including administrative offences), to compile documents establishing the circumstances of an administrative offence, to ensure the safekeeping of evidence relating to that offence.
Pursuant to lines 1, 7, 8 and 13 of section 13(1), the police are authorised to require others to stop unlawful actions, to require citizens (who are not participating in lawful assemblies) to disperse, to escort a person to (that is to say to force that person’s physical arrival at) a police station to decide whether that person should be subjected to an arrest procedure (where that matter cannot be decided on the spot), to compile an administrative-offence record, to gather evidence, to apply other preventive measures provided for by the relevant legislation on administrative offences.