The case originated in two applications (nos. 17160/06 and 35548/06) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Ukrainian nationals, Mr Oleg Pavlovich Peretyaka (“the first applicant”) and Mr Vladimir Andreyevich Sheremetyev (“the second applicant”), on 11 April and 9 August 2006 respectively.
The first applicant was represented by Ms N. Tselovalnichenko, a lawyer practising in Lugansk. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Y. Zaytsev, of the Ministry of Justice.
On 1 October 2009 the President of the Fifth Section decided to give notice of the applications to the Government. It was also decided to examine the merits of the applications at the same time as their admissibility (Article 29 § 1).
The second applicant requested that the Chamber hold a hearing in the case. The Chamber decided, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court, that no hearing was required.
The first applicant was born in 1958 and lives in Lugansk. The second applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Slatino.
In April 2005 the first applicant instituted proceedings in the Leninskyi District Court of Lugansk against the Lugansk Regional Enlistment Office, seeking recalculation of his pension.
On 12 July 2005 the court rejected the applicant's claim as not based on the law. On 13 October 2005 the Lugansk Regional Court of Appeal considered the case under the rules of civil procedure and upheld the lower court's judgment. In the operative part of its decision, the Court of Appeal stated that the applicant had the right to challenge the decision before the Supreme Court within two months.
On 1 December 2005 the applicant submitted an appeal in cassation to the Supreme Court, to which he annexed copies of the lower courts' decisions.
On 26 December 2005 a judge of the Supreme Court, relying on paragraphs 7 and 10 of the Final and Transitional Provisions of the Code of Administrative Justice, ruled that the applicant's appeal in cassation should be remitted to the .
By a ruling of 24 March 2006, a judge of the , relying on Article 212 of the Code of Administrative Justice, dismissed the applicant's appeal in cassation as having been lodged out of time.
In October 2004 the second applicant instituted proceedings in the Leninskyi District Court of Kharkiv against the Kharkiv Regional Enlistment Office, seeking recalculation of his pension.
On 20 May 2005 the court rejected the applicant's claim as not based on the law. On 13 September 2005 the Kharkiv Regional Court of Appeal considered the case under the rules of civil procedure and upheld the lower court's judgment. In the operative part of its decision, the Court of Appeal stated that the applicant had the right to challenge the decision before the Supreme Court within two months.
On 11 November 2005 the applicant submitted an appeal in cassation to the Supreme Court, to which he annexed copies of the lower courts' decisions.
By letter dated 30 November 2005, the Supreme Court informed the applicant that his appeal in cassation had been remitted to the .
By a ruling of 11 April 2006, a judge of the , relying on Article 212 of the Code of Administrative Justice, dismissed the applicant's appeal in cassation as having been lodged out of time.
Article 125
“In  the system of courts of general jurisdiction is formed in accordance with the principles of territoriality and specialisation.
The Supreme Court of Ukraine is the highest judicial body in the [hierarchy] of courts of general jurisdiction.
The respective higher courts are the higher judicial bodies of specialised courts.
Courts of appeal and local courts shall operate in accordance with the law.
The creation of extraordinary and special courts shall not be permitted.”
Article 1. Legislation on civil court procedure
“... Legislation on civil court procedure shall establish procedures for the consideration of cases concerning disputes arising from legal relations in the civil, family, labour and collective farming spheres, in addition to cases concerning administrative legal relations...”
Article 319. The court of cassation instance
“The court of cassation instance is the Supreme Court of Ukraine.”
Article 320. The right to challenge judicial decisions in cassation
“The parties and other persons taking part in the case ... have the right to challenge in cassation judgments and rulings adopted by a first-instance court which have been considered by a court of appeal, as well as rulings and judgments of the court of appeal.
The grounds for [an appeal] in cassation are the wrongful application by the court of norms of substantive law or a violation of norms of procedural law.”
Article 321. The term for lodging an appeal in cassation
“An appeal in cassation ... shall be lodged within one month of the day of the pronouncement of the ruling or judgment of the court of appeal.
If the time-limit ... has been missed for reasons which the court recognises as justified, the court may, at the request of the person who lodged the appeal ... renew that time-limit for a period not exceeding one year from the day on which the right to an appeal in cassation arose...”
Article 15. Jurisdiction of the courts as regards civil cases
“1.  The courts shall consider, within the framework of civil court procedure, cases ...concerning legal relations in the civil, housing, land, family and labour spheres, as well as other legal relations, provided they do not fall to be considered under the rules of a different type of court procedure...”
Article 67. Types of procedural terms
“1.  The terms during which procedural acts are to be performed shall be set by the law, and if they have not been set by the law [the terms shall be] set by the court.”
Article 69. Start of the running of procedural terms
“1.  A procedural term shall start running on the day after the calendar date of the event [to which the term is linked]...”
Article 70. Expiry of procedural terms
“...
A term [expressed] in months shall expire on the same date of the last month of the term...
The last day of the term shall run until [midnight]...
The term shall not be considered to be missed if the claim, complaint, other documents or materials, or money have been submitted to the post office or transferred by other means of communication before its expiry.”
Article 73. Renewal or extension of procedural terms
“1.  The court shall renew or extend the term ... at the request of a party ... if it has been missed for justifiable reasons.
The question concerning renewal or extension of the expired term shall be decided by the court ... to which a document or evidence was due to be submitted. The persons taking part in the proceedings shall be informed of the place and time of consideration of that question. The presence of those persons is not compulsory.
A document or evidence concerning which the request [for renewal or extension of the term] has been lodged may be submitted together with the request...”
Article 323. The court of cassation instance
“1.  The court of cassation instance in civil cases is the court which is envisaged by the Judiciary Act as the court of cassation in such cases.”
Article 324. The right to challenge [judicial decisions] in cassation
“1.  The parties and other persons taking part in the case ... have the right to challenge in cassation:
1)  judgments of the court of first instance, after they have been reviewed on appeal, judgments and rulings of the appeal court adopted [in the course of] the consideration [of the case] on appeal...
2)  rulings of the court of first instance ... after they have been reviewed on appeal and rulings of the appeal court if they preclude further proceedings in the case.
The grounds for [an appeal] in cassation are the wrongful application by the court of norms of substantive law or a violation of norms of procedural law.”
Article 325. The term for lodging an appeal in cassation
“1.  An appeal in cassation ... may be lodged within two months of the day on which the judgment (ruling) of the appeal court becomes final.
If the term ... has been missed for the reasons which the court recognised to be justifiable, the court of cassation instance may, at the request of the person who lodged the appeal, renew that term for a period not exceeding one year from the day on which the right to an appeal in cassation arose.
An appeal in cassation lodged out of time ... shall be returned by the court of cassation to the person who lodged it, if that person does not raise a question of renewal of the term and also if the [request for] renewal is refused.
The question of renewal of the term ... shall be determined by a ruling of the court of cassation instance.”
Chapter XI. Final and transitional provisions
“...
Claims and complaints in the cases concerning administrative [matters] ... lodged before the entry into force of this Code ... shall be considered pursuant to [the rules of] the Code of Administrative Justice...”
Article 15. Jurisdiction of the administrative courts as regards administrative cases
“1.  The administrative courts shall enjoy jurisdiction over:
1)  disputes between physical persons or legal entities and subjects vested with public powers concerning the latter's decisions ... actions or lack of action;
2)  disputes relating to the recruitment, careers and termination of public service of citizens...”
Article 20. Jurisdiction of the particular instances of administrative courts
“...
The Higher Administrative Court of  shall review in cassation the judicial decisions of local administrative courts and administrative courts of appeal...”
Article 102. Renewal and extension of procedural terms
“1.  A court may renew or extend a term missed for justifiable reasons ... at the request of the person taking part in the proceedings...”
Article 103. Calculation of procedural terms
“1.  A procedural term shall start running on the day after the respective calendar date or the event [to which the term is linked]...
A term [expressed] in months shall expire on the same date of the last month of the term...
The last day of the term shall run until [midnight]...
The term shall not be considered to be missed if the claim, complaint, other documents or materials, or money have been submitted to the post office or transferred by other means of communication before its expiry...”
Article 210. The court of cassation instance
“1.  The court of cassation instance in administrative cases is the Higher Administrative Court of Ukraine.”
Article 211. The right to challenge [judicial decisions] in cassation
“1.  The parties and other persons taking part in the case ... have the right to challenge in cassation  judicial decisions of the court of first instance after reviewing them on appeal, as well as judicial decisions of the court of appeal, in full or in part...
A violation by a court of norms of substantive or procedural law shall constitute a ground for [an appeal] in cassation.”
Article 212. Order and terms for lodging an appeal in cassation
“1.  An appeal in cassation ... shall be submitted directly to the administrative court of cassation.
An appeal in cassation shall be lodged within one month of the day on which the judicial decision of the court of appeal becomes final...
An appeal in cassation submitted out of time... shall be left unconsidered if the court of cassation does not find reasons for its renewal at the request of the person who lodged the appeal in cassation...”
Article 236. The right to appeal against court decisions in the light of exceptional circumstances
“1.  Parties ... may challenge in the light of exceptional circumstances court decisions in administrative cases after their review in cassation and decisions of the court of cassation before the Supreme Court of Ukraine.
Decisions of the Supreme Court of Ukraine in administrative cases may also be challenged in the light of exceptional circumstances [on the basis] set out in subparagraph 2 of Article 237 of this Code.
...”
Article 237. Grounds for [an appeal] made in the light of exceptional circumstances
“1.  Court decisions in administrative cases may be reviewed in the light of exceptional circumstances by the Supreme Court of Ukraine, if they are challenged on the [following] grounds:
(1)  dissimilar application of the same provision of law by courts of cassation;
(2)  a finding by an international judicial body that the courts' decisions [in a case] are infringing 's international obligations.”
Article 238. The term for lodging an appeal made in the light of exceptional circumstances
“1.  An appeal shall be lodged within a month of the discovery of the circumstances capable of serving as grounds for [appeal] in the light of exceptional circumstances.
An appeal lodged after the expiry of [that] term ... shall be left without consideration if, upon a request by the appellant, the Supreme Court of Ukraine finds no grounds to renew [the term]...”
Article 239. Admissibility of an appeal made in the light of exceptional circumstances
“1.  A panel of at least five judges of the judicial chamber of the Supreme Court dealing with administrative cases ... shall decide on the admissibility of an appeal made in the light of exceptional circumstances within fifteen days of its receipt and without summoning the persons taking part in the case. At the same time [the panel] may decide on [the question of] the renewal of the term for lodging an appeal made in the light of exceptional circumstances.
An appeal shall be considered admissible ... if at least three judges have reached [such a conclusion].
...”
Article 242. Powers of the Supreme Court in relation to an [appeal made] in the light of exceptional circumstances
“1.  ...[A] panel of judges ... shall adopt, by a majority vote, one of the following decisions...
(1)  allowing the appeal in full or in part;
(2)  dismissing the appeal.
...
The decision of the Supreme Court of Ukraine [concerning an appeal made in the light of exceptional circumstances] is final and may not be appealed against, save for in the circumstances envisaged by Article 237 paragraph 2 of this Code.”
Article 243. A decision of the Supreme Court allowing an appeal
“1.  The Supreme Court of  shall allow an appeal if it discovers a dissimilar application of the same provision of law by courts of cassation.
If the Supreme Court of Ukraine establishes that the contested court decision is unlawful, it shall quash it in full or in part and remit the case for fresh consideration to the court of first, appeal or cassation instance, as appropriate, depending on which court was the first to infringe a provision of substantive or procedural law resulting in the incorrect determination of the case. The Supreme Court of Ukraine may also quash decisions of courts of appeal or cassation and leave wrongfully quashed decisions of courts of first or appeal instance in force.
...
The decision of the Supreme Court of Ukraine allowing an appeal shall be reasoned.”
Chapter VII. Final and transitional provisions
“1.  This Code shall enter into force as from 1 September 2005...
Before the district administrative courts and administrative courts of appeal start to operate, cases falling within their jurisdiction shall be decided by the respective local and appeal courts of general jurisdiction ... pursuant to the rules of the Code of Administrative Justice of ...
After the entry into force of this Code, claims and complaints in cases concerning administrative [matters] ... as well as appeals and appeals in cassation ... in such cases, which were lodged, but not determined, before the entry into force of the Code of Administrative Justice of Ukraine, shall be considered pursuant to [the rules of] this Code.
Such claims or complaints ... may not be left without further action or returned pursuant to this Code, if they were lodged in compliance with the relevant requirements and jurisdictional rules established by the Code of Civil Procedure of Ukraine of 1963...
Appeals in cassation against judgments of the courts of first instance in the situations envisaged in paragraph 7 of this Chapter which were lodged before the entry into force of this Code and which have not been considered by the Supreme Court of Ukraine shall be referred to the Higher Administrative Court of Ukraine...”
Section 47. The Supreme Court of  - the highest judicial body
“1.  The Supreme Court of Ukraine is the highest judicial body within the [hierarchy] of courts of general jurisdiction...
The Supreme Court of :
1)  ..shall consider cases in cassation in the situations envisaged by law...”
Chapter VII. Final and transitional provisions
“...
9)  ...The chamber of the Supreme Court of Ukraine which hears civil cases shall consider civil cases in cassation until such time as another court [vested with functions] of a court of cassation in civil cases is determined by legislation.”