The case originated in an application (no. 69533/01) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Nadezhda Korneyevna Kondrashina (“the applicant”), on 3 March 2001. The applicant died on 25 December 2005 and her husband, Mr Nikolay Dmitrievich Kondrashin, has decided to pursue the application.
The applicant was represented by Mr V.D. Androsov, a lawyer practising in . The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, the former Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the domestic judicial authorities had reconsidered a judgment given in her favour having improperly used the procedure for reconsidering judgments on the basis of newly discovered circumstances.
By a decision of 11 October 2005 the Court declared the application partly admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1). The Chamber decided, after consulting the parties, that no hearing on the merits was required (Rule 59 § 3 in fine).
The applicant was born in 1934 and lived in .
The applicant received an old-age pension. The Law of 21 July 1997 on the Calculation and Upgrading of State Pensions (“the Pensions Act”) introduced, from 1 February 1998 onwards, a new method for calculating pensions. The idea behind this method, based on what is known as an “individual pensioner coefficient”, was to link the pension to the pensioner's previous earnings.
The authority in charge of the applicant's pension, the Pension Fund Agency of Belgorod (“the Agency”), fixed the applicant's coefficient at 0.525. The applicant challenged the Agency's decision in the Sverdlovskiy District Court of . She argued that her coefficient should be 0.7 from 1 February 1998.
On 1 July 1999 the District Court found for the applicant, considering that the Agency had misinterpreted the Pensions Act. It decided that the Agency was to recalculate the applicant's pension using a coefficient of 0.7.
The Agency appealed against the judgment. On 19 October 1999 the  upheld the judgment, which became enforceable on the same day. The judgment was never executed.
On 29 December 1999 the Ministry of Labour and Social Development (“the Ministry”) issued an Instruction on the “Application of Limitations” established by the Pensions Act (“the Instruction”). The Instruction clarified how to apply the Pensions Act.
On 12 January 2000 a Deputy Prime Minister wrote a letter to the Prosecutor General. She complained that throughout the country courts had been deciding in pensioners' favour based on a manifestly wrong interpretation of the Pensions Act, and that the Pension Fund was unable to meet the unforeseen expenses. She asked the Prosecutor General to ask the Supreme Court to reconsider one such judgment to create a pilot case.
Some time thereafter a group of individuals challenged the Instruction before the Supreme Court of the . On 24 April 2000 the Supreme Court dismissed the complaint. It found that, contrary to what the complainants had suggested, the Ministry of Labour had not acted ultra vires in issuing the Instruction, and that the Ministry's interpretation of the Pensions Act had been correct. On 25 May 2000 the Cassation Division of the Supreme Court upheld this judgment on appeal.
On 25 May 2000 the Agency lodged an application with the District Court for the reconsideration of the applicant's case owing to newly discovered circumstances on the basis of the Instruction, which supported their position. They argued that the Instruction had been upheld by the Supreme Court.
On 14 September 2000 the District Court examined the Agency's request. The Agency maintained that the interpretation of the Pensions Act in the Instruction was a newly discovered circumstance which warranted the quashing of the judgment. The applicant submitted that the Agency had missed the statutory time-limit for requesting the reconsideration.
The District Court held as follows:
“... the court considers that the application by the Pension Fund Agency of Belgorod is to be granted for the following reasons:
On 29 December 1999 the RF Ministry of Labour and Social Development issued an instruction on the application of the Federal Law on the Calculation and Upgrading of State Pensions. The lawfulness of the instruction was subject to examination by the RF Supreme Court ... which established its compliance with the provisions of the civil legislation.
... the Pension Fund Agency of Belgorod did not request the reconsideration of the judgment of 1 July 1999 until after the examination of the application [challenging the lawfulness of the Instruction] by the RF Supreme Court... Therefore the Agency had missed the statutory time-limit for requesting the reconsideration for good reason.
Taking into account the above-mentioned reasons the court considers that the judgment ... of 1 July 1999 is to be quashed owing to newly discovered circumstances.”
In a decision of 14 September 2000 the District Court granted the Agency's application and quashed the judgment of 1 July 1999.
As a result of the fresh examination of the case the District Court delivered a judgment of 14 September 2000 in which it rejected the applicant's claims in full. The applicant appealed against the judgment. On 31 October 2000 the  dismissed the applicant's appeal and upheld the judgment of 14 September 2000.
From 1 May 2001, following changes to the pension regulations, the applicant's pension was calculated based on a coefficient exceeding 0.7. According to the Government the coefficient was fixed at 0.84.
The Code of Civil Procedure of 1964 (“CCivP”), in force at the material time, provided as follows:
Article 333. Grounds for reconsideration
“[Judgments] which have come into force may be reconsidered on the basis of newly discovered circumstances. The grounds for reconsideration ... shall be as follows:
significant circumstances which were not and could not have been known to the party who applies for reconsideration; ...
cancellation of a court [judgment] or of another authority's decision which served as legal basis for the [judgment] in question.”
Article 334. Lodging of application
“... [An application for reconsideration of a [judgment] owing to newly discovered circumstances] shall be lodged within three months after the discovery of the circumstances.”
Article 337. Court decision on reconsideration of a case
“After examination of an application for reconsideration of a [judgment] owing to newly discovered circumstances, the court may either grant the application and quash the [judgment], or dismiss the application.
The court decision by which an application for reconsideration of a [judgment] owing to newly discovered circumstances is granted shall not be subject to appeal. ...”
On 2 February 1996 the Constitutional Court of the  adopted a ruling concerning certain provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“CCrP”). In that ruling the  decided that Article 384 of the CCrP (“Grounds for reconsideration of a [criminal] case on the basis of newly discovered circumstances”, which was in many respects similar to Article 333 of the CCivP) was unconstitutional in that it limited the grounds for the reopening of a criminal case to situations of “newly discovered circumstances”. In that ruling the  suggested that this provision of the CCrP prevented rectification of judicial errors and miscarriages of justice. In its ruling of 3 February 1998 the Constitutional Court came to the conclusion that Article 192 § 2 of the Code of Commercial Procedure was unconstitutional in so far as it had served as a basis for the dismissal of applications for reconsideration of judgments of the Presidium of the Supreme Commercial Court, where the judgment had been delivered as a result of a judicial error which had not been and could not have been established earlier.
The Instruction of the Ministry of Labour and Social Development of 29 December 1999 on the “Application of Limitations” established by the Pensions Act was registered by the Ministry of Justice on 31 December 1999 and became binding in February 2000, ten days after its official publication.