The case originated in an application (no. 43328/14) against the Republic of Malta lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Maltese national, Mr Anthony Seychell (“the applicant”), on 2 June 2014.
The applicant was represented by Dr T. Azzopardi, a lawyer practising in Valletta. The Maltese Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Dr P. Grech, Attorney General.
The applicant alleged that the discretion of the Attorney General to decide in which court to try an accused, with the consequent effects this had on punishment, was in breach of Article 7.
On 2 March 2016 the complaint concerning Article 7 was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
Mr Vincent A. De Gaetano, the judge elected in respect of Malta, was unable to sit in the case (Rule 28). Accordingly, the President decided to appoint Mr Geoffrey Valenzia to sit as an ad hoc judge (Rule 29 § 1(b)).
The applicant was born in 1961 and is detained at the Corradino Correctional Facility, Paola.
On 25 June 2004 the police searched the applicant’s residence and found a quantity of cannabis plants, a canopy, foil and two electric lamps on the roof.
The police informed the applicant that he was being charged by the Attorney General, before the Criminal Court, with (i) cultivation and (ii) aggravated possession (not for his exclusive use) of cannabis.
A court-appointed expert found that the weight of the dried cannabis leaves found amounted to 3,416.20 grams, from which 6,832 cannabis ‘reefers’ could be made or 11,382 ‘sticks of cannabis’.
During the trial by jury the applicant, who suffered from chronic depression and severe back pain, admitted the first charge.
By a judgment of 5 March 2008 the applicant was found guilty of both charges (the verdict was unanimous in relation to the first charge, and seven votes to two in relation to the second charge) and was sentenced to a term of twelve years’ imprisonment and a fine of 25,000 euros (EUR) by the Criminal Court. The fine was to be converted into a further eighteen months’ imprisonment if it remained unpaid. In determining the punishment, the Criminal Court noted that, according to the law, if, having considered the age of an accused, his previous conduct, the quantity and quality of the drug in question, as well as all other circumstances, or if the jury’s verdict was not unanimous, it considered that the punishment of life imprisonment would not be adequate, it could sentence the accused to a term of imprisonment of between four and thirty years and a fine of between approximately EUR 3,330 and EUR 116,500. In the present case, it considered the conduct of the applicant, the fact that there was agreement that the second charge would be absorbed by the first charge for the purposes of punishment, and the punishments handed down in similar cases.
By a judgment of 12 March 2009 the Court of Criminal Appeal confirmed the first-instance judgment.
On 9 November 2010, the applicant instituted constitutional redress proceedings, complaining under Article 6 § 1 about, inter alia, the discretion of the Attorney General as public prosecutor to decide in which court to try an accused.
On 10 October 2012 the case was adjourned for judgment. On 11 February 2013 (following the judgment of the Court in Camilleri v. Malta, no. 42931/10, 22 January 2013) the applicant asked to add a complaint under Article 7 in connection with the discretion of the Attorney General.
By a decree of 12 February 2013 the Civil Court (First Hall), in its constitutional competence, rejected the request to suspend the determination of the case and to allow the applicant to add a complaint under Article 7 of the Convention, given that the stage of collection of evidence and pleadings (dibattiment) had come to an end.
By a judgment of 21 March 2013, the Civil Court (First Hall), in its constitutional competence, rejected the applicant’s claims. Having rejected all other complaints by the applicant, it considered that it was not necessary to determine the complaint concerning the discretion of the Attorney General (under Article 6).
By a judgment of 9 December 2013 the Constitutional Court rejected an appeal by the applicant and confirmed the firstinstance judgment. As to the complaint about the Attorney General’s discretion, the Constitutional Court considered that the Court had found a violation of Article 7 in that connection (giving no remedy), but had not determined the matter under Article 6. In the Constitutional Court’s view, such a finding which related to the lack of foreseeability of the law could not cast doubt on the fairness of the proceedings in general which would paralyse the entire judicial system. Furthermore, local caselaw had previously established that such a discretion did not breach an applicant’s fair trial rights. The Constitutional Court also noted that there was no reason to alter the first-instance court’s discretion regarding not allowing the addition of the complaint under Article 7, at a time when the collection of evidence had closed.
In Malta, at the relevant time, in cases such as the present one, it was the Attorney General as public prosecutor who decided before which court an accused could be tried, and consequently which punishment would be applicable.
At the time of the applicant’s trial, Article 22 of the Dangerous Drugs Ordinance, Chapter 101 of the Laws of Malta, provided that the maximum punishment before the Criminal Court (for the offences with which the applicant was charged) might vary between four years and life imprisonment, whereas before the Court of Magistrates it might vary between six months and ten years. The provision, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“(2) Every person charged with an offence against this Ordinance shall be tried in the Criminal Court or before the Court of Magistrates (Malta) or the Court of Magistrates (Gozo), as the Attorney General may direct, and if he is found guilty shall, in respect of each offence, be liable -
(a) on conviction by the Criminal Court -
(i) where the offence is one under article 4 or under article 8(c) or consists in selling or dealing in a drug contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance or in an offence under subarticle (1)(f), or of the offence of possession of a drug, contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance, under such circumstances that the court is satisfied that such possession was not for the exclusive use of the offender, or of the offences mentioned in subarticles (1C) or (1D) or (1E), to imprisonment for life:
Provided that:
(aa) where the court is of the opinion that, when it takes into account the age of the offender, the previous conduct of the offender, the quantity of the drug and the nature and quantity of the equipment or materials, if any, involved in the offence and all other circumstances of the offence, the punishment of imprisonment for life would not be appropriate; or
(bb) where the verdict of the jury is not unanimous, then the Court may sentence the person convicted to the punishment of imprisonment for a term of not less than four years but not exceeding thirty years and to a fine (multa) of not less than two thousand and three hundred and twentynine euro and thirty-seven cents (2,329.37) but not exceeding one hundred and sixteen thousand and four hundred and sixtyeight euro and sixtyseven cents (116,468.67); and
(ii) for any other offence to imprisonment for a term of not less than twelve months but not exceeding ten years and to a fine (multa) of not less than four hundred and sixtyfive euro and eightyseven cents (465.87) but not exceeding twentythree thousand and two hundred and ninety-three euro and seventythree cents (23,293.73); or
(b) on conviction by the Court of Magistrates (Malta) or the Court of Magistrates (Gozo) -
(i) where the offence is one under article 4 or under article 8(c) or consists in selling or dealing in a drug contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance or in an offence under subarticle (1)(f), or of the offence of possession of a drug, contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance, under such circumstances that the court is satisfied that such possession was not for the exclusive use of the offender, or of the offences mentioned in subarticles (1C) or (1D) or (1E), to imprisonment for a term of not less than six months but not exceeding ten years and to a fine (multa) of not less than four hundred and sixtyfive euro and eightyseven cents (465.87) but not exceeding eleven thousand and six hundred and fortysix euro and eightyseven cents (11,646.87); and
(ii) for any other offence to imprisonment for a term of not less than three months but not exceeding twelve months or to a fine (multa) of not less than four hundred and sixtyfive euro and eightyseven cents (465.87) but not exceeding two thousand and three hundred and twentynine euro and thirty-seven cents (2,329.37) or to both such imprisonment and fine, and in every case of conviction for an offence against this Ordinance, all articles in respect of which the offence was committed shall be forfeited to the Government, and any such forfeited article shall, if the court so orders, be destroyed or otherwise disposed of as may be provided in the order:”
Article 22 of the Dangerous Drugs Ordinance also enlists a number of circumstances where Article 21 of the Criminal Code does not apply. In so far as relevant, Article 21 of the Criminal Code, concerning the handing down of sentences below the prescribed minimum, reads as follows:
“... the court may, for special and exceptional reasons to be expressly stated in detail in the decision, apply in its discretion any lesser punishment which it deems adequate, notwithstanding that a minimum punishment is prescribed in the article contemplating the particular offence ...”
Article 175 of the Code of Organisation and Civil Procedure, prior to amendments in 2016, read as follows:
“(1) The court may, at any stage of the proceedings, at the request of any of the parties, until judgment is delivered after hearing where necessary the parties, order the substitution of any act or permit any written pleading to be amended, either by adding or striking out the name of any party and substituting another name therefor or by correcting any mistake in the name or in the character of the parties, or by correcting any other mistake or by causing other submission of fact or of law to be added even by separate note, provided that no such substitution or amendment shall affect the substance either of the action or of the defence on the merits of the case.
(2) Any court of appellate jurisdiction may also order or permit, at any time until judgment is delivered, the correction of any mistake in the application by which the appeal is entered or in the answer, including any mistake in the indication of the court which delivered the decision appealed from, in the name or character of the parties, or in the date of the judgment appealed from:
(3) Any judicial or administrative omission or mistake in a judicial act may until the court shall have delivered judgment and disposed of the case be remedied by a court of its own motion.”
In the case of P.B., whose house in Żejtun was also searched on the same day as the applicant’s, 693.12 grams of the cannabis plant (in its entirety, i.e. including leaves) were found. According to a courtappointed expert, this could be made into between 693 and 1,386 ‘reefers’ or approximately 2,310 ‘cannabis sticks’. P.B. was tried by the Criminal Court, which on 29 November 2011, following a guilty plea and plea bargaining, sentenced P.B. to seven and a half years’ imprisonment and a fine of EUR 17,400.
The Government referred to the following caselaw examples decided by the Criminal Court:
-  Republic of Malta vs Fedele Bartolo, of 15 July 1998, concerning the cultivation of cannabis, an offence committed in 1988, where the punishment handed down was a suspended sentence and a fine.
-  Republic of Malta vs Jolade Martins of 29 August 1991, concerning 275.8 grams of heroin, an offence committed in 198990, where the punishment handed down was six years and six months’ imprisonment and a fine.
-  Republic of Malta vs Godfrey Ellul, 5 April 1995, concerning conspiracy and the trafficking of cocaine in 1990, an offence where the punishment handed down was a fine (overturned on appeal on 4 July 2002, which cleared the applicant of all charges).
-  Republic of Malta vs Ruzarju Tonna of 26 April 1993 concerning the trafficking of heroin in 1991, where the punishment handed down was ten years’ imprisonment and a fine (confirmed on appeal on 10 May 1994).
-  Republic of Malta vs George Mifsud of 19 June 1996 concerning the trafficking of heroin in 1988, where the accused was acquitted.
-  Republic of Malta vs Emmanuela Brincat of 28 March and 6 April 1995 concerning the trafficking of heroin in 1993, where the punishment handed down was eight years’ imprisonment and a fine (confirmed on appeal on 27 October 1997).
-  Republic of Malta vs Christopher Borg, Mario Joseph Rodenas and Allison Micallef of 7 July 2000, concerning the trafficking of cocaine and cannabis in 1997, where the punishment handed down to the accused was four years’ imprisonment and a fine, three years and three months’ imprisonment and a fine, and a threeyear suspended sentence and a fine, respectively. On appeal by Allison Micallef on 5 July 2002, her suspended sentence was reduced to two years.
-  Republic of Malta vs Ali Ben Mohammed Hechmi Bettaieb of 28 October 1999 concerning the trafficking of heroin in 1997, where the punishment handed down was fifteen years’ imprisonment and a fine (confirmed on appeal on 2 June 2005).
-  Republic of Malta vs Abojila Ali Ashor Tunsi of 9 July 1999 concerning the trafficking of cannabis in 1998, where the punishment handed down was six years’ imprisonment.
-  Republic of Malta vs Perry Ingomar Toornstra of 12 June 2001 concerning 5,000 ecstasy pills and LSD in 2000, where the punishment handed down was twenty years’ imprisonment and a fine.
-  Republic of Malta vs Ezedeen Mohammed Zelmati of 14 July 2000 concerning the importation of cannabis in 1998, where the punishment handed down was fifteen years’ imprisonment and a fine.