The case concerns the alleged unfairness of the criminal proceedings against the applicant and, in particular, the principle of equality of arms as regards the possibility for the applicant to challenge forensic evidence presented by the prosecution, and the consistency of the interpretation of the applicable rules of criminal procedure by the domestic courts.
The applicant was born in 1965 and is serving a prison sentence in Kopeysk, Chelyabinsk Region. The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr V. Shukhardin, a lawyer practising in Moscow.
The Government were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
According to the bill of indictment, on 24 October 2013 the applicant and another unidentified person broke into the house of the K. family. The applicant shot E.K. dead. Then both alleged perpetrators threatened and beat V.K. and O.K. in order to make them show where they kept cash and jewellery. The victims complied and the alleged perpetrators took 45,000 Russian roubles in cash and two gold rings.
On an unspecified date the applicant was charged with aggravated robbery and murder.
On an unspecified date the investigation into the matter was completed and on 18 March 2015 the case was transferred to the Chelyabinsk Regional Court for a jury trial.
On 2 June 2015 the presiding judge prepared a verdict sheet which included the questions to be discussed by the jury to reach a verdict.
On 8 June 2015 the jury acquitted the applicant. The prosecutor and one of the victims appealed.
On 28 October 2015 the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation quashed the verdict and remitted the matter to the Regional Court for fresh consideration. The court established that (1) the verdict sheet had not been prepared in accordance with Article 339 of the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure and (2) the defence had exerted undue influence on the jury. The court considered those violations of the rules of criminal procedure to be material and ordered a new trial.
On 10 December 2015 the Regional Court opened a new jury trial in the applicant’s case. The prosecutor presented a number of forensic expert examinations including the autopsy report on E.K., a report on the seriousness of the injuries sustained by V.K. and a ballistics report. The defence asked for the experts to be questioned in court. The trial judge noted that the rules of criminal procedure provided for the questioning of experts only in the case of doubt expressed by the expert or ambiguity in the contents of the report prepared by him or her. The court discerned no doubt or ambiguity in the experts’ findings and dismissed the request. The court further refused to admit into evidence forensic “specialist” opinions commissioned by the applicant regarding the cause of E.K.’s death and ballistics.
On 9 February 2016 the jury found the applicant guilty and on 19 February 2016 the Regional Court sentenced him to eighteen years’ imprisonment. The court also ordered the applicant to pay damages to the victims of the crimes. The applicant appealed, arguing, inter alia, that the trial judge had failed to comply with the rules of criminal procedure and the instructions set out in the appeal judgment of 28 October 2015 when preparing the verdict sheet. In particular, the judge had only put a single question in respect of two different crimes – murder and aggravated robbery – which fact had prevented the jury from correctly assessing the circumstances of the case.
On 2 August 2016 the Supreme Court upheld, in substance, the judgment of 19 February 2016 on appeal. The court considered that the trial had been adversarial and the principle of equality of arms had been observed. It upheld the presiding judge’s decisions to dismiss the applicant’s requests regarding the questioning of forensic experts and the examination of the “specialist” opinions commissioned by the applicant. Lastly, the Supreme Court examined the applicant’s argument as to the verdict sheet and its compliance with the rules of criminal procedure and dismissed the argument as unsubstantiated.