The case originated in an application (no. 60561/14) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Croatian national, Ms S.M. (“the applicant”), on 27 August 2014. The President of the Grand Chamber upheld the decision not to have the applicant’s name disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms S. Bezbradica Jelavić a lawyer practising in Zagreb. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the domestic authorities had failed to apply effectively the relevant criminal-law mechanisms concerning her allegations of human trafficking and/or exploitation of prostitution, contrary to Articles 3, 4 and 8 of the Convention.
The application was allocated to the First Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). On 19 July 2018 a Chamber of that Section composed of Linos-Alexandre Sicilianos, Kristina Pardalos, Krzysztof Wojtyczek, Ksenija Turković, Armen Harutyunyan, Pauliine Koskelo and Jovan Ilievski, judges, and also of Abel Campos, Section Registrar, gave judgment. The Chamber by a majority declared the application admissible and held that there had been a violation of Article 4 of the Convention in its procedural limb. The dissenting opinion of Judge Koskelo was annexed to the judgment.
On 19 October 2018 the Government requested the referral of the case to the Grand Chamber in accordance with Article 43 of the Convention. On 3 December 2018 the panel of the Grand Chamber granted that request.
The composition of the Grand Chamber was determined according to the provisions of Article 26 §§ 4 and 5 of the Convention and Rule 24 of the Rules of Court. During the second deliberations, Angelika Nußberger, Vincent A. De Gaetano and Julia Laffranque, whose term of office expired in the course of the proceedings, continued to deal with the case (Article 23 § 3 of the Convention and Rule 24 § 4). Robert Spano succeeded Angelika Nußberger as President of the Grand Chamber (Rules 10 and 11).
The applicant and the Government each filed further written observations (Rule 59 § 1) on the merits of the case. In addition, third-party comments were received from the Council of Europe Group of Experts on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (GRETA); Clinique doctorale de droit international des droits de l’homme (Faculté de droit d’Aix-en-Provence); the Research Centre L’altro diritto onlus (University of Florence); and the group of researchers Bénédicte Bourgeois (University of Michigan), Marie-Xavière Catto (University Paris I Panthéon-Sorbonne) and Michel Erpelding (Max Planck Institute Luxembourg for Procedural Law).
A hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 15 May 2019 (Rule 59 § 3).
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Ms Bezbradica Jelavić and Ms Stažnik, and also replies by Ms Bezbradica Jelavić, Ms Katić and Ms Stažnik to questions from judges.
The applicant was born in 1990 and lives in Z.
Owing to problems in her family, between 2000 and 2004 she lived with a foster family. Then she moved to a public home for children and young persons, where she stayed until she completed her professional training in catering service. Afterwards she moved to live with her father in S. and occasionally visited her mother in Z.
On 27 September 2012 the applicant came to a police station in Z. and on the record made a criminal complaint against a certain T.M. She alleged that during the summer of 2011 T.M. had physically and psychologically forced her into prostitution.
The applicant submitted that sometime before the summer of 2011 T.M. had contacted her via Facebook and presented himself as a friend of her parents. Following this initial contact, for about a month or two she had continued exchanging messages with T.M. over everyday things. Then sometime in June or July 2011 she had met T.M. and went for a drink with him. On that occasion T.M. had explained that he wanted to help her with finding a job because he knew her parents. For that purpose T.M. left his phone number. Already on that occasion the applicant felt that T.M. was a person who insisted on having things his own way and who could not be contradicted.
The applicant further stated that following this meeting she had continued exchanging messages with T.M. via Facebook. As she had had no reason to question T.M.’s intentions, about two weeks after the first meeting she had contacted T.M. and they had decided to meet again. This time when they met T.M. had said that he would take her to a man to whom she should provide sexual services for money. T.M. had explained that she should charge 400 Croatian kunas (HRK; approximately 50 euros (EUR)) for her services and that she should give him half of that money. She had told T.M. that she did not want to do this. T.M. had then said that she would only have to do this until he found her a proper job. As she had earlier realised that T.M. was not a person to whom one could say “no”, out of fear she had agreed to go with him to see the man.
T.M. had then taken her in his car to a place in the proximity of Zap. (a city near Z.) where the man had been waiting for her in a house. The applicant had explained to the man what was happening and the man had not insisted on having intercourse with her but said that he would give her HRK 400. T.M. had listened to this conversation behind the door and, after the man had left the room, T.M. had slapped the applicant saying that she should never talk to clients and that she should listen to him and do only what he told her.
The applicant further explained that after this incident, T.M. would pick her up every day in front of the place where she lived in Z. and he would take her in his car to provide sexual services to men who had answered an advertisement on a social network. After a while, he had given her a mobile telephone so that clients could contact her and had continued to drive her to meet clients in various places. Soon afterwards T.M. had rented a flat in Z. (the applicant provided the address) where she continued rendering sexual services to men. This arrangement had allowed T.M. to have her constantly under control as he had always been in the flat and had also said that he would install cameras so that he could know what was happening. The applicant had been afraid of T.M. as he had said that he had done the same thing with some other girls, whom he would physically punish if they did not listen to him. T.M. had also physically punished her when she opposed him over something. When she had refused to provide sexual services to other men, he had beaten her.
The applicant also stated that at the beginning of September 2011, when she knew that T.M. would be absent from the flat for a longer time, she had left the flat and gone to the house of her friend M.I. She explained to M.I. what had happened to her. After he had realised that she had left him, T.M. had at first started contacting her via Facebook asking her to come back and saying how he loved her and that she would never again have to provide sexual services. As the applicant had not answered these messages, T.M. had started threatening that he would find her and that she and her parents would “pay” for everything. The applicant had continued ignoring these messages so after a while T.M. had stopped sending them. A year later, and two weeks before the applicant lodged her criminal complaint, T.M. had again contacted her via Facebook mentioning her mother. All this had made the applicant feel frightened for her own safety and the safety of her parents and sister.
The applicant finally explained that on average she had had one client per day because when T.M. had not been around she would turn off the phone and deactivate the advertisement so that clients could not contact her. In total she had some thirty clients and she had earned approximately HRK 13,000 (approximately EUR 1,700). Half of this amount she had given to T.M.
On the same day when the applicant made her criminal complaint, the police informed the Z. Municipal State Attorney’s Office (hereinafter “the State Attorney’s Office”) that the complaint had been lodged and that they were conducting a preliminary investigation.
On 10 October 2012, following an order by the Z. County Court (hereinafter “the County Court”), the police conducted a search of T.M.’s premises and his car. In the car, the police found and seized condoms. During the search of T.M.’s premises, the police seized two automatic rifles with ammunition, a hand grenade and a number of mobile phones.
The police also established that T.M. was registered in the police records as a perpetrator of the criminal offences of procuring prostitution, and rape. His criminal record, obtained by the State Attorney’s Office, indicated that in 2005 T.M. had been convicted of the offence of procuring prostitution using coercion, under Article 195 §§ 2 and 3 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 96 below) and rape under Article 188 § 1 of the Criminal Code, and that he had been sentenced to six and a half years’ imprisonment.
On 10 October 2012 T.M. was arrested and questioned by the police. It was established that T.M. had trained as a policeman. He denied the allegations made by the applicant and stated that everything was an attempt by the applicant and her mother to take revenge on him for the difficult relationship he had had with the applicant’s mother.
On 11 October 2012 the police sent the applicant’s criminal complaint and all the collected evidence to the State Attorney’s Office. The police classified the applicant’s complaint under Article 195 § 3 of the Criminal Code (procuring prostitution using coercion). T.M. was also brought before an investigating judge of the County Court who ordered his pre-trial detention. He remained in detention until the end of the criminal proceedings against him in the Municipal Court.
On 11 October 2012 T.M. was questioned in the State Attorney’s Office. He reiterated the arguments made during the police questioning. He also explained that the applicant had contacted him because she had asked him to protect her from another person for whom she was engaged in prostitution. T.M. denied that he had ever proposed to her that she engage in prostitution for him. He also stressed that the applicant had rented a flat in Z. and that he had lent her money for that, which she had later returned. T.M. further explained that at the applicant’s request he used to drive her around. However, she had not told him where she was going but he had suspected that she might be engaged in prostitution. T.M. stated that he had not lived with the applicant in the same flat. He would only sometimes stay overnight when she would invite him as they had had a relationship. T.M. admitted that once he might have hit the applicant but that was because she had provoked him. He denied that he had given her a mobile phone as she had had her own phone.
On 16 October 2012, in the context of the investigation against T.M., the applicant was questioned in the State Attorney’s Office. The applicant was informed of all her rights as a victim of an offence under Article 43 § 1, Article 45 and Article 52 § 4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 98 below). She stated that she had understood the instructions and made no specific request in that regard.
During the questioning, the applicant repeated her statement concerning the first contact she had had with T.M. (see paragraphs 12-13 above). She also explained that sometime in spring 2011 T.M. had started suggesting that he could find a job for her in a shopping mall. As she had been without employment, she had started communicating with him more intensively. In this context, she had met T.M. on various occasions in cafés and he had continued saying that he could find a job for her. She had had no reason to question his intentions.
The applicant also provided further details concerning the incident when T.M. had taken her to provide sexual services to a man in a house near Zap. She stated that it had happened at the beginning of July 2011 and that T.M. had taken her there by deceiving her into thinking that he would take her to a friend who could find her a job. The applicant repeated her statement as regards the events in the house and how the man had not insisted on sexual intercourse but had still paid her HRK 400. She also reiterated that T.M. had stormed into the room where she was with the man and started to shout at her, following which he had slapped her. Moreover, on their way to Z., T.M. had threatened to throw her out of the car on the highway because she had started asking what was happening.
The applicant further explained that the next day T.M. had again contacted her and told her that they needed to talk about what had happened. She had agreed to meet him but they had not discussed what had happened as he had avoided the topic. A few days later T.M. had given her a mobile telephone. He had explained that clients seeking sexual services would contact her on that number. T.M. had also told the applicant that she had to give her physical description to men who would contact her and charge HRK 400 for half an hour of sexual services or HRK 600 (approximately EUR 80) for an hour, and that she had to give half of that money to T.M. The applicant had acquiesced to all that because she had been scared that T.M. would attack her again and that he would tell her parents everything that was happening.
The applicant also submitted that the men who would contact her had explained that they had seen the advertisement on the Internet. Some ten days after the incident in Zap., T.M. had rented a flat (the applicant provided the address), where the applicant and T.M. had then lived together. She had provided sexual services in that flat and sometimes T.M. had driven her to clients. Since T.M. had lived in the same flat with her, he had controlled everything she did. When she had refused to have sexual intercourse with other men or with him or when she had talked to the clients, T.M. had beaten her. He had beaten her every couple of days. She repeated the statement concerning the amount of money she had earned and stressed that she had given half of it to T.M.
Asked as to why she had not contacted the police earlier, the applicant answered that she had been afraid of T.M. and that he had had her under his control. However, once, when T.M. had been out of the flat and had left the key, she had called her friend M.I. and asked her for help. M.I. had known that she had been giving sexual services to men for money against her will and that she had been in trouble. After this discussion, M.I.’s boyfriend, T., had arrived by taxi, helped the applicant to collect her things and taken her to M.I.’s home, where she had then stayed for several days.
The applicant further said that after she had left, T.M. had at first started contacting her via Facebook asking her to come back to him and telling her that he loved her. As the applicant had not answered these messages, T.M. had started threatening that he would tell everything she had done to her parents. She had truly been afraid that he might do that so she had decided to lodge a criminal complaint to put an end to everything that had happened.
The applicant also said that T.M. had told her that he had previously had a girlfriend, A., whom he had treated in the same way as the applicant. She had also learned from Facebook that T.M. had later had another girlfriend who had been engaged in prostitution. T.M. had told the applicant that he had filmed those girlfriends and punished them when they had been insolent. He had also threatened to do the same thing to the applicant. T.M. had told her all that in order to break her will to stand up to him.
On 6 November 2012 the State Attorney’s Office questioned M.I. She said that the applicant was her friend and she had known her for some two years. M.I.’s last contact with the applicant (before the applicant had come to her flat) had been some eight or nine months previously.
M.I. explained that at the end of summer 2011 the applicant had suddenly come to her home with a bag containing her things. M.I. had then learned that the applicant had agreed with M.I.’s mother that she would come to stay with them, but she (M.I.) did not know any details since she was not on very good terms with her mother. Also, M.I.’s boyfriend (whose full name and address she gave) had told her that he had spoken to the applicant. However, soon afterwards M.I. had broken up with her boyfriend so they had not discussed any details concerning his contact with the applicant.
M.I. further stated that the applicant had told her about T.M., from whom she had escaped because she had no longer wished to be involved in prostitution for him. Before the applicant had come to her flat, M.I. had known that the applicant was engaged in prostitution but she had not known where or for whom the applicant was doing this. Only then had M.I. learned that the applicant had being doing it for T.M. According to M.I., the applicant had been very distressed and scared. She had told M.I. that T.M. had repeatedly beaten her, had watched her through a key hole when she had been giving sexual services to clients and afterwards had also beaten her for not being in a position he had approved of.
M.I. also said that she understood that the applicant had voluntarily given sexual services because she had needed money. The applicant had told her that she had had an agreement with T.M. to work for him and to share the money, that she had had a mobile telephone for clients to call her and that there had been a small ad through which she had been contacted for appointments by clients. The applicant had said that T.M. had given her that mobile telephone and placed the advertisement.
M.I. further stated that she could not remember if the applicant had told her that she had resisted T.M. It was true that the applicant had said that she had not wished to “do it” but in M.I.’s understanding that had rather meant that the applicant had been “doing it” because she had had no other means to earn money. The applicant had also told her that T.M. had slapped her for very minor reasons which she (the applicant) had not expected. The applicant had also said to M.I. that when she had refused sexual relations with him T.M. would beat her and the applicant had not known what would make him explode again. According to M.I.’s knowledge, T.M. had also told the applicant that he had had another girlfriend whom he had treated in the same way as the applicant. The applicant told M.I. that she had used the opportunity to run away from T.M. when he had been out of the flat where they had lived.
M.I. also said that the applicant had stayed with her and her mother for more than half a year and that T.M. had continued to contact the applicant through Facebook. M.I. had seen the messages that he had sent and they were threatening to the applicant and the applicant’s mother. He had also sent messages saying that he loved her and asking her to come back to him.
On 6 November 2012 the State Attorney’s Office indicted T.M. in the Z. Municipal Criminal Court (hereinafter “the Municipal Court”) on charges of procuring prostitution using coercion, as an aggravated offence of procuring prostitution, proscribed by Article 195 § 3 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 96 below).
The indictment alleged that T.M., in order to obtain pecuniary gain, had deceived the applicant into believing that he would find her a job. However, after that he had taken her to provide sexual services to a man in Zap. As the applicant had refused to do that, T.M. had hit her and then, on their way back to Z., had threatened to throw her out of the car. Soon afterwards T.M. had provided the applicant with a mobile phone to answer the clients’ calls. He had also instructed her how to charge for sexual services and to give half of the money to him. According to the indictment, the applicant had consented to this out of fear. T.M. had then taken the applicant to the addresses of clients where she had provided sexual services for money and after a while he had rented a flat in Z. where the applicant had continued providing sexual services to a number of men. T.M. had kept the applicant under surveillance and had also told her that he had beaten other girls who did not do what he had requested. When the applicant resisted him saying that she did not want to provide sexual services anymore, T.M. would hit her. She had therefore, out of fear of him, continued providing sexual services to men for money until September 2011, when she had run away from the flat.
The indictment relied on the applicant’s statement and considered that it was corroborated by M.I.’s evidence. The indictment also considered that T.M.’s defence, although denying the commission of the offence, essentially made the applicant’s statement even stronger.
On 22 November 2012 a three-judge panel of the Municipal Court confirmed the indictment and sent the case fCriminal proceedings against T.M.
The first hearing before the Municipal Court scheduled for 12 December 2012 was adjourned because T.M. claimed to be on hunger strike and could not therefore participate in the proceedings. The judge conducting the proceedings commissioned an expert report to establish whether T.M. could participate in the trial.
The expert report established that T.M. had worked as a policeman for a number of years and that he had been a member of the special police forces during the war in Croatia in the 1990s. He had retired from the police in 2001. He suffered from a post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) related to his participation in the war and he had also developed a personality disorder. He had received psychiatric treatment over a number of years. According to the report, T.M.’s capacity to understand the nature of the impugned acts had been diminished but not to a significant degree. The report therefore recommended that, in the event of conviction, an order for mandatory psychiatric treatment be made. The report also considered that T.M. could participate in and follow the proceedings.
At a hearing on 14 January 2013 T.M. pleaded not guilty. He denied that he had forced the applicant into prostitution. He confirmed that he had contacted the applicant through Facebook because he had recognised her surname since he had known her mother. After several exchanges of messages via Facebook, T.M. and the applicant had started to see each other and the applicant had told him that she had had no money and needed a job and that she had some debts. She had also said that she was in fear of a certain B., whom T.M. had known from prison and it had therefore been clear to him “what the applicant was doing”. Moreover, she had said that she had kept contact details of her clients which she had obtained from B. The applicant had also asked T.M. to lend her money to rent a flat, which he had done and she had later returned the amount she had borrowed in two instalments. The applicant had also said that she would try to find a job.
T.M. further stated that a few weeks after he had met the applicant, they had engaged in a relationship. The applicant had asked him to take her to certain addresses by car and on five or six occasions he had done so. He had known that she was going there to give sexual services for money. However, he had not known how much she had been earning from the provision of her services. T.M. confirmed that he had once hit the applicant because they had had a disagreement over “work” and she had provoked him. He specified that this concerned the fact that the applicant had said that she had found a job in a bakery but that she did not want to work. T.M. had not liked her attitude so there had been an argument and, as he had not been able to control himself, he had hit her. Later on, he had found a job for the applicant in a restaurant in Zap. but then she had disappeared. This had happened in August 2011 and the only thing he had found in the flat she had rented had been a message from the owner of the flat addressed to the applicant.
When questioned by the judge conducting the proceedings, T.M. explained that he had not lived with the applicant in the flat she had rented but only sometimes spent the night there. He had had the keys of the flat. Sometimes the applicant would go alone to see her clients or to see a doctor or her friends, and she would later inform T.M. that she had some money. T.M. could not explain why he had agreed to the applicant providing sexual services to other men when he had been in a relationship with her. He stressed that she had wanted to be independent and to earn her own money so he had not wanted to interfere in that. He also explained that he had only used one mobile phone and that those found by the police during the search had been his old phones which he had no longer used.
When questioned by the prosecutor, T.M. denied that he had given any mobile phone to the applicant. According to him, she had had her own two mobile phones. T.M. also stated that on two or three occasions the applicant had given him some money for fuel because he had driven her around. However, she had constantly complained that she had no money so he used to give her money as well. T.M.’s impression was not that the applicant had been afraid of him as she had not been the kind of person to be afraid of anybody.
Following T.M.’s questioning, the prosecutor asked that the applicant and M.I. be heard as witnesses. The defence agreed and made no other proposal for the taking of evidence. The trial court accepted the parties’ proposal and scheduled the next hearing for 29 January 2013.
The summons for the hearing served on the applicant contained detailed information on her rights as a victim, such as psychological and practical support and the possibility to contact the Department for Organising and Providing Support for Witnesses and Victims within the Municipal Court. The contact details of that Department were also provided.
At a hearing on 29 January 2013 the Municipal Court heard evidence from the applicant and M.I. The applicant was accompanied by a lawyer provided to her by the non-governmental organisation the Rosa Centre.
Before giving her evidence the applicant told the trial court that she was afraid of T.M. He was then removed from the courtroom and the applicant gave evidence in his absence.
During questioning, the applicant repeated her statement given during the investigation (see paragraphs 25-31 above) and said that she wanted to clarify certain aspects of that statement. In this connection, she explained that before the incident in Zap. she had met T.M. three or four times for a coffee and they had exchanged messages on Facebook. He had promised to do his best to find her a job as a waitress or in a shop. The applicant further clarified that when T.M. had taken her to see the man in Zap., he had said that they would have a coffee with him. In the house, the man had seen T.M. slapping her. With regard to the events that happened on their way back to Z., the applicant explained that she had wanted to run away from T.M. but that he had managed to catch her and had forced her to stay in the car. The next day when they had met they had not talked about these events but about her attempts to find a job. The applicant also explained that she had agreed to move into the flat which T.M. had found without him using any force on her. She had done that in order to protect her roommate with whom she had lived at the time. T.M. had commented on how good-looking she was and the applicant had tried to avoid getting her in any of these things and to end up like she (the applicant) did.
When questioned by the judge conducting the proceedings, the applicant explained that when T.M. had rented the flat for her she could guess what she was expected to do there, namely to provide sexual services. She had been afraid of him and for that reason had agreed to give sexual services to other men. He had also threatened that he would tell everything to her parents and that he would put her mother in prison. The applicant also repeated her statement from the investigation about the number of clients she had had and the money she had earned, half of which she had given to T.M.
The applicant further stated that T.M. had been present in the flat when she had provided sexual services to other men. Sometimes he had watched her through the keyhole and he would slap her if she refused to be with a client or to have the intercourse in the way T.M. had wanted. She had also been forced to have sex with T.M. She had not sought medical help or contacted the police because she could not get out of the flat.
When further questioned by the judge conducting the proceedings, the applicant said that she had not known T.M.’s background when they had first got in touch. At that time, he had known that she had no job and he had promised to try to find her one. As to the incident in Zap., the applicant repeated her statement from the investigation. She explained that she had voluntarily given the money she had received from the man to T.M.
The applicant also explained that she had accepted the mobile phones which T.M. had procured for the contacts with clients because she had been afraid of him. Later on, while no longer living in the flat which T.M. had rented, the applicant had learned from T.M. that her mother had previously reported him (the applicant did not specify for what) and that he had been in prison. The applicant also stated that it was she alone who had answered the clients’ calls. Clients would sometimes come to the flat or T.M. would drive her to meet them. In the flat, she had lived with T.M. although she had been required to pay rent, and she had done so. She had not had keys to the flat. She had had one mobile phone which T.M. had provided and she had her own mobile phone but did not have money on the pre-paid SIM card. She had stayed in the flat for about a month and a half. She had not tried to run away because she had been afraid of T.M. She had also not tried to contact the police because T.M. had said that he had contacts in the police and that he would very quickly learn if she had reported him.
As regards her escape from the flat, the applicant explained that once she had taken advantage of the fact that T.M. had been absent for a while and that the key had been left in the front door. She had then called her friend M.I., with whom she had been in contact over the Internet some fifteen days before when she had told M.I. that she was in trouble and that she would need her help. On the occasion when she had called M.I., the applicant had spoken to M.I. and her mother. She had not explained any details but had simply said that she was staying with a man in a flat and was engaged in prostitution and that she wanted to escape. The agreement was that M.I.’s now former boyfriend T. would come by taxi to pick her up. The applicant explained that she had had some earlier contacts with T. via Facebook but she had not told him anything about her situation. When T. had taken her to M.I.’s place, the applicant had found M.I. and her mother there. She had stayed with them for about ten days and she had told M.I. what she had been through. Meanwhile, she had also had contact with the owner of the flat where she had stayed with T.M. concerning the rent and how she could get some of her belongings that she had left there.
Further to the judge’s questions, the applicant explained that she had not tried to escape from T.M. when he took her to see clients away from the flat because she had been sure that he would find her and he had strictly controlled the time she spent with clients. The applicant also stated that T.M. had told her that he had done the same thing to another girl. When confronted with T.M.’s defence, the applicant denied that T.M. had ever lent her money to pay her rent. She said that she did not know any person by the name of B. and denied that she had had any contact details of clients. She also stated that T.M. had never told her that he had found her a job in the restaurant in Zap. Later on, when she had already left him, he had sent her some messages via Facebook mentioning that he had found her a job in a shop.
The applicant also stated that at first when she had run away from T.M. she had not wanted to report him to the police. However, after she had left, T.M. had continued contacting her via Facebook, had reported to the authorities that her mother had neglected and abused her younger daughter, and had threatened that as soon as she found a job or continued with her education he would destroy everything for her. She had therefore decided to report him to the police. The applicant also explained that after she had left T.M. she had been afraid to go out in public and felt fear every time she saw a car similar to T.M.’s.
When questioned by the prosecutor, the applicant stated that she had been very afraid of T.M. She had never known how he would react and she had been in fear for her life because he used to threaten that he would beat her to death. Also, when she had refused to have sex with him, he would beat her. He had also beaten her when she said that she did not want to provide sexual services anymore. Moreover, he had deceived her by saying that she would have to provide sexual services only for a few days and that he would find her a proper job. As to the sharing of money, the applicant explained that she would first hand over all the money she had collected from a client to T.M. and he would then give part of it to her. T.M. had also set some rules concerning the way she was allowed to provide sexual services. When she did not obey this or if she gave sexual services in a manner that he did not like, he would then beat her. He had also taken photos of her naked and published them with the ad. She had not objected to him taking the photos because she had been scared. Then, he had threatened to show the photos to her parents.
When questioned by her lawyer, the applicant stated that T.M. had at first presented himself to her as a former policeman and said that he had been in the war with her father. Later on he had said that he knew people in every police station and that he would “frame” her if she tried to report him.
When questioned by the defence lawyer, the applicant stated that following her first contact with T.M. she had not tried to get in touch with her mother to check whether she had known him. At that time, her mother had not lived in Croatia and they had not been on good terms. However, she had then exchanged some messages with her mother, who had simply said that T.M. was not a reliable person. The applicant had also asked her father about T.M. and he had said that T.M. was “an okay person”. The applicant had concluded from the messages which she had exchanged with T.M. that he was not a bad person and she had no reason to call into question his statement that he had been a policeman. Later on, after she had left T.M., the applicant had spoken to her mother about him. Her mother had told her that she had lived with T.M. after she had split from the applicant’s father. When the applicant asked her mother why T.M. was angry with her and why she had reported him (it was not specified in the record for what), her mother had said that it had not been her but another girl who had reported him and that this girl had provided sexual services in the same manner as the applicant did. According to the applicant, that was the same girl about whom T.M. had also spoken to her.
When further questioned by the defence lawyer, the applicant explained that when she had gone to pick up her belongings from the flat where she had lived with T.M., the owner of the flat and M.I. had been there with her. She had been contacted by the owner as she had not paid the last rent. The flat had been rented in her name. During her stay in the flat with T.M. the owner used to come and T.M. would present them as a couple to the owner. The applicant also stated that T.M. had slept every night in the flat. She did not deny that there had been moments when she would leave the flat to go to a shop without T.M. It had happened three or four times during the period of a month and a half. However, she had not dared to run away because of her fear of T.M., who had always watched her from the window.
After the applicant’s questioning, T.M. was brought back to the courtroom and her statement was read out to him. He had no questions and made a general objection as to the credibility of her statement.
The trial court then proceeded to the questioning of M.I. She repeated her statement given during the investigation (see paragraphs 32-37 above).
When questioned by the judge conducting the proceedings, and after being presented with the applicant’s statement, M.I. denied that the applicant had called her when she had left T.M. She insisted that the applicant must have arranged everything with her (M.I.’s) mother. M.I. further stated that she had known from before that the applicant was engaged in prostitution because the applicant had told her so. The applicant had explained to M.I. that she needed money and that she was living without parents. M.I. considered that the applicant had initially engaged in prostitution voluntarily. M.I.’s opinion was that the applicant had also voluntarily engaged in the prostitution ring with T.M. because she had needed money. However, the applicant had not known who she was dealing with given that – as M.I. had learned from the applicant – T.M. had forced and beaten her. M.I. could not remember whether the applicant had told her that she had resisted T.M. when he had asked her to provide sexual services to men. The applicant had told M.I. that she did not want to do these things anymore but M.I. had understood that as a general complaint about the fact that she had to earn money in this way.
When further questioned by the judge conducting the proceedings, M.I. stated that the applicant had stayed for several months with her. When she had come to M.I.’s place, the applicant had not had any visible injuries but had been very scared and upset. She had been in fear of T.M. and had said that she could not believe what had happened to her and that she had not expected that. M.I. also explained that she had seen the Facebook messages which T.M. had sent to the applicant on the applicant’s laptop. They had been long messages in which T.M. had sometimes said how he loved the applicant and sometimes had made threats mentioning the applicant and her mother. M.I. denied that she had gone with the applicant to pick up her belongings in the flat where she had lived with T.M. According to M.I., it had been her boyfriend T. who had gone with the applicant to the flat.
When questioned by the defence lawyer, M.I. stated that the applicant had never mentioned to her a person by the name of B. She also said that at about the time when the applicant had come to her place she was about to break up with her boyfriend T. As far as M.I. knew, at the relevant time T. had only once exchanged a message with the applicant via Facebook.
Following M.I.’s questioning, the applicant stated that she had no objections to M.I.’s evidence. The applicant considered that, although there had been some discrepancies in their statements, this was the result of the peculiar course of events.
After hearing the applicant and M.I., the prosecutor proposed that the materials from the file be allowed as evidence. The defence asked that a certain K.Z. be heard as a witness concerning the threats of revenge that the applicant’s mother had allegedly made towards T.M. The defence also asked that T.M.’s brother be heard as a witness.
The prosecution opposed these proposals and the trial court considered that it was not necessary to take the evidence proposed by the defence. The next hearing was scheduled for 15 February 2013.
At the hearing on 15 February 2013 the applicant was represented by the lawyer provided by the Rosa Centre. T.M. asked the trial court to allow him to make a further statement, which the trial court agreed to.
In his statement, T.M. stated that he knew the applicant’s mother because she had also been a prostitute but had lost touch with her when he had started serving his prison sentence. After he had made contact with the applicant via Facebook, the applicant had told him that she had talked to her mother about him. He had wanted to help the applicant to find a job and she had also told him that she was engaged in prostitution because that had been the easiest way to earn money. He had fallen in love with the applicant and wanted to have a relationship with her. He had agreed that she could continue with the prostitution because he was not a jealous person. However, he had told her that she should get a proper job.
T.M. further stated that it was the applicant who had rented the flat and organised everything. He knew that she had charged HRK 400 for half an hour and HRK 600 for an hour but it had been her, not him, who had set that price. He had not constantly stayed in the flat. He also denied that the incident in Zap., as stated in the indictment, had ever happened.
When questioned by the judge conducting the proceedings, T.M. admitted that sometimes he had been in the flat when the applicant had provided sexual services to men and that he had received half of the money which she had charged for her services. He had not wanted to take the money but the applicant had insisted saying that it was for the fuel that he had used when driving her to meet clients away from the flat. T.M. also denied that he had strictly controlled the time the applicant had spent with her clients. However, he admitted that he had given her money to buy a mobile phone but that was because she had asked for it. According to T.M., the applicant could have left the flat whenever she wished. However, he had been surprised to see that one day she had simply left. He assumed that the reason for that was the fact that he had put pressure on her to find a proper job and had even made certain contacts to arrange job interviews for her. T.M. admitted that he had hit the applicant once but the reason had again been related to his insistence that she find a proper job. T.M. also stated that he had not known how many clients the applicant had had in total. He had not always been with her and had not constantly controlled her. He denied any deception or force towards the applicant related to her provision of sexual services.
When asked by the applicant’s lawyer why the applicant needed him at all when she had arranged everything on her own, T.M. refused to answer that question saying that he had already explained everything concerning their relationship.
After hearing T.M.’s further statement, the parties made no further proposals for the taking of evidence. The judge conducting the proceedings admitted the documents provided by the prosecution as evidence, heard the parties’ and the applicant’s lawyer’s closing statements and concluded the proceedings.
Following the hearing of 15 February 2013 the Municipal Court acquitted T.M. on the grounds that although it had been established that he had organised a prostitution ring into which he had recruited the applicant, it had not been established that he had forced or pressured her into prostitution, which was a constituent element of the offence he was charged with under Article 195 § 3 of the Criminal Code. In finding this, the court in particular noted the following:
“On the basis of the evidence given by the accused and the victim in these criminal proceedings the following facts have been established: that the accused and the victim met through the social network Facebook when the accused contacted the victim; that the accused had known the victim’s mother and father from before; that after the initial contact, the contacts continued in that the accused and the victim met in cafés in Z.; that at the time the victim lived in a rented flat with a friend K.; that she voluntarily, and at the invitation of the accused, moved to [another] flat in Z.; that she lived in that flat together with the accused for about month or month and a half. There is also no doubt that the accused gave a mobile telephone to the victim so that she could be contacted by the clients with whom she discussed providing sexual services; that the victim indeed did provide sexual services in the flat where she lived with the accused; that on five or six occasions the accused drove the victim to the addresses of clients where she provided sexual services; that the victim charged for providing sexual services the sum of HRK 400 for half an hour and the sum of HRK 600 for an hour. Moreover, there is no doubt that on one occasion the victim left the flat where she lived with the accused and went to her friend M.I.
However, it remains to be established whether the accused forced the victim to provide sexual services – which she undoubtedly provided – by the use of force or threat of the use of force or by deception, in order to obtain pecuniary gain.”
In reaching the above conclusion, the Municipal Court noted that the decisive evidence on which the indictment was based was the applicant’s witness statement. However, the Municipal Court considered that it could not give sufficient weight to the applicant’s testimony because her statement had been incoherent, in places illogical and contrary to the evidence given by the witness M.I. and also by T.M. in his defence. Moreover, she had been unsure and had paused and hesitated when speaking. On the other hand, the Municipal Court considered that it could rely on the evidence given by M.I. and that it could generally accept T.M.’s defence, despite the fact that he had changed his statement during the proceedings. The court also considered that T.M.’s denial of the use of any coercion against the applicant was confirmed by the evidence given by M.I. as regards her knowledge of the applicant’s previous life and the circumstances in which she had engaged in prostitution for T.M.
On 26 March 2013 the State Attorney’s Office lodged an appeal against the first-instance judgment with the County Court. It argued that the first-instance court had erred in its factual findings concerning the charges against T.M. in not accepting the applicant’s testimony. The State Attorney’s Office considered that her statement had been coherent, credible, logical and convincing, given that in all relevant parts she had provided a consistent account of the manner in which T.M. had forced her into prostitution. It also considered that T.M.’s statement could not be taken as credible and stressed that M.I. did not have direct knowledge of the relevant facts of the case.
On 21 January 2014 the County Court dismissed the appeal of the State Attorney’s Office and upheld the first-instance judgment, endorsing the reasoning as well as the facts as established by the Municipal Court.
The County Court’s judgment was served on the applicant’s lawyer on 28 February 2014.
On 31 March 2014 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court, complaining about the manner in which the criminal-law mechanisms had been applied in her case. She alleged, in particular, that the domestic authorities had not properly elucidated all the circumstances of the case relating to her participation in the prostitution ring organised by T.M. and had allowed that the offence committed by him to remain unpunished.
On 10 June 2014 the Constitutional Court declared the applicant’s constitutional complaint inadmissible on the grounds that the applicant had not had the right to bring a constitutional complaint concerning the criminal proceedings against T.M. since these proceedings had concerned a criminal charge against him.
On 21 December 2012, following an identification process carried out by the Ministry of the Interior, the applicant was officially given the status of victim of human trafficking by the Office for Human and Minority Rights of the Government of Croatia (Vlada Republike Hrvatske, Ured za ljudska prava i prava nacionalnih manjina; hereinafter “the Human Rights Office”; see paragraph 105 below).
On the same day the Ministry of the Interior contacted the Croatian Red Cross and its employees informed the applicant of her rights (safe accommodation, medical check-ups, psycho-social support, legal aid and material support).
The applicant did not wish to exercise the right to safe accommodation since she lived with her mother and sister. However, in the period between 17 January 2013 and 24 April 2015 the applicant contacted the Red Cross on several occasions. She received psycho-social support through individual counselling and material support. On two occasions the Red Cross also organised a dental examination for the applicant, as well as individual counselling with a psychologist.
Further to this the applicant was provided with legal aid by the non-governmental organisation the Rosa Centre (see paragraph 50 above), whose activities in the field of human trafficking were in part supported by the State.
On 13 March 2013 the non-governmental organisation the Rosa Centre complained to the Human Rights Office that the State Attorney’s Office had not pursued the applicant’s case diligently by collecting and presenting evidence capable of elucidating all the circumstances of the case. In this connection, the Rosa Centre stressed that there had been some inconsistencies in the statements of the applicant and the witness M.I., which required further clarification. It also submitted that the applicant had later explained that certain inconsistencies in her statement had been the result of her wish to protect other persons, namely her roommate, her friend M.I. and her mother.
The Rosa Centre further argued that the trial court, which had not been bound by the prosecution’s legal classification of the facts, had not reclassified the charges to the basic form of procuring prostitution under Article 195 § 2 and convicted T.M. of that offence. The Rosa Centre also suggested that after the hearing, in an informal context, the judge conducting the proceedings had said to its lawyer that probably eighty percent of his colleagues would have convicted T.M. but that he had not considered that T.M. should be convicted as charged by the State Attorney’s Office. On that occasion, the judge had also stated that the State Attorney’s Office should have amended the indictment.
The Human Rights Office forwarded this letter to the State Attorney General’s Office and asked for the relevant explanations.
In its report of 14 May 2013 the competent State Attorney’s Office explained that it had considered the applicant’s statement to be credible and convincing, and that it provided sufficient grounds for T.M.’s conviction under Article 195 § 3 of the Criminal Code. However, the Municipal Court had not agreed with this assessment and had acquitted T.M. The State Attorney’s Office still believed that the classification of procuring prostitution using coercion was appropriate and it had therefore lodged an appeal against the first-instance judgment (see paragraph 80 above). In these circumstances, it did not consider that it should have amended the indictment. In any event, it stressed that if the Municipal Court considered that T.M. should have been convicted of the basic form of the offence of procuring prostitution under Article 195 § 2 of the Criminal Code, it could have amended the legal classification of the charges itself.
On the basis of this report, on 21 August 2013 the State Attorney General’s Office informed the Human Rights Office of its findings endorsing the assessment of the case by the competent State Attorney’s Office.
The case file of the Municipal Court which the Government provided to the Court contains a document indicating that on 4 September 2012 the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister of Croatia forwarded to the Ministry of Social Policy and Youth and the Ministry of the Interior a complaint made by T.M. about the alleged mistreatment of her children by the applicant’s mother. The Office of the Deputy Prime Minister asked the relevant ministries to examine the matter and to report back on their findings. A copy of the Office’s request was also sent to T.M.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Croatia (Ustav Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 56/1990, with further amendments) read as follows:
Article 23
“No one shall be subjected to any form of ill-treatment ...
Forced or compulsory labour is forbidden.”
Article 35
“Everyone shall have the right to respect and legal protection of his or her private and family life, dignity, reputation and honour.”
Article 134
“International agreements in force which have been concluded and ratified in accordance with the Constitution and made public shall be part of the internal legal order of the Republic of Croatia and shall have precedence over the [domestic] statutes. ...”
The relevant part of the Criminal Code (Kazneni zakon, Official Gazette no. 110/1997, with further amendments), as in force at the relevant time, read as follows:
Trafficking in human beings and slavery
Article 175
“1.  Whoever violates the rules of international law in that he or she by the use of force or of a threat to use force, by means of fraud, by abduction, by abuse of authority or of a position of helplessness or in any other manner recruits, buys, sells, hands over, transports, transfers, incites or acts as intermediary in the purchase or delivery [of a person], or harbours a person for the purposes of slavery or a similar relationship, forced labour, sexual exploitation, prostitution or illegal human-organ transplant, or who keeps a person in slavery or a similar condition, shall be punished by imprisonment for one to ten years.
...
The existence of the criminal offence under paragraph 1 ... does not depend on whether the person concerned consented to force labour, servitude, sexual exploitation, slavery or a similar relationship, or illegal transplant of human organs.”
Procuring prostitution (Podvođenje)
Article 195
“...
Whoever, for profit, organises or arranges for another person to provide sexual services shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to three years.
Whoever, for profit, forces or entices a person to provide sexual services by the use of force or the threat of the use of force or by means of deception shall be punished by imprisonment from one to five years.
...
It is irrelevant for the existence of the criminal offence under this Article whether the person who was engaged in prostitution had already practised it.”
The relevant provisions of the Criminal Code (Official Gazette nos. 125/2011 and 144/2012) currently in force read as follows:
Slavery
Article 105
“1.  Whoever violates the rules of international law in that he or she places another in slavery or a similar relationship or keeps another in such a position, or buys, sells, transfers or acts as an intermediary in the sale or transfer of a person or entices another to sell his or her freedom or the freedom of a person whom he or she is caring for shall be punished by imprisonment for one to ten years.
...”
Trafficking in human beings
Article 106
“1.  Whoever by the use of force, of threat, of fraud, of deception, of abduction, of the abuse of authority or [abuse] of a difficult situation, or a dependency relationship, or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person, or in any other manner recruits, transports, transfers, harbours or receives a person or exchanges or transfers the control over a person for the purpose of exploitation of his or her labour by means of forced labour, servitude, slavery or a similar relationship, or for his or her exploitation for prostitution or other forms of sexual exploitation including pornography, or for the purpose of entering an illegal or forced marriage, for the removal of organs, for his or her participation in armed conflicts, or in order to commit an illegal act shall be punished by imprisonment for one to ten years.
...
The consent of the victim of trafficking in persons is irrelevant for the existence of the criminal offence in question.”
Prostitution
Article 157
“1.  Whoever, for profit or other gain lures, recruits or entices another person to provide sexual services or organises or arranges for another person to provide sexual services shall be punished by imprisonment for six month to five years.
Whoever, for profit, by the use of force or threat, deception, fraud, abuse of power or abuse of a difficult situation or a dependency relationship, forces or entices another person to provide sexual services, or uses sexual services of such a person for payment and knew or ought to have known of the above-mentioned circumstances, shall be punished by imprisonment for one to ten years.
...
It is irrelevant for the existence of the criminal offence whether the person who was lured, recruited, enticed or used for prostitution gave his or her consent or had already engaged in prostitution.”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Zakon o kaznenom postupku, Official Gazette no. 152/2008, with further amendments), as applicable at the relevant time when a particular procedural action was taken, read as follows:
Article 2
“1.  Criminal proceedings shall be instituted and conducted only at the request of a competent prosecutor. ...
In respect of criminal offences subject to public prosecution, the competent prosecutor shall be the State Attorney ...
Unless otherwise provided for by law, the State Attorney shall undertake a criminal prosecution where there is a reasonable suspicion that an identified person has committed a criminal offence subject to public prosecution and where there are no legal impediments to the prosecution of that person.”
Article 16
“1.  In criminal proceedings the victim and injured party shall have the rights provided for in this Code.
The police, investigators, State attorney and court shall act with special care with the victim of the criminal offence [concerned]. These authorities shall instruct the victim [of his or her rights] under paragraph 3 of this Article and under Articles 43-46 of this Code and care for the victim’s interests when adopting their decisions concerning the prosecution of the accused or when taking actions within the criminal proceedings in which the victim has to participate personally.
A victim suffering serious psycho-physical damage or serious consequences of a criminal offence has the right to the free professional aid of a counsellor in accordance with the law.”
Article 38
“1.  The basic power and the main duty of a State attorney shall be the prosecution of the perpetrators of criminal offences liable to State prosecution.”
Victim
Article 43
“1.  The victim of a criminal offence shall have:
(1)  the right to effective psychological and other professional help and to the support of a body or organisation providing support to the victims of criminal offences in accordance with the law;
(2)  the right to participate in the criminal proceedings as an injured party;
(3)  other rights provided for by law.
In accordance with special legislation, the victim of an offence punishable by five or more years’ imprisonment shall have the right:
(1)  to a legal aid counsellor before being heard in the criminal proceedings and when making a compensation claim, if he or she suffers serious psycho-physical damage or other serious consequences of the offence;
(2)  to compensation for pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage from the State fund as provided for in a special law ...
When taking the first action in which the victim participates, the court [conducting the proceedings], a State Attorney, an investigator and the police shall inform the victim of:
(1)  his or her rights under paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article ...
(2)  of his or her rights [in the proceedings] as an injured party.”
Article 45
“1.  The victim of a criminal offence against his or her sexual freedom and morals shall have, in addition to those under Articles 43 and 44 of this Code, the following rights:
(1)  to free consultation with a counsellor before giving his or her evidence;
(2)  to be interviewed by an officer of his or her own gender when interviewed by the police;
(3)  not to answer a question concerning his or her strictly private life;
(4)  to ask to give his or her evidence by means of audio-visual equipment as provided for under Article 292(4) of this Code.
(5)  to confidentiality of personal data;
(6)  to request the exclusion of the public from a hearing.
Before the victim gives his or her evidence for the first time, the court [conducting the proceedings], a State attorney, an investigator and the police shall inform the victim of the criminal offence under paragraph 1 of this Article of his or her rights under this Article.”
Article 52
“1.  The victim shall have the right to point to the relevant facts and to propose evidence necessary for the establishment of the criminal offence, identification of the perpetrator and establishment of the victim’s civil claim.
At the hearing the victim shall have the right to propose evidence, question the accused, witnesses and experts and make objections and give explanations concerning their evidence, as well as to give other statements and requests.
The victim shall have the right to inspect files and examine objects used as evidence ...
The State Attorney and the court shall inform the victim of the rights set out in [this Article].”
Main hearing
Article 419
“1.  The parties shall have the right to propose the questioning of witnesses and experts and the taking and examination of other evidence. The trial panel can take and examine evidence which the parties have not proposed, or in respect of which they have withdrawn their proposal, if it considers it to be important for the establishment of circumstances relating to the exclusion of unlawfulness or guilt or it concerns [the issues of sanctioning].
... The President of the trial panel shall inform the parties and the injured party that [the court] shall not take and examine evidence of which the parties were aware before the start of the hearing but for which they have failed, without justified reason, to make a timely request for examination.”
Article 441
“1.  If during the hearing the prosecutor finds that the evidence taken and examined in the proceedings suggests that the factual circumstances set out in the indictment have changed, he or she can [orally or in writing] amend the indictment until the end of the proceedings for the taking and examination of evidence.
In order to prepare the amendments to the indictment or to prepare the defence [as appropriate] the parties may seek adjournment of the trial.”
Article 449
“1.  A judgment may refer only to a person who has been indicted and only to the criminal offence which is the subject of the charges in the [initially lodged] indictment or the indictment amended or extended at a hearing.
The court is not bound by the prosecutor’s legal classification of the offence but the accused cannot be held guilty of a more serious offence than the one he or she has been indicted for.”
The Minor Offences against Public Order and Peace Act (Zakon o prekršajima protiv javnog reda i mira, Official Gazette no. 5/1990 with further amendments) proscribes acts facilitating prostitution (section 7) and prostitution itself (section 12). Both offences are punishable by a fine or thirty days’ imprisonment.
A claim for the compensation in respect of damage resulting from an infringement of rights of personality can be made under the Civil Obligations Act (Zakon o obveznim odnosima, Official Gazette nos. 35/2005, with further amendments). Rights of personality within the meaning of that Act are, amongst other, the right to physical and mental health, reputation, honour, dignity, privacy of personal and family life, liberty (section 19).
On 1 July 2013 the Act on Compensation for Damage to Victims of Criminal Offences came into force (Zakon o novčanoj naknadi žrtvama kaznenih djela, Official Gazette, no. 80/2008, with further amendments). It provides for the possibility for the victims of violent offences and offences against sexual integrity to obtain compensation from the State of some forms of damage under certain conditions.
In May 2002 the Government of Croatia established the National Board for the Suppression of Human Trafficking as a multidisciplinary inter-departmental body composed of representatives of the relevant authorities and non-governmental organisations working in the field of human trafficking. The Board is in charge of preparing programmes, plans and policy guidelines in this field. Within the Board, there is also an Operative Team for the Suppression of Human Trafficking which ensures the effective functioning and performance of the Board’s tasks.
Since 2002 the Government have also adopted several National Plans for the Suppression of Human Trafficking. They are aimed at establishing guidelines and defining policies in particular in relation to the improvement of the normative framework of human trafficking; ensuring a proactive approach to the identification of victims of human trafficking; achieving effective coordination between the prosecuting authorities, other State bodies and civil society; processing of data on cases of human trafficking; raising awareness of and working on the prevention of human trafficking; and ensuring sufficient financial means for these activities. Under the National Plan, the Human Rights Office coordinates the activities in the field of human trafficking.
In addition, the activities and coordination of the work of the national authorities in the suppression of human trafficking is based on three specialised protocols: the Protocol on the identification, assistance and protection of victims of human trafficking (2008); the Protocol on procedures during the voluntary return of victims of human trafficking (2009); and the Protocol on the integration/reintegration of the victims of human trafficking (2011).
The Protocol on the identification, assistance and protection of victims of human trafficking regulates the procedure for recognition of the status of victim of human trafficking. The identification is carried out by specialised bodies of the Ministry of the Interior in cooperation with the Red Cross and representatives of civil society. The decision on identification can be taken by the Ministry of the Interior or the Operative team of the National Board for the Suppression of Human Trafficking. The Human Rights Office formally certifies the decision on identification. The purpose of the procedure is to ensure various rights of assistance and protection to the victim.
The domestic authorities also cooperate actively with civil society and in particular with the “Petra” network of non-governmental organisations dealing with the issues of human trafficking and sexual exploitation of women and children, which is financed by the Human Rights Office. The Rosa Centre is a member of the “Petra” network.
The 1949 Convention consolidated several treaties adopted between 1904 and 1933. It came into force on 25 July 1951 and was ratified by Croatia on 12 October 1992. In addition to Croatia, it has been ratified by twenty-five other Council of Europe member States.
The relevant parts of the 1949 Convention read as follows:
Preamble
“Whereas prostitution and the accompanying evil of the traffic in persons for the purpose of prostitution are incompatible with the dignity and worth of the human person and endanger the welfare of the individual, the family and the community,
...”
Article 1
“The Parties to the present Convention agree to punish any person who, to gratify the passions of another:
(1)  Procures, entices or leads away, for purposes of prostitution, another person, even with the consent of that person;
(2)  Exploits the prostitution of another person, even with the consent of that person.”
Article 2
“The Parties to the present Convention further agree to punish any person who:
(1)  Keeps or manages, or knowingly finances or takes part in the financing of a brothel;
(2)  Knowingly lets or rents a building or other place or any part thereof for the purpose of the prostitution of others.”
The United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (“UNCTOC”) forms part of the central legal framework concerning trafficking in persons under international law. It represents the “parent instrument” to a specialised protocol on the matter, namely the Palermo Protocol.
UNCTOC was signed on 12-15 December 2000 and entered into force on 29 September 2003. 189 States are parties to this Convention. The Palermo Protocol was signed on 15 November 2000 and entered into force on 25 December 2003. 173 States are parties to this Protocol. Both instruments were ratified by Croatia on 24 January 2003.
The purpose of UNCTOC is to promote cooperation with a view to preventing and combating transnational organised crime more efficiently (Article 1). The scope of this Convention is subject to three prerequisites: firstly, the offence in question must have a transnational aspect, secondly, it must involve an “organized criminal group” and thirdly, the offence must constitute a “serious crime” (Article 3). However, Article 34 § 2 of UNCTOC provides the following:
“The offences established in accordance with articles 5, 6, 8 and 23 of this Convention shall be established in the domestic law of each State Party independently of the translational nature or the involvement of an organized criminal group as described in article 3, paragraph 1, of this Convention, except to the extent that article 5 of this Convention would require the involvement of an organized criminal group.”
For its part, the Palermo Protocol aims to: (i) prevent and combat trafficking in persons, paying particular attention to women and children; (ii) protect and assist the victims of such trafficking, with full respect for their human rights; (iii) promote cooperation among States Parties in order to meet those objectives (Article 2). The provisions of UNCTOC apply, mutatis mutandis, to the Palermo Protocol unless provided otherwise (Article 1 § 2).
Trafficking in human beings has been defined for the first time under international law in the Palermo Protocol as follows (Article 3 (a)):
‘Trafficking’ in persons shall mean the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, by means of the threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person, for the purpose of exploitation. Exploitation shall include, at a minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs ...”
The crime of trafficking in persons has three constituent elements: (i) an action (what is done: the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons); (ii) the means (how it is done: by means of the threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person); (iii) an exploitative purpose (why it is done: this includes at a minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs). A combination of the three constituent elements is necessary in order for the crime of trafficking to be established as regards adult victims (UNODC, Combating Trafficking in Persons: A Handbook for Parliamentarians, March 2009, No. 16-2009, pp. 13-14).
Article 3 (b) clarifies that if one of the means set forth in Article 3 (a) is used, it is irrelevant whether the person expressed his/her consent or not. In its Issue Paper The Role of ‘Consent’ in the Trafficking in Persons Protocol (2014), the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (“UNODC”) found that the requirement to show “means” affirms that, at least within the Protocol, exploitative conditions alone are insufficient to establish trafficking of adults.
The terms “exploitation of the prostitution of others” and “sexual exploitation” have been intentionally left undefined in the Palermo Protocol to allow States, irrespective of their domestic policies on prostitution, to ratify the Protocol. This was highlighted in the Interpretative notes for the official records (travaux préparatoires) of the negotiation of the Palermo Protocol in the following manner (paragraph 64, p. 12):
“[T]he Protocol addresses the exploitation of the prostitution of others and other forms of sexual exploitation only in the context of trafficking in persons and ... the terms ‘exploitation of prostitution of others’ or ‘other forms of sexual exploitation’ are not defined in the Protocol, which is therefore without prejudice to how States Parties address prostitution in their respective domestic laws.”
However, in the Model Law against Trafficking in Persons (pp. 1315 and 19), UNODC defined “exploitation of prostitution of others” as the unlawful obtaining of financial or other material benefit from the prostitution of another person. It also defined “sexual exploitation” as the obtaining of financial or other benefits through the involvement of another person in prostitution, sexual servitude or other kinds of sexual services, including pornographic acts or the production of pornographic materials. It should also be noted that as regards “forced labour or services”, the UNODC explained that “initial recruitment can be voluntary and the coercive mechanisms to keep a person in an exploitative situation may come into play later.”
Furthermore, in a document entitled “Joint UN Commentary on the EU Directive – A Human Rights-Based Approach” (2011), issued by the relevant United Nations bodies (the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR); the UN Refugee Agency (UNHCR); UNICEF; UNODC; UN Women; and the International Labour Organisation), the following was noted (p. 104):
“Exploitation of prostitution of others and sexual exploitation are not defined in international law. The terms have been intentionally left undefined in the Protocol in order to allow all States, independent of their domestic policies on prostitution, to ratify the Protocol. While the Protocol draws a distinction between exploitation for forced labour or services and sexual exploitation, this should not lead to the conclusion that coercive sexual exploitation does not amount to forced labour or services, particularly in the context of trafficking. Coercive sexual exploitation and forced prostitution fall within the scope of the definition of forced labour ...”
According to Article 4, the scope of the Palermo Protocol is as follows:
“This Protocol shall apply, except as otherwise stated herein, to the prevention, investigation and prosecution of the offences established in accordance with article 5 of this Protocol, where those offences are transnational in nature and involve an organized criminal group, as well as to the protection of victims of such offences.”
According to the Model Law against Trafficking in Persons prepared by UNODC (p. 8), although Article 4 limits its applicability to offences that are transnational in nature and involve an organised criminal group, these requirements are not part of the definition of the offence and therefore national laws should establish trafficking in persons as a criminal offence, independently of the transnational nature or the involvement of an organised criminal group. In this connection, reference is made to Article 34 § 2 of UNCTOC (see paragraph 111 above).
Article 5 of the Palermo Protocol provides as follows:
“1.  Each State Party shall adopt such legislative and other measures as may be necessary to establish as criminal offences the conduct set forth in article 3 of this Protocol, when committed intentionally.
Each State Party shall also adopt such legislative and other measures as may be necessary to establish as criminal offences:
(a)  Subject to the basic concepts of its legal system, attempting to commit an offence established in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article;
(b)  Participating as an accomplice in an offence established in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article; and
(c)  Organizing or directing other persons to commit an offence established in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article.”
Article 6 provides for various measures of assistance to and protection of victims of trafficking in persons. In so far as relevant for the present case, it reads as follows:
“...
Each State Party shall ensure that its domestic legal or administrative system contains measures that provide to victims of trafficking in persons, in appropriate cases:
(a)  Information on relevant court and administrative proceedings;
(b)  Assistance to enable their views and concerns to be presented and considered at appropriate stages of criminal proceedings against offenders, in a manner not prejudicial to the rights of the defence.
Each State Party shall consider implementing measures to provide for the physical, psychological and social recovery of victims of trafficking in persons, including, in appropriate cases, in cooperation with non-governmental organizations, other relevant organizations and other elements of civil society, and, in particular, the provision of:
(a)  Appropriate housing;
(b)  Counselling and information, in particular as regards their legal rights, in a language that the victims of trafficking in persons can understand;
(c)  Medical, psychological and material assistance; and
(d)  Employment, educational and training opportunities.
...
Each State Party shall endeavour to provide for the physical safety of victims of trafficking in persons while they are within its territory.
Each State Party shall ensure that its domestic legal system contains measures that offer victims of trafficking in persons the possibility of obtaining compensation for damage suffered.”
CEDAW was adopted in 1979 by the UN General Assembly and ratified by Croatia on 9 September 1992. Article 6 reads:
“States Parties shall take all appropriate measures, including legislation, to suppress all forms of traffic in women and exploitation of prostitution of women.”
The CEDAW Committee, in its General recommendation No. 19 on violence against women (1992), held as follows:
“13.  States parties are required by article 6 to take measures to suppress all forms of traffic in women and exploitation of the prostitution of women.
Poverty and unemployment increase opportunities for trafficking in women. In addition to established forms of trafficking there are new forms of sexual exploitation ... [which are] incompatible with the equal enjoyment of rights by women and with respect for their rights and dignity. They put women at special risk of violence and abuse.
Poverty and unemployment force many women, including young girls, into prostitution. Prostitutes are especially vulnerable to violence because their status, which may be unlawful, tends to marginalize them. They need the equal protection of laws against rape and other forms of violence.”
In its General recommendation No. 35, which complements and updates its General recommendation No. 19, the CEDAW Committee held, inter alia, as follows:
“10.  The Committee considers that gender-based violence against women is one of the fundamental social, political and economic means by which the subordinate position of women with respect to men and their stereotyped roles are perpetuated ...
In general recommendation No. 28 and general recommendation No. 33, the Committee confirmed that discrimination against women was inextricably linked to other factors that affected their lives. The Committee, in its jurisprudence, has highlighted the fact that such factors include women’s ... being in prostitution, as well as trafficking in women.
...
The Committee recommends that States parties implement the following measures with regard to prosecution and punishment for gender-based violence against women:
(a)  Ensure effective access for victims to courts and tribunals and that the authorities adequately respond to all cases of gender-based violence against women, including by applying criminal law and, as appropriate, ex officio prosecution to bring alleged perpetrators to trial in a fair, impartial, timely and expeditious manner and imposing adequate penalties ...”
The CEDAW Committee, in its background paper concerning Article 6 summarising the travaux préparatoires and the jurisprudence of the Committee (CEDAW/2003/II/WP.2), concluded as follows:
“The Committee consistently addressed the issue of prostitution and trafficking in women and girls when considering the initial and periodic reports of the States parties. In general, the approach taken by the Committee focused on the need to adopt a comprehensive strategy against the exploitation of prostitution and trafficking which would include: adoption or review of legislation to de-criminalize prostitutes and impose severe sanctions to pimps, procurers and traffickers; implementation of measures aimed at improving the economic situation of women and girls so as to eliminate their vulnerability to prostitution and trafficking; provision of social support and health-care services to prostitutes; implementation of rehabilitation and reintegration measures for women and girls who had been victims of trafficking; and training of border police and law enforcement officials in order that they might recognize and provide support for victims of trafficking. In its approach, the Committee laid particular emphasis on the need to respect the human rights of prostitutes and victims of trafficking.”
On 28 July 2015 the CEDAW Committee published its concluding observations on the combined fourth and fifth periodic reports of Croatia (CEDAW/C/HRV/CO/4-5). As regards trafficking and exploitation of prostitution, it noted as follows:
“20.  While the Committee notes with appreciation the legislative and policy measures and programmes aimed at protecting women and girls who are victims of trafficking, it is concerned:
(a)  That perpetrators of trafficking are often charged with offences of pimping rather than the more serious offence of human trafficking, resulting in a disturbingly low rate of conviction for human trafficking;
(b)  That victims of exploitation of prostitution are sometimes prosecuted rather than provided with appropriate support measures, while persons purchasing sex from victims of forced prostitution and/or victims of trafficking are not consistently prosecuted and commensurately punished;
(c)  That there are inadequate mechanisms for identifying victims of trafficking in situations of heightened risk;
(d)  That there are inadequate systems for the collection of disaggregated data on victims of trafficking, including by sex, age, ethnicity and nationality;
(e)  That there are inadequate shelter and training of personnel therein, for victims of trafficking;
(f)  That there are inadequate measures to address the specific vulnerabilities and needs of non-national victims of trafficking.”
It therefore recommended, inter alia, that Croatia:
“(a) Ensure that perpetrators of trafficking receive sentences commensurate with the gravity of the offence;
...
(c)  Strengthen measures to identify and provide support to women at risk of trafficking ...”
In 1993 the UN General Assembly adopted, by consensus, the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women (A/RES/48/104) to complement CEDAW. Article 2 (b) of this Declaration emphasises that violence against women shall be understood to encompass, but not be limited to the following:
“Physical, sexual and psychological violence occurring within the general community, including rape, sexual abuse, sexual harassment and intimidation at work, in educational institutions and elsewhere, trafficking in women and forced prostitution.”
The ICCPR was adopted in 1966 by the UN General Assembly and ratified by Croatia in 1992. Article 8 of the ICCPR reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“1.  No one shall be held in slavery; slavery and the slave-trade in all their forms shall be prohibited.
No one shall be held in servitude.
(a)  No one shall be required to perform forced or compulsory labour.”
In its General Comment no. 28 on Equality of rights between men and women (CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.10), the Human Rights Committee (“the HRC”) held that States parties should inform the Committee of measures taken to eliminate trafficking of women and children, within the country or across borders, and forced prostitution.
On 30 April 2015 the HRC published its concluding observations on the third periodic report of Croatia (CCPR/C/HRV/CO/3). As regards trafficking, it held as follows:
“The Committee takes note of reports indicating retrogression with regard to measures taken to combat trafficking in persons. The Committee is also concerned that trafficking in persons persists in the State party. The Committee is further concerned about the small number of prosecutions and the leniency of the sentences imposed on traffickers (art. 8).
The State party should vigorously pursue its public policy to combat trafficking. It should continue its efforts to raise awareness of and combat trafficking in persons, including at the regional level and in cooperation with neighbouring countries. The State party should train its police officers, border control personnel, judges, lawyers and other relevant personnel in order to raise awareness of the matter and of the rights of victims. It should ensure that all individuals responsible for trafficking in persons are prosecuted and punished commensurately with the crimes committed, and that victims of trafficking are compensated and rehabilitated. Furthermore, the State party should step up its efforts to identify victims of trafficking and ensure the systematic collection of data on trafficking, which should be disaggregated by age, sex and ethnic origin and should also be focused on trafficking flows from, to and through its territory.”
In 2002 the High Commissioner for Human Rights issued Recommended Principles and Guidelines on Human Rights and Human Trafficking (E/2002/68/Add.1), which adopted a rights-based approach to human trafficking.
As regards the primacy of human rights, the Recommended Principles emphasise that States have a responsibility under international law to act with due diligence to prevent trafficking, to investigate and prosecute traffickers and to assist and protect trafficked persons (Principle 2).
As to protection and assistance, Principle 9 requires that legal and other assistance be provided to trafficked persons for the duration of any criminal, civil or other actions against suspected traffickers.
In so far as criminalisation and punishment are concerned, Principle 13 provides that States must “effectively investigate, prosecute and adjudicate trafficking, including its component acts and related conduct”.
In her annual report to the Human Rights Council, in 2006, the Special Rapporteur Sigma Huda focused on demand for commercial sexual exploitation and trafficking. In particular, she noted as follows:
“41.  The Protocol [Palermo] does not necessarily require States to abolish all possible forms of prostitution. It does, however, require States to act in good faith towards the abolition of all forms of child prostitution and all forms of adult prostitution in which people are recruited, transported, harboured, or received by means of the threat or use of force, or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of one person having control over another, for the purpose of exploiting that person’s prostitution.
For the most part, prostitution as actually practiced in the world usually does satisfy the elements of trafficking. It is rare that one finds a case in which the paths to prostitution and/or a person’s experience within prostitution do not involve, at the very least, an abuse of power and/or an abuse of vulnerability. Power and vulnerability in this context must be understood to include power disparities based on gender, race, ethnicity and poverty. Put simply, the road to prostitution and life within “the life” is rarely one marked by empowerment or adequate options.
Thus, State parties with legalized prostitution industries have a heavy responsibility to ensure that the conditions which actually pertain to the practice of prostitution within their borders are free from the illicit means delineated in subparagraph (a) of the Protocol definition, so as to ensure that their legalized prostitution regimes are not simply perpetuating widespread and systematic trafficking. As current conditions throughout the world attest, States parties that maintain legalized prostitution are far from satisfying this obligation.”
In her annual report to the Human Rights Council, in 2012, the Special Rapporteur Joy Ngozi Ezeilo focused on integration of a human rights-based approach in the prosecution of cases of human trafficking. In particular, she noted as follows:
“31.  Timely and efficient identification of victims is central to the criminalization of trafficking, as it affects the ability of law enforcement officials to prosecute traffickers effectively and is fundamental in terms of being able to provide trafficked persons with the necessary support services. The Special Rapporteur observes, however, that the issue of identification raises a number of complex pragmatic questions, in particular concerning how, where and by whom identification should be performed.
...
Police are often at the forefront when identifying victims, and thus play a critical role in this process. While they may be experienced in law enforcement in general, they may not have specific expertise in trafficking in persons; for this reason, the Special Rapporteur highlights the importance of ensuring that they are given appropriate training to identify victims of trafficking accurately and with sensitivity.
...
Proactive investigations that seek to collect evidence to obviate or support victim testimony are another way for States to realize their due diligence obligation to prosecute trafficking without unduly burdening victims. The Special Rapporteur notes that alternative or corroborative evidence may be difficult to collect in trafficking cases because of limited resources and a lack of trained officials, particularly in States most affected by trafficking. The situation may also be compounded by the hidden nature of the crime and the lack of concrete records or indicators of criminal activity. It is important to acknowledge that substituting victim testimony with alternative evidence may not allow for full and effective prosecution. Nevertheless, the added value of such evidence merits attention, not least because the discovery of additional or corroborative evidence may alleviate some of the pressure put on victims during the prosecution process.”
The ILO has adopted two conventions on forced labour, namely the 1930 Forced Labour Convention (“Convention No. 29”) and the 1957 Abolition of Forced Labour Convention (“Convention No. 105”), which were ratified by Croatia on 8 October 1991 and 5 March 1997 respectively.
In 2014 two new instruments were adopted by the ILO with a view to providing a comprehensive strategy against all forms of forced labour, including trafficking in persons, namely the Protocol to Convention No. 29 and Recommendation 203 on Supplementary Measures for the Effective Suppression of Forced Labour.
Convention No. 29 requires ratifying States to suppress all forms of forced or compulsory labour. Article 2 § 1 reads as follows:
“For the purposes of this Convention the term forced or compulsory labour shall mean all work or service which is exacted from any person under the menace of any penalty and for which the said person has not offered himself voluntarily.”
The definition consists of three elements: (i) work or service – this refers to all types of work, service and employment, occurring in any activity, industry or sector, including in the informal economy. Forced labour can occur in both the public and private sectors; (ii) menace of a penalty – this refers to a wide range of penalties used to compel someone to perform work or service, including penal sanctions and various forms of direct or indirect coercion such as physical violence, psychological threats or the non-payment of wages. The “penalty” may also consist of a loss of rights or privileges; and (iii) involuntariness – the term “offered voluntarily” refer to the free and informed consent of a worker to enter into an employment relationship and his or her freedom to leave the employment at any time. For example, an employer or recruiter could interfere with this freedom by making false promises to induce a worker to take a job that he or she would not otherwise have accepted (ILO, Standards on Forced Labour: the New Protocol and Recommendation at a glance (2016), p. 5).
The ILO’s Special Action Programme to Combat Forced Labour has devised eleven indicators of forced labour. They are: (i) abuse of vulnerability, (ii) deception, (iii) restriction of movement, (iv) isolation, (v) physical and sexual violence, (vi) intimidation and threats, (vii) retention of identity documents, (viii) withholding of wages, (ix) debt bondage, (x) abusive working and living conditions, and (xi) excessive overtime. It has been suggested that the presence of a single indicator in a given situation may in some cases imply the existence of forced labour but that in others it may be several indicators, which, taken together, point to a forced labour practice.
However, the ILO has stressed that “forced labour” encompasses activities which are more serious than the mere failure to respect labour laws and working conditions. For example, the failure to pay a worker the statutory minimum wage does not in itself constitute forced labour (ILO, Human Trafficking and Forced Labour Exploitation: Guidance for Legislation and Law Enforcement (2005), pp. 19-21).
The Committee of Experts which monitors the implementation of the ILO Conventions has considered the following concerning the link between human trafficking and trafficking-related conduct and forced or compulsory labour (ILO, Report of the ILO Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations, Report III (Part IB), p. 41):
“77.  A crucial element of the definition of trafficking is its purpose, namely, exploitation, which is specifically defined to include forced labour or services, slavery or similar practices, servitude and various forms of sexual exploitation. The notion of exploitation of labour inherent in this definition allows for a link to be established between the Palermo Protocol and Convention No. 29 and makes clear that trafficking in persons for the purpose of exploitation is encompassed by the definition of forced or compulsory labour provided under Article 2, paragraph 1, of the Convention.
While a certain distinction has been drawn in the above definition between trafficking for forced labour or services and trafficking for sexual exploitation, this should not lead to a conclusion that coercive sexual exploitation does not amount to forced labour or services, particularly in the context of human trafficking. The inclusion of ‘exploitation for the prostitution of others’ may create difficulties in this since, since there is no duty to criminalize prostitution, either under the Palermo Protocol, or under Convention No. 29, and consequently prostitution and related matters falling outside the scope of trafficking in persons should be dealt with by individual countries in accordance with their national laws and policies. Nonetheless, it seems clear that coercive sexual exploitation and forced prostitution do come within the scope of the definition of forced or compulsory labour in Article 2, paragraph 1, of the Convention.”
In this connection, it is also worth mentioning that the European Commission, together with the ILO, developed the Operational Indicators of Trafficking in Human Beings, which provide for three different indicators (strong, medium and weak) applied to each of the elements of the trafficking definition (act, means and purpose).
In its Direct request to Croatia on the application of Convention No. 29, adopted in 2018, the Committee of Experts held, inter alia, as follows:
“The Committee ... requests the Government to take the necessary measures to ensure that investigations and prosecutions are carried out against perpetrators of trafficking in persons.
...
The Committee ... requests the Government to strengthen its efforts with regard to the identification of victims of trafficking for purposes of both sexual and labour exploitation, and to take the necessary measures to ensure that appropriate protection and assistance is provided to such victims. The Committee also requests the Government to provide information on the measures taken and the results achieved in this regard.”
The Protocol to Convention No. 29 aims to address various gaps in the implementation of that Convention by reaffirming that measures of prevention, protection and remedies are necessary to achieve the effective and sustained suppression of forced or compulsory labour. Croatia has not yet ratified this Protocol.
In particular, the preamble to the Protocol recognises the following:
“[T]he context and forms of forced or compulsory labour have changed and trafficking in persons for the purposes of forced or compulsory labour, which may involve sexual exploitation, is the subject of growing international concern and requires urgent action for its effective elimination ...”
Article 1 reads, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“1.  In giving effect to its obligations under the Convention to suppress forced or compulsory labour, each Member shall take effective measures to prevent and eliminate its use, to provide to victims protection and access to appropriate and effective remedies, such as compensation, and to sanction the perpetrators of forced or compulsory labour.
...
The definition of forced or compulsory labour contained in the Convention is reaffirmed, and therefore the measures referred to in this Protocol shall include specific action against trafficking in persons for the purposes of forced or compulsory labour.”
Article 3 reads:
“Each Member shall take effective measures for the identification, release, protection, recovery and rehabilitation of all victims of forced or compulsory labour, as well as the provisions of other forms of assistance and support.”
The Anti-Trafficking Convention entered into force on 1 February 2008. It was ratified by Croatia on 5 September 2007.
The Anti-Trafficking Convention is a comprehensive treaty which aims to prevent and combat trafficking in human beings, while guaranteeing gender equality; to protect the human rights of the victims of trafficking, design a comprehensive framework for the protection and assistance of victims and witnesses, while guaranteeing gender equality, as well as to ensure effective investigation and prosecution; and to promote international cooperation on action against trafficking in human beings (Article 1).
Article 39 of the Anti-trafficking Convention states that it does not affect the rights and obligations deriving from the Palermo Protocol, that it was intended to enhance the protections afforded by the Protocol and to develop the standards contained therein.
The definition of trafficking in human beings under Article 4 (a) is identical to Article 3 (a) of the Palermo Protocol and consists of the same three components (see paragraph 113 above).
In the Explanatory report to the Anti-Trafficking Convention it is pointed out that trafficking in human beings is a combination of these constituents and not the constituents taken in isolation. Thus, as in the Palermo Protocol, for there to be trafficking in adult human beings, ingredients from each of the three categories must be present together.
As regards terminology, the Explanatory report clarifies that “recruitment” includes recruitment by using new information technologies like the Internet (see further, the Council of Europe publication “Trafficking in human beings: Internet recruitment Misuse of the Internet for the recruitment of victims of trafficking in human beings” EG-THB-INT (2007) 1), and that “transport” does not need to be across a border to be a constituent of trafficking in human beings.
It also highlights the fact that fraud and deception are frequently used by the traffickers, as when victims are led to believe that an attractive job awaits them rather than the intended exploitation. The term “abuse of vulnerability” means “abuse of any situation in which the person involved has no real and acceptable alternative to submitting to the abuse”. It this connection it is further held as follows:
“The vulnerability may be of any kind, whether physical, psychological, emotional, family-related, social and economic. The situation might, for example, involve insecurity or illegality of the victim’s administrative status, economic dependence or fragile health. In short, the situation can be any hardship in which a human being is impelled to accept being exploited.”
The terms “exploitation of the prostitution of others” and “other forms of sexual exploitation” are not defined in the Anti-Trafficking Convention. The Explanatory report states that this is so as not to prejudice how State parties deal with prostitution in domestic law.
Article 4 (b) reads as follows:
“The consent of a victim of ‘trafficking in human beings’ to the intended exploitation set forth in subparagraph (a) of this article shall be irrelevant where any of the means set forth in subparagraph (a) have been used.”
According to the Explanatory report the approach adopted in Article 4 (b) is in line with the approach to consent in the Court’s case-law.
The scope of the Anti-Trafficking Convention is clearly meant to include “all forms of trafficking in human beings, whether national or transnational, whether or not connected with organized crime” (Article 2).
Chapter III concerns measures to protect and promote the rights of victims. In particular, Article 10 § 1 on identification of the victims reads as follows:
“Each Party shall provide its competent authorities with persons who are trained and qualified in preventing and combating trafficking in human beings, in identifying and helping victims, including children, and shall ensure that the different authorities collaborate with each other as well as with relevant support organisations, so that victims can be identified in a procedure duly taking into account the special situation of women and child victims and, in appropriate cases, issued with residence permits under the conditions provided for in Article 14 of the present Convention.”
The Explanatory report to the Anti-Trafficking Convention clarifies that the competent authorities involved in the identification process need not be specialists in human-trafficking matters but that they must have the necessary training and qualifications to be able to identify victims.
Further, Articles 11 to 16 of the Anti-Trafficking Convention provide for further measures of assistance and protection of victims: protection of their private life; psychological, social and legal assistance to victims; recognition of a recovery and reflection period for the victim to recover and escape the influence of traffickers and/or to take an informed decision on cooperating with the authorities; granting of residence permits in some instances; providing for the possibility of compensation and legal redress; and measures to facilitate the repatriation and return of victims.
Chapters IV and V of the Anti-Trafficking Convention contain a series of obligations on States with a view to enabling the effective investigation and prosecution of traffickers, including the attribution of proportionate and dissuasive sanctions.
Article 18 is identical to Article 5 of the Palermo Protocol and provides that States shall adopt such legislative and other measures as may be necessary to establish as criminal offences the conduct contained in Article 4 of this Convention, when committed intentionally. Article 23 provides for the necessity of introducing effective, proportionate and dissuasive sanctions and measures.
Article 27 § 1, concerning prosecution, reads as follows:
“Each Party shall ensure that investigations into or prosecution of offences established in accordance with this Convention shall not be dependent upon the report or accusation made by a victim, at least when the offence was committed in whole or in part on its territory.”
Other relevant procedural issues are regulated in Articles 28 and 30, and concern the protection of victims, witnesses and collaborators with the judicial authorities and the protection of victims during court proceedings.
Chapter VII of the Anti-Trafficking Convention provides for the establishment of a monitoring mechanism that will supervise its implementation by the member States. It consists of two pillars: (i) the Group of Experts on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (“GRETA”) – a group of independent experts, and (ii) the Committee of the Parties – a political body composed of the representatives of all States parties to the Convention.
Following the first evaluation round of the Convention, GRETA devoted a part, in its 4th General Report (2015), to stock-taking. It noted, inter alia, as regards investigation, prosecutions and sanctions on human-trafficking cases, as follows:
“One of the purposes of the Convention is to ensure the effective investigation and prosecution of trafficking offences. GRETA’s evaluation of 35 parties to the Convention reveals that there is an important gap between the number of identified victims of trafficking and the number of convictions. GRETA’s reports refer to a variety of reasons for this gap: over-reliance of victims’ statements, issues around credibility of witnesses who may change their statements over time, or difficulties in relation to the sufficiency of evidence ...
Investigators, prosecutors and judges who are not specialized and trained to deal with trafficking cases may be prejudiced vis-à-vis victims of trafficking and insensitive to the problems experienced by them.
...
GRETA has urged 17 countries to address gaps in the investigation and the presentation of trafficking in human being cases in court with a view to improving the conviction rate and securing sentences proportionate to the seriousness of the crime. In this context, GRETA has stressed the need to improve the training and specialization of judges, prosecutors, police investigators and lawyers regarding trafficking in human beings and the rights of victims of trafficking, stressing the severe impact of exploitation on victims and the importance of ensuring that victims are prepared psychologically before they give statements.”
Croatia has been subject to two rounds of evaluations by GRETA. In its second evaluation report published on 4 February 2016 GRETA considered that since the adoption of its first report on Croatia in 2011, progress had been made in a number of areas but that there remained some issues which gave rise to concern. It therefore urged the Croatian authorities, inter alia, as follows:
“[T]ake additional steps to ensure that all victims of trafficking are identified as such and can benefit from the assistance and protection measures contained in the Convention, in particular by:
-  taking steps so that law enforcement officials, social workers, NGOs and other relevant actors adopt a more proactive approach and increase their outreach work to identify victims of human trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation;
-  to take additional legislative and practical measures to ensure that:
-  trafficking in human beings cases are investigated proactively, prosecuted successfully and lead to effective, proportionate and dissuasive sanctions;
-  the offence of trafficking in human beings is excluded from the plea bargaining procedure.”
In Recommendation 1325 (1997) on traffic in women and forced prostitution in Council of Europe member States, the Parliamentary Assembly, defined traffic in women and forced prostitution as follows:
“2.  ... [A]ny legal or illegal transporting of women and/or trade in them, with or without their initial consent, for economic gain, with the purpose of subsequent forced prostitution, forced marriage, or other forms of forced sexual exploitation. The use of force may be physical, sexual and/or psychological, and includes intimidation, rape, abuse of authority or a situation of dependence.”
Considering trafficking in women and forced prostitution to be a form of inhuman and degrading treatment and a flagrant violation of human rights, it recommended that the Committee of Ministers elaborate a convention on traffic in women and forced prostitution.
The Committee of Ministers in its Recommendation No. R (2000) 11 on action against trafficking in human beings for the purpose of sexual exploitation, noted that trafficking in human beings for the purpose of sexual exploitation, which mainly concerned women and young persons, might result in slavery for the victim and recommended, inter alia, that member States review their legislation and practice in line with the measures described in the appendix to the recommendation.
In Recommendation Rec (2002) 5 on the protection of women against violence, the Committee of Ministers reminded States, inter alia, of their obligation to exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate and punish acts of violence, whether those acts were perpetrated by the State or private persons, and provide protection to victims. In its appendix, it is stated that the term “violence against women” encompasses, amongst other things, instances of trafficking in women for the purposes of sexual exploitation.
The Parliamentary Assembly in its Recommendation 1545 (2002) on a campaign against trafficking in women noted that “in European societies trafficking is a very complex subject which is closely linked to prostitution and hidden forms of exploitation, such as domestic slavery, catalogue marriages and sex tourism”. It therefore called on all European countries to develop common policies and actions covering all aspects of this problem, such as introducing effective punishment of traffickers.
In its Recommendation 1815 (2007) entitled “Prostitution – which stance to take?”, the Parliamentary Assembly stated that all necessary measures must be taken to combat forced prostitution and trafficking in human beings. It further noted as follows:
“Regarding adult voluntary prostitution, the Assembly encourages the Committee of Ministers to recommend that Council of Europe member states formulate an explicit policy on prostitution. In particular, they must avoid double standards and policies which criminalise and penalise prostitutes.”
On 11 June 2008, in its reply to the Parliamentary Assembly Recommendation 1815 (2007), the Committee of Ministers noted as follows:
“[T]he approaches adopted in the 47 member states of the Council of Europe vary widely in this field. For this reason, a common policy on prostitution can only be formulated with great difficulty at this stage ...”
Finally, in its Resolution 1983 (2014) on prostitution, trafficking and modern slavery, the Parliamentary Assembly expressed, inter alia, the following views:
“3.  Although they are distinct phenomena, trafficking in human beings and prostitution are closely linked. It is estimated that 84% of trafficking victims in Europe are forced into prostitution; similarly, victims of trafficking represent a large share of sex workers ... [C]onsidering the significant overlap between the two phenomena, the Assembly believes that legislation and policies on prostitution are indispensable anti-trafficking tools.
...
Legislation and policies with regard to prostitution vary across Europe, ranging from legalisation to criminalisation of prostitution-related activities. ...
Forced prostitution and sexual exploitation should be considered as violations of human dignity and, as women are disproportionately represented among victims, as an obstacle to gender equality.
...
The Assembly acknowledges that different legal approaches and cultural sensitivities make it difficult to propose a single model of prostitution regulations that would fit all member States. It believes, however, that human rights should be the main criteria in designing and implementing policies on prostitution and trafficking.
Irrespective of the model chosen, legislators and law-enforcement officials should be aware of their responsibility to ensure that sex workers, where prostitution is legalised or tolerated, may carry out their activity in dignified conditions, free from coercion and exploitation, and that the protection needs of those who are victims of trafficking can be adequately identified and addressed.
Furthermore, in all cases, the authorities should refrain from considering prostitution regulations as a substitute for comprehensive action aimed specifically at human trafficking, based on a sound legal and policy framework and implemented effectively ...
In the light of these considerations, the Assembly calls on Council of Europe member ... States ... to:
...
1.3.	criminalise pimping, if they have not already done so;”
Article 27 of the Geneva Convention (IV) relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, 12 August 1949, reads, inter alia, as follows:
“Women shall be especially protected against any attack on their honour, in particular against rape, enforced prostitution, or any form of indecent assault.”
In its commentary, “enforced prostitution” is defined as “the forcing of a woman into immorality by violence or threats”.
Likewise, Article 75 § 2 (b) of Protocol Additional (I) to the Geneva Conventions relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts and Article 4 § 2 (e) of Protocol Additional (II) to the Geneva Conventions relating to the Protection of Victims of NonInternational Armed Conflicts (8 June 1977), prohibit enforced prostitution at any time and in any place whatsoever.
Article 7 § 1 (g) of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court of 17 July 1998 included “enforced prostitution” as a crime against humanity. The Rome Statute Elements of Crimes define this concept in the following manner:
 “1.  The perpetrator caused one or more persons to engage in one or more acts of a sexual nature by force, or by threat of force or coercion, such as that caused by fear of violence, duress, detention, psychological oppression or abuse of power, against such person or persons or another person, or by taking advantage of a coercive environment or such person’s or persons’ incapacity to give genuine consent.
The perpetrator or another person obtained or expected to obtain pecuniary or other advantage in exchange for or in connection with the acts of a sexual nature.
The conduct was committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against a civilian population.
The perpetrator knew that the conduct was part of or intended the conduct to be part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against a civilian population.”
On 3 December 2003 the OSCE’s Ministerial Council adopted Decision No. 2/03 on Combatting Trafficking in Human Beings in which it endorsed the OSCE Action Plan to Combat Trafficking in Human Beings and decided to establish an OSCE mechanism to provide assistance to participating States to combat trafficking in human beings. As a result, a Special Representative and Co-ordinator for Combating Trafficking in Human Beings was established.
The Action Plan, which is based on the Palermo Protocol definition of trafficking in persons, intends to provide participating States with a comprehensive toolkit to help them implement their commitments to combating trafficking in human beings. In this respect, it requires at the national level, for example, the following:
“2.7  Encouraging investigators and prosecutors to carry out investigations and prosecutions without relying solely and exclusively on witness testimony. Exploring alternative investigative strategies to preclude the need for victims to be required to testify in court.”
In 2013 an Addendum to the OSCE Action Plan was adopted by the Ministerial Council Decision No. 7/13. The Addendum aimed to address the current and emerging trends and patterns in trafficking in human beings, as well as the most pressing challenges relating to the prosecution of the crime, its prevention, and the protection of trafficked persons. In this connection, it held, in particular, that recommended action at the national level included:
“1.2  Enhancing the criminal justice responses to human trafficking, including the prosecution of traffickers and their accomplices, while ensuring that victims are treated in a manner that respects their human rights and fundamental freedoms and that they are provided with access to justice, to legal assistance and to effective remedies and other services as applicable.
...
1.  ... [R]elevant State authorities identify individuals as trafficked persons, who have suffered human rights abuses, as soon as there are reasonable grounds to believe that they have been trafficked, and, in accordance with national law, ensure that victims of trafficking in human beings are provided with assistance even before the investigation is initiated ...”
Article 6 of the American Convention on Human Rights (“the ACHR”) guarantees “Freedom from Slavery” and reads, insofar as relevant, as follows:
“1.  No one shall be subject to slavery or to involuntary servitude, which are prohibited in all their forms, as are the slave trade and traffic in women.
No one shall be required to perform forced or compulsory labor ...”
Another key instrument is the Inter-American Convention on the Prevention, Punishment and Eradication of Violence against Women (“Convention of Belem Do Para”). Article 2 of this Convention states that:
“Violence against women shall be understood to include physical, sexual and psychological violence:
...
that occurs in the community and is perpetrated by any person, including, among others, rape, sexual abuse, torture, trafficking in persons, forced prostitution, kidnapping and sexual harassment in the workplace, as well as in educational institutions, health facilities or any other place ...”
On 20 October 2016 the Inter-American Court of Human Rights (“the Inter-American Court”) adopted a judgment on Article 6 of the ACHR in the case of Trabjadores de la hacienda Brasil verde v. Brasil, which concerned a group of workers allegedly subjected to trafficking in human beings, forced labour, debt bondage and slavery in a privately-owned cattle ranch. The Inter-American Court expanded on the content and scope of the concepts of slavery, servitude, slave trade and traffic in women, as well as forced labour. It recalled, in particular, that the ACHR used the expression “slave trade and traffic in women”. However, it stressed that, considering the evolution of international law, the most favourable interpretation and the pro persona principle, that expression was to be understood as “trafficking in persons”, which would also bring its current definition into line with the Palermo Protocol.
On 26 September 2018, in the case of López Soto y otros v. Venezuela, the Inter-American Court found, inter alia, a violation of Article 6 of the ACHR in relation to the deprivation of liberty of a woman by a private individual who had subjected her to various acts of physical and psychological violence, notably, of a sexual nature. For the Inter-American Court, this conduct amounted to sexual slavery.
Article 5 of the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights reads:
“Every individual shall have the right to the respect of the dignity inherent in a human being and to the recognition of his legal status. All forms of exploitation and degradation of man, particularly slavery, slave trade, torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment and treatment shall be prohibited.”
In its General Comment No. 4 on the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights: The Right to Redress for Victims of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Punishment or Treatment, the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights held, inter alia, that:
“57.  Acts of sexual and gender based violence, or the failure by States to prevent and respond to such acts, may amount to torture and other ill-treatment in violation of Article 5 of the African Charter...
These include physical and psychological acts committed against victims without their consent or under coercive circumstances, such as ... trafficking for sexual exploitation, enforced prostitution, sexual slavery, sexual exploitation ... These acts may occur in public or private and include force or coercion caused by fear of violence, duress, detention, psychological oppression or abuse of power.”
Article 4 of the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa requires States to prevent and condemn trafficking in women, prosecute the perpetrators of such trafficking and protect those women most at risk.
Article 83 § 1 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (“the TFEU”) reads, inter alia, as follows:
“The European Parliament and the Council may, by means of directives adopted in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure, establish minimum rules concerning the definition of criminal offences and sanctions in the areas of particularly serious crime with a cross-border dimension resulting from the nature or impact of such offences or from a special need to combat them of a common basis.
These areas of crime are the following: ... trafficking in human beings and sexual exploitation of women and children ...”
In addition, Article 79 § 1 of the TFEU requires the Union to develop a common immigration policy aimed at the prevention of, and enhanced measures to combat illegal immigration and trafficking in human beings.
Article 5 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union is worded as follows:
“1.  No one shall be held in slavery or servitude.
No one shall be required to perform forced or compulsory labour.
Trafficking in human beings is prohibited.”
According to the Explanations relating to the Charter, the right in paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 5 corresponds to paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 4 of the Convention and that therefore it has the same meaning and scope as set out therein. As regards paragraph 3 of Article 5 it states as follows:
“Paragraph 3 stems directly from human dignity and takes account of recent developments in organized crime, such as the organisation of lucrative illegal immigration or sexual exploitation networks. The Annex to the Europol Convention contains the following definition which refers to trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation: ‘traffic in human beings: means subjection of a person to the real and illegal sway of other persons by using violence or menaces or by abuse of authority or intrigue with a view to the exploitation of prostitution, forms of sexual exploitation and assault of minors or trade in abandoned children’. ... On 19 July 2002, the Council adopted a framework decision on combating trafficking in human beings (OJ L 203, 1.8.2002, p. 1) whose Article 1 defines in detail the offences concerning trafficking in human beings for the purposes of labour exploitation or sexual exploitation, which the Member States must make punishable by virtue of that framework decision.”
The AntiTrafficking Directive aims to prevent trafficking, to effectively prosecute criminals and to protect the victims. In this regard, the recitals to the Anti-Trafficking Directive state the following:
“(1)  Trafficking in human beings is a serious crime, often committed within the framework of organised crime, a gross violation of fundamental rights and explicitly prohibited by the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. Preventing and combating trafficking in human beings is a priority for the Union and the Member States.
...
(18)  It is necessary for victims of trafficking in human beings to be able to exercise their rights effectively. Therefore assistance and support should be available to them before, during and for an appropriate time after criminal proceedings. Member States should provide for resources to support victim assistance, support and protection.”
As regards the definition of trafficking in human beings, Article 2 of the Directive, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“1.  Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the following intentional acts are punishable:
The recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or reception of persons, including the exchange or transfer of control over those persons, by means of the threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person, for the purpose of exploitation.
A position of vulnerability means a situation in which the person concerned has no real or acceptable alternative but to submit to the abuse involved.
Exploitation shall include, as a minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or services, including begging, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude, or the exploitation of criminal activities, or the removal of organs.
The consent of a victim of trafficking in human beings to the exploitation, whether intended or actual, shall be irrelevant where any of the means set forth in paragraph 1 has been used.”
Article 4 of the Anti-Trafficking Directive stipulates, in so far as relevant, that the relevant offence under Article 2 is punishable by a maximum penalty of at least five years, or in some instances ten years, of imprisonment.
As regards the investigation and prosecution of the crime of trafficking in human beings, Article 9 of the Anti-Trafficking Directive reads:
“1.  Member States shall ensure that investigation into or prosecution of offences referred to in Articles 2 and 3 is not dependent on reporting or accusation by a victim and that criminal proceedings may continue even if the victim has withdrawn his or her statement.”
In addition, Articles 11 and 12 provides for various measures of assistance and support to be provided to victims of trafficking in human beings and their protection in criminal investigations and proceedings.
Article 18 of the Anti-Trafficking Directive requires that Member States promote regular training for officials likely to come into contact with victims or potential victims of trafficking in human beings so that they can identify and deal with such victims and potential victims.
In accordance with the requirements of the Anti-Trafficking Directive (Article 20 and 23 §§ 1 and 2), the European Commission, following the adoption of the Directive, has provided the European Parliament and the Council with a number of reports.
In its first report on the progress made in the fight against trafficking in human beings dated 19 May 2016, the Commission noted, inter alia, the following:
“Increasing the number of investigations and prosecutions is one of the key priorities of the EU legal and policy framework addressing trafficking in human beings. However, it is also one of the key challenges reported by the Member States. In fact, trafficking in human beings is a crime often difficult and costly to detect and investigate. The investigations in this field require a substantial body of evidence in order to reach a conviction. In particular, practitioners note that excessive burden is placed on victims and their testimonies both before and during criminal proceedings for evidence gathering, while, according to the Anti-trafficking Directive, investigative tools and approaches should ensure that victims, either acting as witness or not, are not burdened excessively during procedures that can cause secondary trauma to them ...
Based on the previous Eurostat data and the latest data transmitted by the Member States for the Report, the level of prosecutions and convictions remains worryingly low, especially when compared to the number of victims identified. This trend has been also confirmed by the GRETA reports, concluding that there is an important gap between the number of identified victims of trafficking and the number of convictions, and referring to several factors such as over-reliance on victims’ statements, issues around the credibility of witnesses who may change their statements over time, difficulties in relation to the sufficiency of evidence, or non-specialised and prejudiced investigators, prosecutors and judges ...
One of the main factors reported by Member States [contributing to the low level of prosecution] is related to the high evidentiary threshold applied by national courts, which leads to qualify cases of trafficking in human beings as crimes of lesser degree – such as procuring or pandering instead of trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation, or breach of labour laws or fraud instead of trafficking for the purpose of labour exploitation – resulting in minor convictions.”
In its second report on the progress made in the fight against trafficking in human beings dated 3 December 2018, the Commission noted, inter alia, the following:
“Trafficking in human beings for the purpose of sexual exploitation continues to be the most reported form. In 2015-2016, there were 9 759 registered victims of sexual exploitation. i.e. over half (56%) of the registered victims who had a recorded form of exploitation, predominantly women and girls (95% of registered victims of sexual exploitation).
...
Internal trafficking, within the territory of a Member State, is reported to be on the increase.
Member States report that traffickers are constantly changing the ways they work, using less physical force but more psychological and emotional violence.
...
In view of the ever-adjusting methods used by traffickers, Member States should ensure specialised training for professionals likely to come in contact with victims, which is adapted to the role of new information technologies, and initiatives to prevent trafficking in human beings.
...
Nevertheless, trafficking in human beings remains a crime characterised by impunity for the perpetrators and those who exploit the victims. The findings of this report do not indicate that trafficking has decreased. Further, the analysis of the data reveals a tendency to identify victims of prioritised forms of exploitation, with certain categories of victims placed at the forefront of action, while others receive less attention. Information from the Member States reveals persisting complexities and a lack of progress in key areas. The Member States must therefore make it a priority to take all the necessary measures.”
The Victims’ Rights Directive establishes minimum standards on the rights, support and protection of victims of crime. According to recital 57 of that Directive, there should be a strong presumption that victims of human trafficking within the meaning of the Anti-trafficking Directive will benefit from special protection measures.
The relevant parts of the European Parliament’s Resolution of 26 February 2014 on sexual exploitation and prostitution and its impact on gender equality (2013/2103(INI)) read as follows:
“B.  whereas prostitution and forced prostitution are forms of slavery incompatible with human dignity and fundamental human rights;
whereas trafficking of persons, particularly women and children, for sexual as well as other forms of exploitation is one of the most egregious violations of human rights; whereas trafficking in human beings is growing globally, led by the increase in organised crime and its profitability;
...
Recognises that prostitution, forced prostitution and sexual exploitation are highly gendered issues and violations of human dignity, contrary to human rights principles, among which gender equality, and therefore contrary to the principles of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, including the goal and the principle of gender equality;
...
Recognises that prostitution and forced prostitution can have an impact on violence against women in general, as research on sex buyers shows that men who buy sex have a degrading image of women ...
Stresses that prostituted persons are particularly vulnerable socially, economically, physically, psychologically, emotionally and in family terms, and are more at risk of violence and harm than persons engaged in any other activity ...
...
Believes that looking upon prostitution as legal ‘sex work’, decriminalising the sex industry in general and making procuring legal is not a solution to keeping vulnerable women and under-age females safe from violence and exploitation, but has the opposite effect and puts them in danger of a higher level of violence, while at the same time encouraging prostitution markets – and thus the number of women and under-age females suffering abuse – to grow ...”
According to the information available to the Court concerning the legislation of thirty-nine Council of Europe member States (Albania, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Moldova, Montenegro, the Netherlands, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, the Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, and the United Kingdom) across Europe there is a universal recognition that human trafficking involving sexual exploitation is a serious crime. In all thirty-nine member States human trafficking is criminalised. Similarly, all member States criminalise compelling another person to provide sexual services (forced prostitution).
The majority of member States surveyed criminalise the involvement in the provision by another person of sexual services even where there is no coercion on the person providing the services. The exceptions are Germany, the Netherlands, Slovenia, Spain and Switzerland.
The member States have different approaches to identifying the existence of coercion; the constitutive elements of compulsion in national legislation are not uniform. The threat of physical violence is the most commonly identified indicator of coercion. Some other indicators are, for instance, blackmail, deceit, fraud, false promises, taking advantage of the victim’s vulnerability, restriction of movement, abduction, and abusing a position of power.