The case concerns the blocking of access to the applicant’s website as a consequence of a blocking order against another website which had the same IP address as the applicant’s website.
The applicant was born in 1969 and lives in Moscow. He was represented by Mr D. Gaynutdinov, a lawyer admitted to practice in Russia.
The Government were represented initially by Mr A. Fedorov, head of the office of the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by Mr M. Galperin, the Representative.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant is the executive director of the Association of Electronic Publishers, a non-commercial partnership, and co-founder of the Association of Internet Users, a non-governmental organisation. He is the owner and administrator of the website Electronic Publishing News (), which features a compilation of news, articles and reviews about electronic publishing.
The website was set up 2008 and was hosted by DreamHost, a provider of a shared web-hosting service based in the United States. The service hosts multiple websites which have the same numerical network address (“Internet protocol or IP address”) but different domain names. When a user’s browser requests a website from the server, it includes the requested domain name as part of the request. The server uses this information to determine which website it would show the user.
In late December 2012, users from various Russian regions reported to the applicant that access to his website was blocked by their Internet service providers by reference to “a decision by the competent Russian authority”. He checked the register of websites black-listed by the Russian telecoms regulator (Roskomnadzor) and discovered that the IP address of his website had been put on the blocking list pursuant to a decision of the Federal Drug Control Service dated 19 December 2012. The decision was intended to block access to another website, rastaman.tales.ru – a collection of cannabis-themed folk stories “The Rastaman Tales” – which was also hosted by DreamHost and had the same IP address as the applicant’s website. According to the Government, on 22 March 2013 the blocking of the IP address ceased; copies of the blocking and unblocking decisions have not been made available to the applicant or the Court.
The applicant complained to the Taganskiy District Court in Moscow that the decision to block the entire IP address had had the effect of blocking access to his website which did not contain any illegal information.
On 19 June 2013 the District Court rejected the applicant’s complaint, holding that Roskomnadzor had acted within its competence, in accordance with the applicable laws and for the purpose of protecting children from harmful information relating to the use of drugs. It did not assess the impact of the contested measure on the applicant’s website.
The applicant appealed, relying in particular on the Court’s findings in the case of Ahmet Yıldırım v. Turkey (no. 3111/10, ECHR 2012), which concerned the indiscriminate blocking of a hosting service.
On 12 September 2013 the Moscow City Court dismissed the appeal in a summary fashion, finding that the principle of proportionality had been respected because Roskomnadzor had lawfully blocked access to illegal information. It did not address the effect of the blocking decision on the applicant’s website.
On 17 July 2014 the Constitutional Court refused to consider an application lodged by the applicant for a constitutional review of section 15.1 of the Information Act. The court held:
“As regards the owners of websites that do not contain any prohibited information, who had seen access to their websites blocked as a consequence of having their network address added to the register, what affected their right to impart information was not, in essence, the decision to add the network address to the Integrated Register but the failure on the part of the hosting service provider to act diligently. Accordingly, their right to impart information must be asserted, first and foremost, in their legal relationship with the hosting service provider.”
On 28 July 2012 a new section 15.1 was added to the Information Act (Federal Law no. 149-FZ of 27 July 2006). It established the Integrated Register of domain names, webpage references (URL) and network addresses of websites featuring content which is banned in the Russian Federation (subsection 1). The telecoms regulator Roskomnadzor is responsible for updating the Integrated Register (subsection 3). Pursuant to a decision by the competent executive body, it lists websites featuring prohibited content, of which there are seven categories, including information relating to the manufacture and use of narcotics (subsection 5(1)(b)). The decision to list the website may be challenged before a court by the website’s owner, hosting service provider or Internet service provider (subsection 6). Immediately on receiving notification that a website has been listed, the hosting service provider must inform the website’s owner and ask him or her to remove the unlawful content (subsection 7). If the owner fails to react, the hosting service provider must block access to the website (subsection 8). In the absence of any reaction from the hosting service provider and the website’s owner, the website’s IP address is added to the Integrated Register (subsection 9) and Internet service providers must block access to it (subsection 10).
On 26 October 2012 the Government approved regulations on establishing, compiling and maintaining the Integrated Register of domain names, webpage references (URL) and network addresses of websites containing prohibited content (Resolution no. 1101). The regulations set out the procedure for implementing section 15.1 of the Information Act.
The Declaration on freedom of communication on the Internet, adopted by the Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers on 28 May 2003, took note of member States’ commitment to abide by the following principles in the field of communication on the Internet:
Principle 3: Absence of prior state control
“Public authorities should not, through general blocking or filtering measures, deny access by the public to information and other communication on the Internet, regardless of frontiers. This does not prevent the installation of filters for the protection of minors, in particular in places accessible to them, such as schools or libraries.
Provided that the safeguards of Article 10, paragraph 2, of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms are respected, measures may be taken to enforce the removal of clearly identifiable Internet content or, alternatively, the blockage of access to it, if the competent national authorities have taken a provisional or final decision on its illegality.”
The 2011  (A/HRC/17/27) expressed concerns about the excessive scope of blocking measures:
“29.  Blocking refers to measures taken to prevent certain content from reaching an end user. This includes preventing users from accessing specific websites, Internet Protocol (IP) addresses, domain name extensions, the taking down of websites from the web server where they are hosted, or using filtering technologies to exclude pages containing keywords or other specific content from appearing ...
States’ use of blocking or filtering technologies is frequently in violation of their obligation to guarantee the right to freedom of expression ... Firstly, the specific conditions that justify blocking are not established in law, or are provided by law but in an overly broad and vague manner, which risks content being blocked arbitrarily and excessively. Secondly, blocking is not justified to pursue aims which are listed under article 19, paragraph 3, of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and blocking lists are generally kept secret, which makes it difficult to assess whether access to content is being restricted for a legitimate purpose. Thirdly, even where justification is provided, blocking measures constitute an unnecessary or disproportionate means to achieve the purported aim, as they are often not sufficiently targeted and render a wide range of content inaccessible beyond that which has been deemed illegal. Lastly, content is frequently blocked without the intervention of or possibility for review by a judicial or independent body ...”
The , adopted on 1 June 2011 by the UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Opinion and Expression, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Representative on Freedom of the Media, the Organization of American States Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression and the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression and Access to Information, provides in particular:
General Principles
“a. Freedom of expression applies to the Internet, as it does to all means of communication. Restrictions on freedom of expression on the Internet are only acceptable if they comply with established international standards, including that they are provided for by law, and that they are necessary to protect an interest which is recognised under international law (the ‘three-part’ test) ...”
Filtering and Blocking
“a. Mandatory blocking of entire websites, IP addresses, ports, network protocols or types of uses (such as social networking) is an extreme measure – analogous to banning a newspaper or broadcaster – which can only be justified in accordance with international standards, for example where necessary to protect children against sexual abuse.”
In General Comment No. 34 on Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, adopted at its 102nd session (1129 July 2011), the United Nations Human Rights Committee stated as follows:
“43. Any restrictions on the operation of websites, blogs or any other Internet-based, electronic or other such information-dissemination system, including systems to support such communication, such as Internet service providers or search engines, are only permissible to the extent that they are compatible with paragraph 3. Permissible restrictions generally should be content-specific; generic bans on the operation of certain sites and systems are not compatible with paragraph 3 ...”
, an issue paper published by the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights in 2014, identified some of the deficiencies of the blocking system: (i) blocking, notably when performed by software or hardware that reviews communications, is inherently likely to produce (unintentional) false positives (blocking sites with no prohibited material) and false negatives (when sites with prohibited material slip through a filter); (ii) the criteria for blocking certain websites, but not others, and the lists of blocked websites, are very often opaque at best, and secret at worst; (iii) appeal processes may be onerous, little known or non-existent, especially if the decision on what to block or not block is – deliberately – left to private entities.
Recommendation CM/Rec(2016)5 of the Committee of Ministers to member States on Internet freedom, adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on 13 April 2016, recommended that member States be guided by, and promote, specific Internet freedom indicators when participating in international dialogue and international policy making on Internet freedom. When adopting this recommendation, the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation indicated that, in accordance with Article 10.2c of the Rules of Procedure for the meetings of the Ministers’ Deputies, he reserved the right of his Government to comply or not with the recommendation, in so far as it referred to the methodology for its implementation at national level. Section 2.2 of the Internet freedom indicators, “Freedom of opinion and the right to receive and impart information”, reads:
“2.2.1.  Any measure taken by State authorities or private-sector actors to block or otherwise restrict access to an entire Internet platform (social media, social networks, blogs or any other website) or information and communication technologies (ICT) tools (instant messaging or other applications), or any request by State authorities to carry out such actions complies with the conditions of Article 10 of the Convention regarding the legality, legitimacy and proportionality of restrictions.
2.2.  Any measure taken by State authorities or private-sector actors to block, filter or remove Internet content, or any request by State authorities to carry out such actions complies with the conditions of Article 10 of the Convention regarding the legality, legitimacy and proportionality of restrictions.
2.3.  Internet service providers as a general rule treat Internet traffic equally and without discrimination on the basis of sender, receiver, content, application, service or device. Internet traffic management measures are transparent, necessary and proportionate to achieve overriding public interests in compliance with Article 10 of the ECHR.
2.4.  Internet users or other interested parties have access to a court in compliance with Article 6 of the Convention with regard to any action taken to restrict their access to the Internet or their ability to receive and impart content or information.
2.5.  The State provides information in a timely and appropriate manner to the public about restrictions it applies to the freedom to receive and impart information, such as indicating websites that have been blocked or from which information was removed, including details of the legal basis, necessity and justification for such restrictions, the court order authorising them and the right to appeal.”