The case originated in an application (no. 32715/17) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Mr Petras Znakovas (“the applicant”), on 21 April 2017.
The applicant was represented by Mr J. Platelis, a lawyer practising in Klaipėda. The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms L. Urbaitė.
On 5 September 2018 the complaints concerning the alleged illtreatment by the police and lack of an effective investigation under Article 3 of the Convention were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1955 and lives in the Klaipėda Region.
At around 9.20 p.m. on 9 September 2016 the applicant’s wife called the Gargždai police and stated that the applicant was using violence against her. At around 10 p.m., two police officers, R.N. and R.J., went to the applicant’s house.
According to the applicant, that night he and his wife had guests staying with them and they drank some alcohol. After the guests had gone to bed, he and his wife had an argument but he did not use violence against her and went to bed. The applicant was woken up by two police officers who did not explain the reasons for their arrival. The applicant took his mobile phone and wanted to record what was happening but officer R.N. grabbed the phone from him and threw it at the wall. The applicant was handcuffed and taken outside wearing only underwear. He and his wife took alcohol tests, which established blood alcohol concentrations of 1.95‰ and 1.03‰ respectively. The officers asked the applicant’s wife to give a statement, which was video recorded (see paragraph 26 below).
The applicant was put in the back seat of a police car. On the way to the police station he asked the officers to video record everything, but they ignored his requests. After some time officer R.N. became enraged, stopped the car, got out and began to yell at the applicant to keep quiet; then he opened the back door of the car and used an electroshock weapon against the applicant three or four times, all the while yelling at him. Then R.N. told his colleague R.J. to drive, while he kept hold of the applicant and repeatedly threatened to use the electroshock weapon again if the applicant made any more requests. The applicant was taken to the police station and placed in a detention cell. The following morning he was questioned. He was released from the police station on the morning of 11 September 2016.
In their official reports written in essentially identical wording and submitted on 9 September 2016, officers R.N. and R.J. stated that they had gone to the applicant’s house after receiving a call about domestic violence. When they arrived there, they were greeted by the applicant’s wife, who stated that the applicant had been acting aggressively, that he had slapped her in the face and had kicked her several times, and that he had a gun at home. The officers found the applicant lying in bed, although his wife stated that just moments earlier, he had been walking around the house.
When the officers entered the bedroom, the applicant was hostile and began shouting at them. They introduced themselves and explained that his wife had called them because of his violent and inappropriate behaviour towards her. The room smelled of alcohol, the applicant was visibly drunk and his speech was slurred. The officers politely asked him to get out of bed but he began threatening them that “it would not end well” and called R.N. an offensive name. The applicant was ordered to get out of bed and get dressed but he refused. The officers explained to him that he would be taken to the police station in order to clarify the situation but he again refused and continued threatening them. Then R.N. took the applicant by the arm and ordered him to get out of bed but the applicant stiffened his hands, started swearing and told the officer not to touch him. Seeing that the applicant was not following his orders and was acting aggressively, R.N. handcuffed him while he was still in bed. He then led the applicant to a police car. The applicant was taken there in his underwear because he had refused to get dressed, but the officers asked his wife to give them some of the applicant’s clothes.
While in the car, the applicant kept acting aggressively and calling the officers offensive names. On the way to the police station, he suddenly attacked R.N., grabbed his jacket and pulled on it, and tried to grab the steering wheel, thereby creating a risk of a traffic accident. R.N. quickly stopped the car on the roadside and got out, ran around the car towards the backdoor and opened it. The applicant was shouting and tried to get out of the car and attack R.N., and for that reason a Taser device (an electrical discharge weapon) was used against him. After that, the applicant calmed down and was taken to the police station with no further difficulties. He did not complain of any health problems.
On 12 September 2016 the applicant was examined by a court medical expert, who found contusions on both his arms and the right side of his chest, as well as bruises, resembling traces of electricity, on his chest and back. The expert considered that the injuries corresponded to negligible health impairment (nežymus sveikatos sutrikdymas).
Following the allegations of domestic violence made by the applicant’s wife (see paragraph 5 above), a pre-trial investigation was opened against the applicant. It was discontinued on 12 September 2016, after the applicant’s wife withdrew the allegations.
On 14 October 2016 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Klaipėda prosecutor, asking that a pre-trial investigation be opened into officer R.N.’s actions and the physical force used against the applicant at his home and in the police car (see paragraphs 6 and 7 above).
The prosecutor interviewed officers R.N. and R.J., who gave essentially the same statements as those in their official reports (see paragraphs 8-10 above). R.N. additionally stated that he had used the Taser device against the applicant in accordance with the law, seeking to defend himself from danger and to subdue (sutramdyti) the applicant in his unlawful actions.
On 24 October 2016 the prosecutor refused to open a pre-trial investigation against R.N. The prosecutor held that the applicant had acted aggressively towards the officer and had refused his lawful orders, so the use of physical force against him, including the Taser device, had been lawful and justified. In particular, the relevant rules adopted by the Police Commissioner General permitted using that device to subdue or arrest offenders who were, inter alia, aggressive, under the influence of alcohol, acting in an unpredictable and dangerous manner, or others who disobeyed police officers’ lawful orders or caused a danger to police officers or other persons (see paragraph 32 below). The fact that the applicant had suffered only negligible health impairment (see paragraph 11 above) also showed that the force used had complied with the legal requirements.
The applicant lodged an appeal against the prosecutor’s decision. He submitted that the decision had been based exclusively on the statements given by officers R.N. and R.J. The applicant also submitted that R.J. had made a video recording of the arrest at his home but the prosecutor had not examined that recording and had not determined whether the applicant had really insulted and threatened the officers. The applicant contended that the officers had had video cameras with them, so if he had been aggressive towards them at any point, they should have made a video recording as proof. Given that they had not made such a recording, their oral statements should not be accepted as evidence. He further argued that it was very unlikely that he would have tried to attack two armed police officers while being handcuffed and almost naked in a police car in the middle of the night. However, the prosecutor had accepted the officers’ version of events without questioning it.
In subsequent additional submissions the applicant stated that R.N.’s and R.J.’s official reports had been almost identical (see paragraphs 8-10 above), which should have raised doubts as to their credibility.
On 7 December 2016 the Klaipėda District Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal. The court stated that it was not clear from the appeal “what the applicant wanted, what criminal offence had been committed, why a pre-trial investigation should be opened, what procedural measures should be taken and with regard to what criminal activity [R.N.’s] actions should be investigated”. It stated that the appeal contained only the applicant’s “reflections based on his subjective assessment, conviction and speculations”, which did not constitute grounds for criminal liability.
The applicant lodged an appeal against the court’s decision, but on 16 January 2017 the Klaipėda Regional Court dismissed the appeal and stated that nothing in the case file gave grounds to believe that a criminal act might have been committed. The court acknowledged that the applicant had sustained certain injuries during his arrest (see paragraph 11 above) but emphasised that police officers had the right to use physical force against persons who refused to obey their lawful orders. The court observed that administrative proceedings had been opened against the applicant for insulting police officers and disobeying their lawful orders at his home and in the police car (see paragraphs 20-30 below). It therefore concluded that officer R.N. had acted lawfully. That decision was final and not amenable to any further appeal.
On 7 November 2016 the police drew up an administrative offence report, stating that the applicant had insulted police officers and disobeyed their lawful orders.
During a hearing before the Klaipėda District Court the applicant repeated his version of events (see paragraphs 6 and 7 above) and denied having threatened or insulted the officers.
When questioned at the hearing, officers R.N. and R.J. stated that when they had entered the applicant’s bedroom on the night of the arrest, he had been awake. R.N. had explained to him several times why the officers were there but the applicant had been hostile from the beginning, had called them offensive names and refused to follow their lawful orders. Before handcuffing the applicant, R.N. had asked R.J. to make a video recording, but by the time R.J. had started the recorder, R.N. had already handcuffed him (see paragraph 27 below). Outside, the officers had taken a statement from the applicant’s wife on video (see paragraph 26 below). On the way to the police station, the applicant had started pulling R.N.’s jacket and tried to grab the steering wheel, so R.N. had stopped the car and both he and R.J. had got out. When R.N. had opened the back door of the car, the applicant had remained in the car but tried to attack the officer, and R.N. had used the Taser device. Afterwards R.N. had stayed in the back seat with the applicant and R.J. had driven the car. There had been no equipment for audio or video recording in the car, but in any event the applicant had not asked for any recording to be made.
R.N. stated that he had warned the applicant before handcuffing him but not before using the Taser device, because he had had to act “within seconds”. In the car the applicant’s hands had been handcuffed in front of him, which had made it possible for him to attack the officer. On the way to the police station the applicant had kept insulting the officers, and at first R.N. thought that “he was an old man who would just talk and not do anything”, but when the applicant had tried to attack him, he could have caused a traffic accident on the highway – there had been a risk of crashing the car and putting the officers and the applicant in danger. R.N. considered that the Taser device had been the most appropriate measure in the circumstances – otherwise he “would have broken the applicant’s arms” (būčiau sulaužęs rankas) or used a tear-gas dispenser, which would have burned the applicant’s eyes.
When questioned at the hearing, the applicant’s wife stated that on the night in question she and the applicant had had an argument and had “shoved and punched” each other, but he had not hit her and she regretted having called the police. She stated that the applicant had not insulted the officers and that R.N. had acted aggressively.
The guests who had been staying in the applicant’s house on the night of the arrest (see paragraph 6 above) stated that they had been asleep and had not heard or seen anything.
The court examined the video recording made by the officers, showing the applicant’s wife on the night of 9 September 2016. She was visibly agitated and in tears, and stated that the applicant had slapped her in the face several times, had kicked her in the legs and stomach. She said that it had not been the first time, although she had never called the police before; the applicant drank every day and could be even more aggressive.
The court also examined the video recording made by officer R.J. at the applicant’s home. It showed the applicant lying on a bed in his underwear and handcuffs. Officer R.N. told him that he would be taken to the police station half-naked and asked him to get out of bed voluntarily, but the applicant did not do so. Then R.N. took his arm and led him out of the room, while asking the applicant’s wife to put some clothes in a bag. After the applicant had been taken out of the bedroom, he was heard asking R.N. to allow him to get dressed, but R.N. refused and said that he had already asked the applicant to do that several times.
On 19 January 2017 the Klaipėda District Court held the applicant liable for the administrative offence of insulting police officers and disobeying their lawful orders. The court considered that officers R.N. and R.J. had given consistent and detailed testimony about the applicant’s aggressive behaviour and offensive words. It dismissed the applicant’s arguments that R.N. had acted aggressively towards him, pointing out that it had been refused to open a pre-trial investigation against R.N. (see paragraphs 13-19 above). It also held the testimony of the applicant’s wife given at the hearing to be unreliable because it had been refuted by the video recording made on the night of the applicant’s arrest (see paragraphs 24 and 26 above). The court thus found it established that the applicant had disobeyed police officers’ lawful orders both at his home and in the police car, insulted the officers by using demeaning words, and acted aggressively in the car, thereby creating the risk of causing a traffic accident. The applicant was given a fine of 90 euros (EUR).
The applicant lodged an appeal against that decision. He submitted, inter alia, that the video recording of him at his home had not shown him disobeying or insulting the officers (see paragraph 27 above), and that the court had unfairly dismissed the testimony his wife had given in his favour at the hearing (see paragraph 24 above).
On 28 February 2017 the Klaipėda Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal. It considered that the lower court had correctly established the relevant factual circumstances and made well-founded conclusions. It stated that the video recording made at the applicant’s home (see paragraph 27 above) had shown that he had refused the officers’ request to get dressed, had stayed in bed only in his underwear and had not provided any explanation about the conflict between him and his wife, which demonstrated his intention to insult the officers and his refusal to obey their lawful orders. In the court’s view, the applicant’s inappropriate behaviour had been further proved by the fact that the officers had had to handcuff him and take him to the police station. It also held that the lawfulness of the measures which the officers had used against the applicant had been confirmed by the prosecutor’s and courts’ refusal to open a pretrial investigation against R.N. (see paragraphs 13-19 above). The court also noted that it was not examining whether the applicant had used violence against his wife, because that question had been the subject of different proceedings (see paragraph 12 above). However, in the court’s view, the fact that the applicant’s wife had changed her testimony with regard to domestic violence gave it grounds to consider her testimony in the applicant’s favour, given in the present proceedings, as unreliable. That decision was final and not amenable to any further appeal.
The relevant parts of Article 26 of the Police Act, in force at the material time, read:
“1. A police officer may use coercion when it is necessary to prevent criminal activity or administrative offences, to apprehend individuals who have committed criminal or administrative offences, as well as in other cases where protecting and defending the lawful interests of an individual, society or the State. Coercion which might cause bodily injuries or death may only be used to the extent which is necessary for the fulfilment of the official duties and only after all possible measures of persuasion or other measures have been used with no effect. The type of coercion and the limits of its use shall be chosen by the police officer, taking into account the particular situation, the nature of the violation of the law and the individual characteristics of the offender. When using coercion, police officers must seek to avoid grave consequences.
Before using physical coercion or special equipment, a police officer must give a warning, providing the individual with an opportunity to comply with the officer’s orders, except for cases where a delay might endanger the life or limb of the officer or another person, or where a warning is not possible.
An officer may use any means necessary to fulfil the functions of the police ...”
The relevant parts of the Rules for using Taser weapons in police activity, adopted on 23 June 2005 by order no. 5-V-394 of the Police Commissioner General and in force at the material time, provided:
“2. A Taser device is special equipment of the police. The use of a Taser device against an individual constitutes physical coercion within the meaning of [the Police Act]. A Taser device may be used against an individual only in strict compliance with the conditions of and grounds for the use of physical force, laid out in [the Police Act]. A Taser device is not a replacement for a service firearm, however, a police officer, having assessed the potential danger and the risk to his or her, or another persons’ life and limb, may use a Taser device as a less dangerous weapon.
A Taser device may be used to subdue (sutramdyti) or arrest offenders who are aggressive, under the influence of alcohol, drugs or other psychotropic substances, mentally unstable, or acting in an unpredictable and dangerous manner, or others who disobey police officers’ lawful orders or cause danger to themselves, police officers or other persons, as well as for self-defence or for defence of others from aggressive animals.
...
Every use of a Taser device, even if accidental, must be examined and documented. After the use of a Taser device, a report on its use ([form appended to the Rules]) must be drawn up ...
...
The user of a Taser device must give an oral warning to the arrested individual and other police officers about the possible use of the Taser device, and when possible, demonstrate the laser aim, except in cases where the use of a Taser device is urgent.”
In its 20th General Report, published in 2010, the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) stated:
“66. The use of [electrical discharge weapons (EDW)] by law enforcement and other public officials is a controversial subject. There are conflicting views as regards both the specific circumstances in which resort to such weapons can be justified and the potential negative effects on health that the weapons can cause. It is also a fact that by their very nature, EDW lend themselves to misuse ...
...
The CPT understands the wish of national authorities to provide their law enforcement officials with means enabling them to give a more graduated response to dangerous situations with which they are confronted. There is no doubt that the possession of less lethal weapons such as EDW may in some cases make it possible to avoid recourse to firearms. However, electrical discharge weapons can cause acute pain and, as already indicated, they are open to abuse. Consequently, any decision to issue law enforcement officials or other public servants with EDW should be the result of a thorough debate at the level of the country’s national executive and legislature. Further, the criteria for deploying EDW should be both defined by law and spelt out in specific regulations.
The CPT considers that the use of electric discharge weapons should be subject to the principles of necessity, subsidiarity, proportionality, advance warning (where feasible) and precaution ...
In the CPT’s view, the use of EDW should be limited to situations where there is a real and immediate threat to life or risk of serious injury. Recourse to such weapons for the sole purpose of securing compliance with an order is inadmissible. Furthermore, recourse to such weapons should only be authorised when other less coercive methods (negotiation and persuasion, manual control techniques, etc) have failed or are impracticable and where it is the only possible alternative to the use of a method presenting a greater risk of injury or death.
...
Electrical discharge weapons are increasingly being used when effecting arrests, and there have been well-publicised examples of their misuse in this context (e.g. the repeated administration of electric shocks to persons lying on the ground). Clearly, the resort to EDW in such situations must be strictly circumscribed. The guidance found by the CPT in some countries, to the effect that these weapons may be used when law enforcement officials are facing violence – or a threat of violence – of such a level that they would need to use force to protect themselves or others, is so broad as to leave the door open to a disproportionate response. If EDW gradually become the weapon of choice whenever faced with a recalcitrant attitude at the time of arrest, this could have a profoundly negative effect on the public’s perception of law enforcement officials.
...
... The CPT knows of cases in which persons deprived of their liberty have been subjected to several electrical discharges in quick succession; such excessive, unnecessary use of force certainly qualifies as ill-treatment ...
...
The potential effects of EDW on the physical and mental health of persons against whom they are used is the subject of much argument ... In the absence of detailed research on the potential effects of EDW on particularly vulnerable persons (e.g. the elderly, pregnant women, young children, persons with a pre-existing heart condition), the CPT believes that their use vis-à-vis such persons should in any event be avoided. The use of EDW on people who are delirious or intoxicated is another sensitive issue; persons in this state of mind may well not understand the significance of an advance warning that the weapon will be used and could instead become ever more agitated in such a situation ...
...
Following each use of an EDW, there should be a debriefing of the law enforcement official who had recourse to the weapon. Further, the incident should be the subject of a detailed report to a higher authority. This report should indicate the precise circumstances considered to justify resort to the weapon, the mode of use, as well as all other relevant information (presence of witnesses, whether other weapons were available, medical care given to the person targeted, etc). The technical information registered on the memory chip and the video recording of the use of the EDW should be included in the report.
...
Whenever it transpires that the use of an EDW may not have been in accordance with the relevant laws or regulations, an appropriate investigation (disciplinary and/or criminal) should be set in motion.”