The case originated in an application (no. 37121/15) against the Republic of Malta lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by twentyfour Maltese nationals and a company registered in Malta (see appendix for details), (“the applicants”), on 20 July 2015.
The applicants were represented by Dr J. Camilleri, a lawyer practising in Valletta. The Maltese Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Dr P. Grech, Attorney General.
The applicants alleged that they had been suffering an ongoing interference with their property rights in breach of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention. They also considered that they were being discriminated against with regard to the enjoyment of their property, since as the law stood, they were obliged to renew their rent agreement on a yearly basis, while people having commercial rents had been freed from such obligation through amendments introduced to the Civil Code in 2009.
On 4 January 2017 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicants are joint owners of the property at number 274, Republic Street, Valletta. The property, known as the “King’s Own Band Club” (hereinafter referred to as “the KOBC”), is a fourstorey building of 864 square metres, and is located in a prime site in Malta’s capital city.
Initially, the property belonged to the applicants’ ascendants. In 1946, the applicants’ ascendants entered into a rent agreement with the KOBC, whereby they willingly rented the said property for 500 pounds sterling (GBP) annually (around 1,164.69 euros (EUR)). In 1955 legislation specifically regulating the lease of property to band clubs (Act V of 1955, hereinafter “the 1955 amendments”) was introduced.
By law (The Civil Code read in conjunction with the Reletting of Urban Property (Regulation) Ordinance – see relevant domestic law below), the applicants are obliged to renew, on an annual basis, the lease entered into by their ascendants, and may not demand an increase in rent. According to the applicants’, the property’s market rental value (in 2014) was EUR 269,100 annually.
Part of the property is utilised as a band club, and part of the property is operated as a restaurant and bar. The applicants claim that the operation of the restaurant and bar is a profitable economic activity that generates an income to the caterer of around EUR 150,000 or more annually.
In 2009, amendments were introduced to allow for increases in certain rents and to establish a cut-off date for existing protected leases relating to commercial properties, which are thus to come to an end in 2028. These amendments did not affect the applicants’ property which is rented out as a band club. The amendments however also gave the relevant Minister the power to regulate conditions relating to clubs, thus allowing for the possibility of future amendments (see paragraph 19 below).
In 2011, the applicants filed proceedings before the Civil Court (First Hall) in its constitutional jurisdiction. The proceedings were brought against the Attorney General (hereinafter referred to as “the AG”), the Prime Minister (hereinafter referred to as “the PM”) and the King’s Own Band Club (the lessee). The applicants claimed that their right to peaceful enjoyment of the property as protected under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention was being breached. They claimed that they were being denied the use of their property without being provided with adequate compensation. The applicants further submitted that, in 2009, the law had been amended, allowing for an increase in rent and the establishment of a cutoff date for existing “protected rents”, but the amendments in the law did not cover properties rented out as clubs. Therefore, in contrast with other commercial rents, the annual rent for the club could not be raised, and the rent contract could not be terminated. The applicants claimed that the law was discriminatory and was therefore in violation of Article 14 of the Convention.
On 8 October 2013, the Civil Court (First Hall) in its constitutional jurisdiction found that the applicants had suffered a violation of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention in so far as the interference with the applicants’ property rights had not been proportionate. The applicants had submitted that the property had a rental value of EUR 269,100 a year, while the AG and the PM had submitted that the property had a rental value of EUR 93,000 a year. Irrespective of which value one was to consider, the court concluded that the rent being received by the applicants was disproportionate. Keeping in mind the estimated rental values presented before the court, and the income that the KOBC was generating from its bar, the court awarded EUR 300,000 in damages to the applicants (to be paid half by the AG and the PM jointly, and half by the KOBC). The costs of the proceedings were to be paid, half by the AG and PM, and the other half by the KOBC.
The court further concluded that the applicants had not suffered any discrimination as no satisfactory proof had been presented showing that they were discriminated against when compared to other owners leasing their property as a club.
The AG, PM and KOBC filed an appeal before the Constitutional Court.
On 6 February 2015 the Constitutional Court overturned in part the judgment of the firstinstance court, and concluded that there had been no violation of the applicants’ rights. The Constitutional Court ordered that the costs of proceedings at both instances be paid by the applicants.
The Constitutional Court found that contrary to that pleaded by the Government, the applicants did have title of ownership over the property at issue. However, in line with domestic case-law the Constitutional Court concluded that, because the agreement had been entered into voluntarily with full knowledge of the consequences it would lead to (that is, that the rent due could not be raised and the rent agreement could not be terminated), then the applicants could not allege a violation of their rights. This was so, even if due to the rate of inflation throughout the years, the rent due was now to be considered low. The Constitutional Court further held that the amendments to the law of 2009, mentioned by the applicants, did not affect their position which remained the same as that when the rent agreement had been entered into [in 1946], and therefore there was no reason for the principle of pacta sunt servanda (“agreements must be complied with”) not to be given full effect.
On 6 May 2015, the applicants filed an application for retrial. They claimed that the Constitutional Court had committed an error of fact and applied a wrong interpretation of the law. They noted that the protection given in law to clubs was introduced in 1955 while their predecessors in title had entered into a lease agreement in 1946.
Nevertheless, the applicants also instituted proceedings before this Court on 20 July 2015.
On 3 February 2016 the Constitutional Court rejected the applicants’ request for a retrial. The Constitutional Court held that, as the law stood, retrial could not be applied in regard to a case of a constitutional nature. The costs of the proceedings were to be paid by the applicants.
Pending the constitutional redress proceedings (on appeal), on 1 January 2014, the Conditions Regulating the Leases of Clubs Regulations (hereinafter ‘the Regulations’), Subsidiary Legislation Chapter 16.13 of the Laws of Malta came into force (see relevant domestic law).
The Regulations provided that the rent payable to the owners by the band clubs holding the property under title of lease was to be increased by 10% (from the previous year) every year until 2016 and as from 1 January 2016 the rent was to be increased by 5% (from the previous year) every year until 2023, following which it would increase every year according to the index of inflation. As from 2015 the tenant also had to pay an additional rent calculated at the rate of 5% on the annual income derived by the club. As a result in 2015 the total annual rent paid to the applicants by the KOBC was EUR 2,876. 26 and in 2016 EUR 3,017.20,
Act I of 1925 introduced restrictions whereby controlled rents were applied to urban property. Article 2 of Act I of 1925 defined the term premises as “any urban immovable property”. The owner was only able to gain back the possession of the property by requesting authorisation from the Rent Regulation Board on condition that the owner was able to prove that the lessee was not paying the rent or that the property was needed for the accommodation for the owner himself or his ascendants and descendents. Act I of 1925 was intended to provide such protection until 1929. By means of Act XXIII of 1929 the obligation of renewal of leases was extended until 1933. In the meantime, in 1931, Ordinance XXI had been promulgated (originally Chapter 109 of the Laws of Malta, today Chapter 69 of the Laws of Malta), which provided that the obligation to renew a lease was an indefinite obligation. In 1955 legislation specifically regulating the lease of property to band clubs (the 1955 amendments) was introduced.
Article 2, of the Reletting of Urban Property (Regulation) Ordinance, Chapter 69 of the Laws of Malta (as applicable to date), in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“In this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires -
the expression ‘club’ means any club registered as such at the Office of the Commissioner of Police under the appropriate provisions of law”
Article 1531I and Article 1531J of the Civil Code, Chapter 16 of the Laws of Malta, read as follows:
“In the case of commercial premises leased prior to 1st June, 1995, the tenant shall be considered to be the person who occupies the tenement under a valid title of lease on the 1st June, 2008, as well as the husband or wife of such tenant, provided they are living together and are not legally separated, and also in the event of the death of the tenant, his heirs who are related by consanguinity or by affinity up to the grade of cousins inclusively:
Provided that a lease of commercial premises made before the 1st June, 1995 shall in any case terminate within twenty years which start running from the 1st June, 2008 unless a contract of lease has been made stipulating a specific period. When a contract of lease made prior to the 1st June, 1995 for a specific period and which on the 1st January, 2010 the original period di fermo or di rispetto is still running and such period of lease has not yet been automatically extended by law, then in that case the period or periods stipulated in the contract shall apply. A contract made prior to the 1st June, 1995 and which is to be renewed automatically or at the sole discretion of the tenant, shall be deemed as if it is not a contract made for a specific period and shall as such terminate within twenty years which start running from the 1st June, 2008.”
“In the case of a tenement leased to an entity and used as a club before the 1st June, 1995 including but not limited to a musical, philanthropic, social, sport or political entity, when its lease is for a specific period and on the 1st January, 2010 the original period di fermo or di rispetto is still running and the lease has not yet been automatically extended by law, then in that case the period of lease established in the contract shall apply. In all other instances where the contract of lease was made prior to the 1st June, 1995 the law and all definitions as in force on the 1st June, 1995 shall continue to apply:
Provided that notwithstanding the provisions of the law as in force before the 1st June, 1995, the Minister responsible for accommodation may from time to time make regulations to regulate the conditions of lease of clubs so that a fair balance may be reached between the rights of the lessor, of the tenant and the public interest”.
In 2014, the Conditions Regulating the Leases of Clubs Regulations, Subsidiary Legislation Chapter 16.13 of the Laws of Malta were introduced through Legal Notice 195 of 2014. In so far as relevant, these Regulations provide that:
“2. (1) The rent of a club as referred to in Article 1531J of the Civil Code which is paid on the basis of a lease entered into before the 1st June 1995 shall, unless otherwise agreed upon in writing after the 1st January 2014, or agreed upon in writing prior to the 1st June 1995 with regard to a lease which was still in its original period di fermo or di rispetto on the 1st January 2014, as from the date of the first payment of rent due after the 1st January 2014, be increased by a fixed rate of ten per cent over the rent payable in respect of the previous year and shall continue to be increased as from the date of the first payment of rent due after the 1st January of each year until and including the year 2016 by ten per cent over the previous rent.
(2) The rent as from the first payment of rent due after the 1st January 2017 shall be increased by a fixed rate of five per cent over the rent payable in 2016. Such rent shall continue to be increased by five per cent per annum until the 31 December 2023 and the rent shall thereafter increase every year according to the index of inflation for the previous year.
(1) Where club premises or part thereof to which these regulations apply are used for the generation of income through an economic activity carried out in the said premises, then as from the 1st January 2015 the tenant of the said premises shall also pay the person entitled to receive the rent a sum equivalent to five per cent of the annual income derived by the club from the said economic activity, other than income derived from fundraising or philanthropic activities organized and managed by the club itself:
Provided that for the purposes of this regulation, income generated from economic activity means any income which is directly or indirectly derived from the bar and, or restaurant and from any lease, sub-lease, lease of a going-concern or a management agreement of the said premises that is leased out as a club or part thereof.
(2) The amount referred to in sub-regulation (1) shall be calculated on an annual basis and shall be payable by the 30th September of the following year with the first payment being due in respect of the year 2015 by the 30th September 2016.
(3) The annual income referred to in sub-regulation (1) shall be calculated on the basis of financial statements signed by a certified public accountant in the case of clubs having an income of less than €200,000 per annum and by audited financial statements in the case of clubs having an income of €200,000 or more per annum”.