The case originated in an application (no. 37685/10) against the Republic of Croatia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) introduced in the name of Mr Gašpar Perasović and five other Croatian nationals listed in the Appendix (“the applicants”), on 17 May 2010.
The applicants were represented by Mr B. Duplančić, an advocate practising in Split, who also claimed to have represented Mr Perasović. The Croatian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs Š. Stažnik.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that their right to peaceful enjoyment of their possessions had been violated because the domestic courts had refused to acknowledge the ownership of land they had acquired by adverse possession.
On 23 May 2014 the complaint concerning the right of property was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants live in Stobreč. Their names and dates of birth are set out in the Appendix. Mr Gašpar Perasović, who died on 10 May 2010, also lived in Stobreč.
The legislation of the former Yugoslavia, in particular section 29 of the 1980 Basic Property Act (see paragraph 24 below), prohibited the acquisition of ownership of socially owned property by adverse possession (dosjelost).
When incorporating the 1980 Basic Property Act into the Croatian legal system on 8 October 1991, Parliament repealed the above-mentioned provision (see paragraph 25 below).
Subsequently, the new Property Act of 1996, which entered into force on 1 January 1997, provided in section 388(4) that the period prior to 8 October 1991 was to be included in calculating the period for acquiring ownership by adverse possession of socially owned immovable property (see paragraph 27 below).
Following several petitions for an abstract constitutional review (prijedlog za ocjenu ustavnosti) submitted by former owners of properties that had been appropriated under the socialist regime, on 8 July 1999 the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske) accepted the initiative and decided to institute proceedings to review the constitutionality of section 388(4) of the 1996 Property Act.
By a decision of 17 November 1999 the Constitutional Court invalidated section 388(4) of the 1996 Property Act. It held that the impugned provision had retroactive effect resulting in adverse consequences for the rights of third parties (primarily those who under the restitution legislation were entitled to the restitution of property appropriated during the Communist regime) and was therefore unconstitutional (for the relevant part of the Constitutional Court’s decision see Trgo v. Croatia, no. 35298/04, § 17, 11 June 2009). The Constitutional Court’s decision came into effect on 14 December 1999 when it was published in the Official Gazette.
On 19 April 2002 Mr Perasović and the applicants brought a civil action in the Split Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Splitu) against Split Township (Grad Split – hereinafter “the local authorities”) seeking a declaration of their ownership of the five plots of land and registration in their names in the land register. They submitted that the property at issue, even though it had been recorded in the land register in the name of Stobreč Municipality as the legal predecessor of Split Township, had been in their possession and the possession of their predecessors for more than seventy years. Given that the statutory period for acquiring ownership by adverse possession had elapsed, the plaintiffs claimed to have acquired ownership of the land.
By a judgment of 20 September 2004 the Municipal Court ruled for the plaintiffs. It held that they had proved that they and their predecessors had had continuous possession of the land in question since at least 1912 in good faith. Consequently, it held that the statutory time-limit for acquiring ownership by adverse possession had elapsed after twenty years, that is, in 1932.
Following an appeal by the defendant authority, by a judgment of 17 May 2007 the Split County Court (Županijski sud u Splitu) reversed the first-instance judgment and dismissed the action. It held that the Municipal Court had established the facts correctly (continuous possession of the land in good faith since 1912) but had erred in its application of the substantive law. It established, firstly, that the land in question had been in social ownership on 8 October 1991 and that under the relevant legislation it had not been possible to acquire ownership of socially owned property by adverse possession before that date unless the statutory requirements for doing so had been met by 6 April 1941 (see paragraphs 18, 24 and 30-31 below). However, those requirements had not been met in the plaintiffs’ case. That was so because under Article 1472 of the 1811 Civil Code (which was applicable in Croatia from 1852 until 1980, see paragraphs 17-19 and 21 below) immovable property owned by municipal authorities could be acquired by adverse possession only after forty years. However, having regard to the factual findings of the first-instance court according to which the plaintiffs and their predecessors had possessed the land at issue since 1912 (see paragraph 12 above), that time-limit had not expired before 6 April 1941.
The plaintiffs then lodged a constitutional complaint against the second-instance judgment alleging infringements of their constitutional rights to equality before the law, equality before the courts and to fair procedure.
By a decision of 30 September 2009 the Constitutional Court dismissed their constitutional complaint and on 19 November 2009 served its decision on their representative.
The relevant provision of the 1999 Constitutional Act on the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Croatia (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 99/99 with subsequent amendments – “the Constitutional Court Act”), which has been in force since 24 September 1999, reads:
“(1) The Constitutional Court shall invalidate [ukinuti] a statute or its provisions if it finds that they are incompatible with the Constitution ...
(2) Unless the Constitutional Court decides otherwise, the invalidated [ukinuti] statute or its provisions shall cease to have legal force on the date of publication of the Constitutional Court’s decision in the Official Gazette [i.e. ex nunc].”
The Austrian General Civil Code of 1811 (Opći građanski zakonik – “the 1811 Civil Code”) entered into force in the territory of the present-day Croatia on 1 May 1853.
The Act Invalidating Legislation Enacted before 6 April 1941 and during the Enemy Occupation (Zakon o nevažnosti pravnih propisa donesenih prije 6. aprila 1941. i za vrijeme neprijateljske okupacije, Official Gazette of the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia nos. 86/46 and 105/47), enacted in 1946, deprived all legislation in force on 6 April 1941, including the Civil Code, of its legal force. However, it allowed for the application of that pre-war legislation as long as it was not contrary to the Constitution of Yugoslavia or its constituent republics, or the legislation in force.
The Civil Code rules concerning property thus remained applicable under those conditions until the entry into force of the 1980 Basic Property Act (see paragraph 22 below). The relevant provisions of the Civil Code provided as follows.
Article 1468 provided that if immovable property was not recorded in the land register in the name of the person in whose possession it was, the possessor could acquire the ownership of such property by adverse possession after thirty years.
Article 1472 provided that a possessor could acquire ownership of immovable property owned by State, municipal or church authorities by adverse possession after forty years.
The relevant provisions of the Basic Ownership Relations Act (Zakon o osnovnim vlasničkopravnim odnosima, Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia nos. 6/1980 and 36/1990 – “the 1980 Basic Property Act”), which entered into force on 1 September 1980, provided as follows.
Section 28 provided that a person possessing in good faith immovable property owned by someone else would become its owner by adverse possession after twenty years.
Section 29 prohibited the acquisition of ownership by adverse possession of socially owned property.
Section 3 of the Act on the Incorporation of the Act on Basic Ownership Relations (Zakon o preuzimanju zakona o osnovnim vlasničkopravnim odnosima, Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia no. 53/1991 of 8 October 1991), which legislation entered into force on 8 October 1991, repealed section 29 of the Basic Property Act.
The relevant provisions of the Ownership and Other Rights In Rem Act (Zakon o vlasništvu i drugim stvarnim pravima, Official Gazette no. 91/96 with subsequent amendments – “the 1996 Property Act”), which has been in force since 1 January 1997, read as follows:
RIGHT OF OWNERSHIP
...
ACQUISITION OF OWNERSHIP
(1) Ownership may be acquired by legal transaction, by decision of a court or other public authority, by succession, or by the operation of law.
...
(1)  Ownership may be acquired by adverse possession on the basis of the exclusive possession of a [particular] property ... if such possession has lasted continuously for a period of time determined by law and if the possessor is capable of being the owner of such property.
(2)  An exclusive possessor who possesses under just title, in good faith and whose possession is free of vice shall acquire ownership of movable property after three years and of immovable property after ten years.
(3)  An exclusive possessor who possesses at least in good faith shall acquire ownership of movable property after ten years and of immovable property after twenty years of continuous exclusive possession.
(4)  An exclusive possessor of a property owned by the Republic of Croatia ... shall acquire ownership by adverse possession once his or her ... possession has lasted continuously for a period twice as long as that set out in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this section.”
The original text of section 388 of the 1996 Property Act read as follows:
“(1)  The acquisition, modification, legal effects and termination of rights in rem after the entry into force of this Act shall be assessed on the basis of its provisions ...
(2)  The acquisition, modification, legal effects and termination of rights in rem until the entry into force of this Act shall be assessed on the basis of the rules applicable at the time of the acquisition, modification or termination of those rights or of their legal effects.
(3)  If the prescribed time-limits for acquiring or terminating rights in rem set out in this Act started to run before its entry into force, they shall continue to run pursuant to paragraph 2 of this section ...
(4)  In calculating the period for acquiring by adverse possession immovable property socially owned on 8 October 1991, and for acquiring [other] rights in rem over such property, the period before that date shall also be taken into account.”
After the Constitutional Court on 17 November 1999 invalidated paragraph 4 of section 388 of the 1996 Property Act as unconstitutional (see paragraph 10 above), that provision was amended by the 2001 Amendment to the 1996 Property Act (Zakon o izmjeni i dopuni Zakona vlasništvu i drugim stvarnim pravima, Official Gazette no. 114/01), which entered into force on 20 December 2001. The new text of paragraph 4 reads as follows:
“In calculating the period for acquiring by adverse possession immovable property socially owned on 8 October 1991, and for acquiring [other] rights in rem over such property, the period before that date shall not be taken into account.”
According to the interpretation adopted at the extended plenary session of the Federal Supreme Court of Yugoslavia of 4 April 1960 a person in possession of immovable property in good faith acquired ownership of it by adverse possession after twenty years.
The Supreme Court of Croatia referred to this interpretation as valid law at the time in eight of its decisions. In case no. Rev 250/03-2 of 16 June 2004 it held as follows:
“Since it was established that the disputed property was on 8 October 1991 in social ownership ... in order to determine whether it had been acquired by adverse possession, in applying the current paragraph 4 of section 388 of the [1996] Property Act, it must be ascertained whether the plaintiff, through its legal predecessors, was in possession of the disputed property before 6 April 1941 [and thus a sufficiently long time] to become its owner by adverse possession according to the provisions applicable at the time and the way they were applied pursuant to the interpretation adopted at the extended plenary session of the Federal Supreme Court of Yugoslavia of 4 April 1960.”
In the case no. Rev-x 51/13-2 of 23 July 2014 the Supreme Court held as follows:
“The lower courts dismissed the plaintiff’s action because they found that the plaintiff had begun to acquire ... ownership of the property by adverse possession from its purchase in [1969], at a time when it was [still] in private ownership. The [period for acquiring ownership by] adverse possession therefore began [to run] before the entry into force of the [1980] Basic Property Act, at a time when the rules of the former [1811] Civil Code were still applicable. Under Article 1468 of the [1811] Civil Code the period of thirty years, or twenty years according to the interpretation adopted at the extended plenary session of the Federal Supreme Court of Yugoslavia of 4 April 1960, was necessary to acquire ownership by adverse possession. That period had not expired at the time the [1980] Basic Property Act entered into force, and thus continued to run [in accordance with that Act]. The period necessary for acquiring ownership by adverse possession would have expired in 1989. [However, by that time the property was already in social ownership, having been transferred in 1983]. Given that at the time the property was transferred into social ownership (1983) the period of twenty years for acquiring ownership by adverse possession had not expired because the time between 1983 and 8 October 1991 (when section 29 of the [1980] Property Act was repealed) does not count toward the period necessary to acquire ownership by adverse possession, the plaintiff did not become the owner of the property by adverse possession.”
The relevant provision of the Civil Procedure Act (Zakon o parničnom postupku, Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia no. 4/1977, with subsequent amendments, and Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia no. 53/91 with subsequent amendments), reads as follows:
“(1)  When the European Court of Human Rights has found a violation of a human right or fundamental freedom guaranteed by the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms or additional protocols thereto, ratified by the Republic of Croatia, a party may, within thirty days of the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights becoming final, file a petition with the court in the Republic of Croatia which adjudicated at first instance in the proceedings in which the decision violating the human right or fundamental freedom was rendered, to set aside the decision [in question].
(2)  The proceedings referred to in paragraph 1 of this section shall be conducted by applying, mutatis mutandis, the provisions on the reopening of proceedings.
(3)  In the reopened proceedings the courts are required to observe the legal views expressed in the final judgment of the European Court of Human Rights finding a violation of a fundamental human right or freedom.”