The case of Campbell and Cosans was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission") and by the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland ("the Government"). The case originated in two applications against the  lodged with the Commission in 1976 under Article 25 (art. 25) of the Convention by citizens of that State, Mrs. Grace Campbell and Mrs. Jane Cosans. The Commission ordered the joinder of the applications on 6 October 1979.
Both the Commission's request and the Government's application were lodged with the registry of the Court on 13 October 1980, within the period of three months laid down by Articles 32 par. 1 and 47 (art. 32-1, art. 47). The request referred to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48) and to the declaration whereby the  recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46) (art. 46); the application referred to Article 48 (art. 48). The purpose of the request and of the application is to obtain a decision as to whether or not the facts of the case disclose a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 3 of the Convention and Article 2 of Protocol no. 1 (art. 3, P1-2).
The Chamber of seven judges to be constituted included, as ex officio members, Sir Vincent Evans, the elected judge of British nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr. G. Balladore Pallieri, the President of the Court (Rule 21 par. 3 (b) of the Rules of Court). On 6 November 1980, the Vice-President drew by lot, at the request of the President and in the presence of the Registrar, the names of the five other members, namely Mr. R. Ryssdal, Mr. J. Cremona, Mr. L. Liesch, Mr. M. Sørensen and Mr. R. Macdonald (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 par. 4) (art. 43).
Mr. Balladore Pallieri assumed the office of President of the Chamber (Rule 21 par. 5); following his death on 9 December 1980, he was replaced by Mr. Wiarda, then Vice-President of the Court (Rule 21 par. 3 (b) and 5). Having ascertained, through the Registrar, the views of the Agent of the Government and the Delegates of the Commission regarding the procedure to be followed, Mr. Wiarda decided on 15 December that the Agent should have until 16 March 1981 to file a memorial and that the Delegates should be entitled to file a memorial in reply within two months from the date of the transmission of the Governments' memorial to them by the Registrar. Mr. Wiarda, who had in the meantime been elected President of the Court, agreed on 13 and 27 March to extend the first of these time-limits until 6 and 20 April 1981, respectively, and on 15 June to extend the second until 22 July 1981.
The Government's memorial was received at the registry on 21 April 1981. On 21 July, the Secretary to the Commission, who had informed the Registrar on 12 May that the Delegates would present their observations at the oral hearings, transmitted to the Court observations on the memorial, which had been submitted to the Delegates by Mrs. Campbell's lawyer.
After consulting, through the Registrar, the Agent of the Government and the Delegates of the Commission, the President directed on 28 July that the oral hearings should open on 25 September 1981.
The oral hearings were held in public at the Human Rights Building, , on 25 September. The Chamber had held a preparatory meeting on the previous day. As a result of the indisposition of Mr. Wiarda and Mr. Sørensen, Mr. Ryssdal assumed the office of President of the Chamber (Rule 21 par. 3 (b) and 5) and Mr. Thór Vilhjálmsson and Mr. Pettiti, the first and second substitute judges, were called upon to sit as members thereof (Rule 22 par. 1).
There appeared before the Court:
- for the Government:
- for the Commission:
The Court heard addresses by Mr. Nørgaard, Mr. Kiernan, Mr. Thornberry and Mr. McLean for the Commission and by Lord Mackay for the Government, and also replies to questions put by it and two of its members. Mr. Thornberry filed a document through the Delegates.
On 30 October, certain texts which the Court had asked the Government to supply were received at the registry.
On 20 January 1982, the Government replied to a letter of 6 January from the Registrar containing certain questions posed by the Court.
Both Mrs. Campbell and Mrs. Cosans live in . Each of them had one child of compulsory school age at the time when she applied to the Commission. The applicants' complaints concern the use of corporal punishment as a disciplinary measure in the State schools in  attended by their children. For both financial and pratical reasons, the applicants had no realistic and acceptable alternative to sending their children to State schools.
At the time of Mrs. Campbell's application to the Commission (30 March 1976), her son Gordon, who was born on 3 July 1969, was attending St. Matthew's Roman Catholic Primary School in Bishopbriggs which is situated in the Strathclyde Region Education Authority area. In that school, corporal punishment is used for disciplinary purposes, although it was disputed before the Commission and the Court whether it is applied to pupils below the age of 8. The Strathclyde Regional Council had refused Mrs. Campbell's requests for a guarantee that Gordon would not be subjected to this measure. He was, in fact, never so punished whilst at that school, where he remained until July 1979.
Mrs. Cosans' son Jeffrey, who was born on 31 May 1961, used to attend  in Cowdenbeath which is situated in the Fife Region Education Authority area. On 23 September 1976, he was told to report to the Assistant Headmaster on the following day to receive corporal punishment for having tried to take a prohibited short cut through a cemetery on his way home from school. On his father's advice, Jeffrey duly reported, but refused to accept the punishment. On that account, he was immediately suspended from school until such time as he was willing to accept the punishment.
On 1 October 1976. Jeffrey's parents were officially informed of his suspension. On 18 October, they had an inconclusive meeting with the Senior Assistant Director of Education of the Fife Regional Council during which they repeated their disapproval of corporal punishment. On 14 January 1977, the day after a further meeting, that official informed Mr. and Mrs. Cosans by letter that he had decided to lift the suspension in view of the fact that their son's long absence from school constituted punishment enough; however, he added the condition that they should accept, inter alia, that "Jeffrey will obey the rules, regulations or disciplinary requirements of the school". However, Mr. and Mrs. Cosans stipulated that if their son were to be readmitted to the school, he should not receive corporal punishment for any incident while he was a pupil. The official replied that this constituted a refusal to accept the aforesaid condition. Accordingly, Jeffrey's suspension was not lifted and his parents were warned that they might be prosecuted for failure to ensure his attendance at school.
In the event, Jeffrey never returned to school after 24 September 1976. He ceased to be of compulsory school age on 31 May 1977, his sixteenth birthday.
Under Scottish law, the use of corporal punishment is controlled by the common law, particularly the law of assault. The general principle is that an assault may give rise to a civil claim for damages or to prosecution for a criminal offence. However, teachers in both State and other schools are, by virtue of their status as teachers, invested by the common law with power to administer such punishment in moderation as a disciplinary measure. Excessive, arbitrary or cruel punishment by a teacher or its infliction for an improper motive would constitute an assault. The teacher's power of chastisement, like that of a parent, derives from his relationship with the children under his care and is therefore not in the nature of a power delegated by the State. Thus, the administration of corporal punishment as a disciplinary measure is, subject to the limitations imposed by the common law as described above and to any conditions incorporated in the teacher's contract with the education authority employing him, left to the discretion of the teacher.
In the two schools concerned, corporal chastisement takes the form of striking the palm of the pupil's hand with a leather strap called a "tawse". For misconduct in the class-room, punishment is administered there and then, in the presence of the class; for misconduct elsewhere and for serious misconduct, it is administered by the Headmaster, or his deputy, in his room.
The Commission noted that, on the facts of the case, it could not be established that the applicants' children had suffered any adverse psychological or other effects which could be imputed to the use of corporal punishment in their schools.
At the time of the events giving rise to this case, the administration of the Scottish educational system was regulated by the Education (Scotland) Act 1962, now repealed and reenacted without material change by the Education () Act 1980. Central government formulates general policy, promotes legislation and exercises supervision; the primary responsibility for organising facilities is vested in regional education authorities who are required to secure that "adequate and efficient provision" of school education is made for their area. Section 29 (1) of the 1962 Act provided that "in the exercise and performance of their powers and duties under this Act, the Secretary of State and education authorities shall have regard to the general principle that, so far as is compatible with the provision of suitable instruction and training and the avoidance of unreasonable public expenditure, pupils are to be educated in accordance with the wishes of their parents".
Successive Education Acts have empowered the Secretary of State for  "to make regulations prescribing the standards and general requirements to which every education authority shall conform" in discharging its functions. According to the Government, he is not thereby permitted to change the substantive law on a teacher's right to administer corporal punishment, which would require primary legislation. There are, in fact, no statutory provisions governing the use of corporal punishment and the utilisation of this method of discipline is a matter for the discretion of the individual teacher, subject only to the limits set by the common law and to any particular conditions in his contract of employment.
Following agreement in principle that the teaching profession should be encouraged to move towards the gradual elimination of corporal punishment as a means of discipline in schools, a consultative body - the Liaison Committee on Educational Matters, on which the Scottish Education Department, the Association of Directors of Education and the teachers' associations were represented - prepared in 1968 a booklet entitled "Elimination of Corporal Punishment in Schools: Statement of Principles and Code of Practice". The Code reads as follows:
"Until corporal punishment is eliminated its use should be subject to the following rules:
The above-mentioned booklet, whose issue was welcomed by the Secretary of State of Scotland, was sent to all education authorities in February 1968. The code of Practice, which was reissued in 1972, has no statutory force; however, the courts might be expected to have regard thereto in civil or criminal proceedings concerning an allegedly unlawful use of corporal punishment, and failure to observe it might be relevant in disciplinary proceedings.
The authorities take the view that, within the guidelines set by the Code, it is for the teachers in each school to determine the disciplinary measures needed in the school. The Code is not incorporated into the contracts of employment of teachers in the Strathclyde or Fife Education Authority areas, although they have been recommended to abide by it.
In 1974, the Secretary of State for  appointed an independent committee of inquiry ("the Pack Committee") to investigate indiscipline and truancy in Scottish schools. The Committee, which reported in 1977, was of the opinion "that corporal punishment should, as was envisaged in 1968, disappear by a process of gradual elimination rather than by legislation".
The Government remain committed to a policy aimed at abolishing corporal punishment as a disciplinary measure in Scottish schools, but they take the view that that policy is best implemented by seeking to secure progress in this direction by consensus of all concerned rather than by statute. A working group established in 1979 by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has been considering, inter alia, the introduction of alternative sanctions and there are, in fact, some schools in which the use of corporal punishment has ceased or will soon be abandoned. However, its continued use by teachers is apparently, according to a recent opinion survey, favoured by a large majority of Scottish parents and, according to the Pack Committee's report, by pupils, who even prefer it to some other forms of punishment.
Under regulation 4 of The Schools General () Regulations 1975, an education authority may exclude a pupil from school if "the parent of the pupil refuses or fails to comply, or to allow the pupil to comply, with the rules, regulation or disciplinary requirements of the school".
Under section 35 of the 1962 and of the 1980 Education (Scotland) Acts, if a child fails "without reasonable excuse" to attend school regularly, the parent is guilty of an offence; unless the court otherwise determines, a child is deemed to have so failed if he has been required to discontinue his attendance on account of "his parent's refusal or failure to comply" as aforesaid.
Mrs. Campbell applied to the Commission on 30 March 1976 and Mrs. Cosans on 1 October 1976. Each applicant maintained that the use of corporal punishment as a disciplinary measure in the school attended by her child constituted treatment contrary to Article 3 (art. 3) of the Convention and also failed to respect her right as a parent to ensure her son's education and teaching in conformity with her philosophical convictions, as guaranteed by the second sentence of Article 2 of Protocol No. 1 (P1-2). Mrs. Cosans further contended that Jeffrey's suspension from school violated his right to education, protected by the first sentence of the last-mentioned Article (P1-2).
Both applications were declared admissible by the Commission on 15 December 1977.
In its report of 16 May 1980 (Article 31 of the Convention) (art. 31), the Commission expressed the opinion:
- by nine votes to five, that there had been, as regards both applicants, a violation of the second sentence of Article 2 of Protocol No. 1 (P1-2):
- by eight votes to one, with five abstentions, that is was not necessary to consider whether there had been a separate violation of the first sentence of the said Article 2 (P1-2), as claimed by Mrs. Cosans;
-by thirteen votes to one, that there had not been any violation of Article 3 (art. 3) of the Convention.
The report contains three separate opinions.
At the hearings on 25 September 1981, the Government maintained the submissions set out in their memorial, whereby they had requested the Court:
"(1) With regard to Article 2 of Protocol No. 1 (P1-2)
(2) With regard to Article 25 par. 1 (art. 25-1) of the Convention
To decide and declare that the applicant, Mrs. Campbell, could not at the time of filing her application with the Commission claim on her son's behalf that he was a victim of a violation of Article 3 (art. 3) of the Convention for the purposes of Article 25 par. 1 (art. 25-1) of the Convention.
(3) With regard to Article 3 (art. 3) of the Convention
To decide and declare that, in any event, the facts of the two cases disclose no breach by the United Kingdom of Article 3 (art. 3) of the Convention."