The case originated in an application (no. 29343/18) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a national of Kazakhstan, Mr N.M. (“the applicant”), on 22 June 2018.
The applicant was represented by Mrs D. Trenina, Mr K. Zharinov and Mrs. E. Davidyan, lawyers practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 25 June 2018 the applicant’s request for the application of an interim measure under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court was granted. It was indicated to the Russian Government that the applicant should not be removed from Russia for the duration of the proceedings before the Court. It was further decided that the applicant’s identity would not be disclosed to the public (Rule 47 § 4) and that the application should be granted priority treatment (Rule 41).
On 9 January 2019 the Government were given notice of the complaint concerning the risk of ill-treatment of the applicant in Uzbekistan in case of his return there and the alleged lack of remedies in respect of that complaint and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court. On 13 September 2019 the Government were informed that the Court envisaged the assigning of the present application to a committee of three judges.
The applicant was born in 1969 in Uzbekistan. He currently remains in Russia. The applicant’s personal details, the information concerning his application, and the particulars of the domestic proceedings are set out in the Appendix.
The applicant was charged with religious crimes by the authorities in Uzbekistan, his pre-trial detention was ordered in absentia, and an international search warrant was issued in his name. He was detained in Russia pending his extradition.
The Russian authorities took final decisions to extradite the applicant despite his consistent claim that in the event of his removal he would face a real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Convention.
The relevant domestic and international law is summarised in the Court’s judgment concerning removals from Russia to Uzbekistan (see Akram Karimov v. Russia, no. 62892/12, §§ 69-87, and §§ 101-05, 28 May 2014).
The references to the relevant reports by the UN agencies and international NGOs on the situation in Uzbekistan were cited in the cases of Kholmurodov v. Russia, no. 58923/14, §§ 46-50, 1 March 2016, and T.M. and Others v. Russia, no. 31189/15, § 28, 7 November 2017.
In respect of Uzbekistan the 2019 World Report by Human Rights Watch indicated that there were certain promising steps to reform the country’s human rights record; however, many reforms are yet to be implemented. It further stated that a limited number of persons imprisoned on politically motivated charges had been released in 2016-2018. Furthermore, isolated incidents of security agency officers sentenced for torture and death in custody were cited. Amnesty International Report 2017/2018 reflected similar trends, including judicial independence and effectiveness as the priorities set by the authorities for the systemic reform. At the same time the report stressed that the authorities continued to secure forcible returns, including through extradition proceedings, of Uzbekistani nationals identified as threats to the “constitutional order” or national security.