The case originated in an application (no. 64734/11) against the Republic of Estonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by four applicants, namely Ms K. Leuska (“the first applicant”), Mr A. Leuska (“the second applicant”), Ms P. Esop (“the third applicant”) and Ms K.-B. Esop (“the fourth applicant”). The first and second applicants were represented before the Court by Mr T. Keevallik and the third and fourth applicants by Mr E. Tonka, both lawyers practising in Tallinn.
The Estonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Kuurberg, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicants complained under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention of the failure of the Harju County Court to decide on their claim for compensation for the costs they had incurred in criminal proceedings in which they had participated as victims and to hear oral evidence from them.
On 4 February 2014 those complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The first and second applicants’ son was killed in a traffic accident on 17 July 2010 in which the fourth applicant sustained serious injuries. The third applicant is the fourth applicant’s mother.
The applicants joined the criminal proceedings concerning the accident as victims.
On 9 and 10 December 2010 the applicants lodged a civil action within the criminal proceedings against the suspect, J., claiming compensation for non-pecuniary damage and reimbursement of the legal costs incurred in the criminal proceedings.
On 28 January 2011 the applicants, represented by lawyers of their own choice, concluded an out-of-court settlement with J. (hereinafter “out-of-court settlement agreement”). They informed the prosecutor that they had agreed that the case would be settled (kokkuleppemenetlus). J. informed the prosecutor that he had paid the compensation to the applicants as laid down in the out-of-court settlement agreement.
On 4 February 2011 the applicants’ consent to the application of the settlement procedure was recorded in a report signed by the prosecutor and the applicants’ representatives. The report stated that the applicants had been informed of their rights under the settlement procedure and set out the consequences of applying the settlement procedure. In a section entitled “Remarks”, it was noted that the applicants had given up their claims in respect of non-pecuniary damage against J. (as lodged on 9 and 10 December 2010), but had not given up their claim for reimbursement of the legal costs incurred in the criminal proceedings. The report also stated that the victims had no right to withdraw their consent to the settlement procedure. At that time, the applicants had submitted neither an itemised list of legal costs nor any supporting documents.
On 11 February 2011 J. gave his consent to the application of the settlement procedure. The prosecutor, J. and the latter’s counsel signed a settlement agreement in which they agreed, inter alia, on the type and extent of the damage caused. The agreement stated that the victims had withdrawn the civil claims they had lodged within the criminal proceedings.
On 14 February 2011 the Harju County Court committed J. for trial and scheduled a hearing for 7 March 2011. J., his counsel and the prosecutor were summoned to appear at the court hearing. The applicants, however, were not summoned.
On 4 March 2011 the applicants lodged a claim for legal costs in the amount of 6,483.66 euros (EUR) and submitted supporting documents. The Harju County Court received their submission on 7 March 2011.
J., his counsel and the prosecutor attended the hearing held before the Harju County Court as scheduled. According to the court record, the trial judge disclosed the applicants’ claim for reimbursement of their legal costs. J. asked the court not to examine the claim as it had been absorbed by the out-of-court settlement agreement. The applicants alleged that they had not been allowed to address the court notwithstanding their presence in the court building.
In a judgment of the same date, the Harju County Court convicted J. of violating traffic and driving regulations and sentenced him to a suspended prison term. It also withdrew J.’s driving licence and ordered him to pay the State Treasury expenses consisting of compensation levies (sundraha) and the cost of expert assessments. It held that the victims had given up the civil claims they had lodged within the framework of the criminal proceedings. The judgment made no reference to the applicants’ claim for reimbursement of the legal costs incurred in the criminal proceedings.
The applicants lodged an appeal against that judgment. They complained that they had not been allowed to attend the court hearing of 7 March 2011 and that the court had left their claim for reimbursement of the legal costs undecided.
On 23 March 2011 the Harju County Court refused to examine the appeal. Relying on Articles 246 and 318 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CCrP; Kriminaalmenetluse seadustik), the court found that the applicants had not been parties to the court proceedings and did not, therefore, have the right to appeal (see paragraph 29 below).
The applicants appealed against the County Court’s decision, insisting that they had been parties to the proceedings and had the right to appeal.
At a public hearing on 5 April 2011 the Tallinn Court of Appeal examined the appeal in the presence of J. and his counsel, the prosecutor and the applicants’ counsel. At the hearing, the prosecutor firstly noted that the applicants had not submitted any documents concerning their claim for legal costs, despite the fact that they had had a week after the settlement to do so. According to the report of the hearing, the prosecutor later noted that those documents could have been submitted when the applicants had signed the report (see paragraph 10 above) or a few days later. The report stated that J. had wanted to submit the out-of-court settlement agreement to the judge in order to prove that it covered all the relevant damages. However, the Court of Appeal had refused, considering that it did not concern the subject matter of the dispute before the court in those proceedings.
By a decision of 13 April 2011, the Tallinn Court of Appeal dismissed the applicants’ appeal and upheld the Harju County Court’s decision of 23 March 2011. It referred to Article 243 of the CCrP, under which the victim was not entitled to revoke his or her consent to the application of the settlement procedure, and to Article 246 of the Code, which provided that the victim did not have to be summoned to a court hearing in settlement proceedings (see paragraphs 28 and 29 below). The Court of Appeal concluded that the applicants, as victims, had not been parties to such court proceedings and that, accordingly, they had no right to appeal against the County Court’s judgment.
Although the Court of Appeal’s decision stated that it was final and not amenable to appeal, the applicants’ counsel nevertheless challenged it before the Supreme Court.
By a decision of 3 October 2011 in case no. 3-1-1-60-11 the Supreme Court refused to examine the appeal on points of law because the Court of Appeal’s decision had been final and not amenable to appeal. It nevertheless stated that according to the established case-law, in settlement proceedings the court should not limit itself to merely analysing the settlement reached. It must also verify whether there were still questions that should be addressed in the subsequent judgment, but which had not been included in the settlement agreement. The court noted that according to Article 245 of the CCrP, the settlement agreement did not necessarily have to address matters dealing with the costs of criminal procedure or cover the extent of granting the civil claim or of compensating for the damage caused by the criminal offence. However, referring to Article 306 §§ 11, 13 and 14 of the CCrP and Article 248 § 1 (3) of the CCrP, the Supreme Court considered that those matters should not be overlooked by the court concerned (see paragraphs 30 and 31 below).
Article 38 provided that a victim had the right, within the framework of criminal proceedings, to lodge a civil claim before the end of the trial in the first-instance court.
Under Article 175 § 1 (1), the procedural costs (menetluskulud) included reasonable remuneration paid to the chosen counsel or representative and other necessary costs incurred by a party in connection with the criminal proceedings.
Article 180 laid down a general rule that in the event of conviction, procedural costs had to be borne by the convicted offender. Article 182 set out the rules for the payment of procedural costs related to a civil action, providing that in the event that the civil claim was dismissed, the costs were to be borne by the victim, and in the event that the claim was satisfied, the costs were to be borne by the accused or the civil defendant. If the court refused to hear a civil action, the procedural costs related to the civil action were to be paid by the State.
Article 189 § 2 provided that in court proceedings, compensation for expenses related to criminal proceedings had to be decided by a court ruling or a judgment. Article 189 § 3 provided that in the event that compensation for expenses related to criminal proceedings was prescribed by a court judgment, this could be contested separately from the court judgment itself.
The regulations concerning the settlement procedure were set out in Articles 239 to 250 of Chapter 9 entitled “Simplified Proceedings”.
Article 239 § 2(4) stipulated that the settlement procedure could not be applied without the consent of the victim. Article 240(2) provided that if a prosecutor’s office considered it possible to apply the settlement procedure, it had to explain to the victim the option of applying the settlement procedure, the rights of the victim under the settlement procedure and the consequences of applying such a procedure. Article 243 provided that a report had to be drawn up concerning the consent granted by a victim to the application of the settlement procedure. The victim did not have the right to revoke his or her consent.
Pursuant to Article 246, only a prosecutor, the accused and his or her counsel were summoned to court hearings in proceedings conducted under the settlement procedure, and their participation therein was mandatory.
Article 248 listed the possible outcomes of the settlement procedure. These included, inter alia, the court giving a ruling on the return of the criminal file to the prosecutor’s office if there were no grounds for applying the settlement procedure or a ruling on the refusal to apply the settlement procedure and on the return of the criminal file to the prosecutor’s office if the court had doubts regarding the circumstances specified in Article 306.
Under Article 306 §§ 11 and 14, when rendering a judgment, the court had to adjudicate on, inter alia, whether and to what extent to grant the civil action or award compensation for the damage caused by the criminal offence, as well as adjudicating on the costs and expenses relating to the criminal proceedings and the person who was to bear them.
In 2016 and 2017, with the aim of transposing Directive 2012/29/EU of the European Parliament and the Council establishing minimum standards for the rights, support and protection of victims of crime, certain amendments dealing with the position and the rights of victims in settlement proceedings were made to the CCrP. Article 240(3) currently provides that the prosecutor must request the consent of the victim to the settlement procedure and ask the victim (where he or she is a natural person) whether he or she wishes to receive notification of the time of the relevant court hearing, unless the victim has expressed his or her opinion about these issues earlier in the course of the criminal proceedings. The prosecutor must also explain that the victim has no right to withdraw his or her consent to the settlement procedure. Under Article 240(4), the prosecutor may, if necessary, grant the victim a reasonable deadline for lodging a civil action or a claim for compensation for procedural costs. Under Article 246 § 11, as it entered into force on 16 January 2016, the court must now notify a victim who is a natural person of the time of a court hearing, if the victim has so requested. The failure of a victim to appear in court must not hinder the court. According to the explanatory memorandum attached to the draft legislation introducing the above-mentioned amendments to the CCrP, the Code did not previously provide for a clear deadline for submitting a claim for the reimbursement of procedural costs.
In its judgment of 8 February 2010 in case no. 1-09-13388 the Tallinn Court of Appeal held that an exception to the victim’s right to be informed of the hearing and the right to participate in it is set out in the settlement procedure where the victim has given consent to the sentence and the damages, and knows that the court cannot go beyond the limits of the settlement agreement.
In its judgment of 4 October 2007 in case no. 3-1-1-52-07 the Supreme Court held that a court in settlement proceedings should not overlook, among other things, the question of expenses relating to criminal proceedings when making its decision. The Supreme Court reiterated that requirement in the applicants’ case (see paragraph 22 above).
As to the right provided for under Article 189 § 3 of the CCrP (see paragraph 26 above), the Supreme Court in its decision of 27 April 2006 in case no. 3-1-1-38-06 (reiterated in the decision in the applicants’ case) held that this also applied in the context of the settlement procedure without the usual restrictions on appealing under the settlement procedure being applicable.
In its decision of 30 December 2008 in case no. 3-1-1-70-08 concerning compensation for legal costs incurred within the framework of general criminal procedure, and not the settlement procedure, the Supreme Court stated that the deadline for lodging a compensation claim and submitting all the supporting documents was before the court adjourned to deliberate in chambers.
On 15 March 2001 the Council of the European Union adopted Council Framework Decision 2001/220/JHA on the standing of victims in criminal proceedings (OJ 2001 L 82, p. 1).
Article 2 § 1 of the Framework Decision reads:
“1.  Each Member State shall ensure that victims have a real and appropriate role in its criminal legal system. It shall continue to make every effort to ensure that victims are treated with due respect for the dignity of the individual during proceedings and shall recognise the rights and legitimate interests of victims with particular reference to criminal proceedings.”
Article 7 of the Framework Decision concerns victims’ expenses with respect to criminal proceedings and reads:
“Each Member State shall, according to the applicable national provisions, afford victims who have the status of parties or witnesses the possibility of reimbursement of expenses incurred as a result of their legitimate participation in criminal proceedings.”
In 2002 Council Framework Decision 2001/220/JHA was replaced by Directive 2012/29/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 establishing minimum standards for the rights, support and protection of victims of crime (OJ 2012 L 315, p. 57) (see paragraph 32 above). The Directive, which the Member States of the European Union had to transpose by 16 November 2015, is not applicable to the facts of the present case.