The case originated in eight applications against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Lithuanian nationals, Mr Kęstutis Matiošaitis (application no. 22662/13), on 27 March 2013, Mr Juozas Maksimavičius (application no. 51059/13), on 25 June 2013, Mr Stanislovas Katkus (application no. 58823/13), on 11 September 2013, Mr Vladas Beleckas (application no. 59692/13), on 12 September 2013, Mr Rolandas Lenkaitis (application no. 59700/13), on 11 September 2013, Mr Aidas Kazlauskas (application no. 60115/13), on 10 September 2013, Mr Piort Gervin (application no. 69425/13), on 21 October 2013, and Mr Edmundas Svotas (application no. 72824/13), on 21 October 2013.
The applicants K. Matiošaitis, J. Maksimavičius, S. Katkus, V. Beleckas, A. Kazlauskas and V. Gervin, who had been granted legal aid, were represented by Mr V. Rutkauskas, a lawyer practising in Vilnius. R. Lenkaitis and E. Svotas did not have a legal representative. The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms Karolina Bubnytė.
The applicants alleged that their life sentences without commutation amounted to inhuman and degrading punishment, in breach of Article 3 of the Convention.
The first applicant, K. Matiošaitis, further complained that he had not been allowed to pursue vocational education while in Lukiškės Prison, in breach of Article 2 of Protocol No. 1.
On 12 December 2013 the complaints concerning Article 3 of the Convention and Article 2 of Protocol No. 1 were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the applications was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of the Court.
On 31 March 2014 the President of the Section granted the Human Rights Monitoring Institute leave, under Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court, to intervene as a third party in the proceedings.
On 3 September 2014 the Court sent letters by registered post to the fifth applicant, R. Lenkaitis, at Pravieniškės Correctional Institution, and to the eighth applicant, E. Svotas, at Lukiškės Prison, advising them that the time-limit for submission of their observations had expired on 6 August 2014 and that an extended deadline had not been requested. The Court drew their attention to Article 37 § 1 (a) of the Convention, which provides that it may strike a case out of its list of cases where the circumstances lead to the conclusion that the applicant does not intend to pursue the application. From the relevant delivery receipts it transpires that the letters were received at Pravieniškės Correctional Institution and Lukiškės Prison (“siunta pristatyta ir įteikta gavėjui, ar pagal įgaliojimą kitam asmeniui”) on 13 and 15 September 2014 respectively. However, the Court has received no response from those two applicants.
.  On 7 July 2015 the Chamber decided, under Rule 54 § 2 (a) of the Rules of the Court, that the parties should be invited to submit further written observations on the admissibility and merits of the applications. On 15 September 2015 the Government sent their observations to the Court. The further observations by six applicants were received on 27 October 2015. By letters of 12 November 2015 the Court again informed the applicants R. Lenkaitis and E. Svotas that they had failed to submit their observations within the time-limit of 15 September 2015, which could lead to striking their cases out of the Court’s list of cases under Article 37 § 1 (a) of the Convention. The two applicants have not responded.
The first applicant, Mr Kęstutis Matiošaitis, was born on 3 February 1961 and is serving a life sentence at Lukiškės Prison (Lukiškių tardymo izoliatorius – kalėjimas) in Vilnius.
By a Supreme Court judgment of 2 June 1993, K. Matiošaitis was sentenced to the death penalty for aggravated murder of another prisoner, committed in prison and in a particularly cruel manner. By the same judgment the applicant was also convicted of violence against other prisoners. Under Article 24 of the old Criminal Code, in force at the time, if the death penalty was imposed, the court could change it to life imprisonment (see “Relevant domestic law”, paragraph 61 below). The Supreme Court thus changed the applicant’s sentence from the death penalty to life imprisonment.
The applicant started serving his life sentence nearly twenty four years ago, in June 1993.
In May 2003 a new Criminal Code came into force. Article 3 of the new Code provided for retroactive application of the law commuting a penalty or mitigating the legal circumstances of a convict in other ways (see paragraph 63 below). The applicant asked the court to reclassify his crimes and to commute the sentence imposed on him. In a final decision the Court of Appeal found that there were no grounds for commuting the life sentence imposed.
In 2011, whilst serving his life sentence in Lukiškės Prison, K. Matiošaitis obtained a bachelor’s degree in social pedagogy from the Vilnius Pedagogical University.
In his annual assessment for 2009, the applicant’s character was assessed as satisfactory (patenkinamai) by Lukiškės Prison administration. They came to the same conclusion in further assessments in 2012 for the purpose of a pardon plea, and in 2014 at the request of the Prisons Department. As from 2007 the applicant had been working in prison, but on 31 March 2009 he refused to work, explaining in writing that he would not work with prisoners belonging to a lower caste. The applicant took part in social rehabilitation programmes aimed at social reintegration of convicted persons, reform of life prisoners and computer literacy, and responded positively. He participated actively in both individual and collective discussions, but remained suspicious and appeared unable to think objectively. The applicant had social contact with his family by means of letters, telephone calls and visits. According to the prison administration, he had fully admitted his guilt but had not made serious resolutions. By 2012 the applicant had committed three disciplinary violations. In particular, in 2010 a knife, sharpened pieces of tin, needles and other prohibited objects were found in his cell. He was then placed in a punishment cell for fifteen days. He was commended for good behaviour ten times. As of 2013 the applicant has taken part in a social skills programme organised by the Prisoners’ Care Society (Kalinių globos draugija) – he was part of a “knitting group”. He has also studied English in courses provided in prison.
In 2012 the applicant submitted a pardon plea to the President of the Republic. His plea was rejected by the Pardon Commission at its meeting on 29 January 2013.
In May 2012 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court. As it transpires from the summary of his complaint by that court, K. Matiošaitis argued that Article 158 of the Code for the Execution of Sentences, which prohibits life prisoners’ release on parole (see paragraph 69 below), was unconstitutional. By a ruling of 29 May 2012 the administrative court refused to examine the applicant’s complaint, underlining that the acts adopted by the President of the Republic or the Seimas could not be challenged in the administrative courts (see paragraph 108 below).
In August 2014 the applicant submitted a request to Lukiškės Prison administration, stating that he would like to obtain vocational training (mokytis profesinėje mokykloje). The prison administration replied that the conditions in Lukiškės Prison were not appropriate for teaching a profession (see also paragraph 106 below).
The second applicant, Mr Juozas Maksimavičius, was born on 13 December 1963 and is serving a life sentence in Lukiškės Prison. By a judgment of 20 December 1993 the Supreme Court found the applicant guilty of aggravated murder for mercenary reasons, illegal possession of firearms and other crimes. The Supreme Court sentenced him to death.
By a decree of 13 April 1995 the President of the Republic granted a pardon to the second applicant and changed his death sentence to life imprisonment. The applicant has served twenty two years of his prison sentence.
Following the adoption of the new Criminal Code, the applicant asked the courts to reclassify his crimes and to commute his penalty. In a final decision the Court of Appeal held that there were no grounds for commuting the life sentence imposed, because the crime which the applicant had committed was particularly grave.
The applicant’s annual character assessment for 2011 by Lukiškės Prison administration stated that he had partly admitted his guilt, but avoided talking about his crime. He worked at a manufacturing facility, took part in the social rehabilitation and recreation (laisvalaikio užimtumo) programmes, and devoted much time to computer work. The applicant had incurred no disciplinary penalties and had no civil claims outstanding against him. He had been commended (skatintas) for good behaviour thirteen times. His behaviour while in prison had been positive. In the character assessment report for 2012 drafted by the prison administration for the purpose of a pardon, it was further noted that the applicant had fully admitted his guilt and that no civil claims were outstanding against him. He was also a keen participant in individual and theme discussions.
In 2012 the applicant asked the President of the Republic for a pardon. His plea was rejected by the Pardon Commission at its meeting on 12 October 2012. The applicant’s further pardon plea was rejected 17 October 2014.
The third applicant, Mr Stanislovas Katkus, was born on 26 October 1956 and is currently serving a life sentence in Lukiškės Prison. On 17 August 2001 the Klaipėda Regional Court found him guilty of aggravated murder and illegal possession of firearms. He was sentenced to life imprisonment and all his property was confiscated.
According to the Government, the conviction was upheld by the higher courts. The applicant started serving his life sentence more than sixteen years ago, in October 2000.
Following the adoption of the new Criminal Code, the applicant asked the courts to reclassify his crimes and to commute his sentence. In a final decision of 5 December 2003, the Court of Appeal took into account the fact that, as noted in the court decision convicting the applicant, he had committed the crimes in cold blood (šaltakraujiškai), those crimes had had particularly grave consequences for society, and the applicant had two prior convictions. Accordingly, there were no grounds for commuting the life sentence.
According to the applicant’s annual character assessment by Lukiškės Prison administration for 2011, he had partly admitted his guilt but avoided talking about his crimes. The applicant had been an active participant in individual and theme discussions and had shown an interest in his future. He had also participated in social rehabilitation and recreation programmes, and had reacted to the former programme positively. His behaviour was satisfactory. In 2011 the applicant had been found slightly inebriated and had been placed in a punishment cell for fifteen days for that disciplinary violation.
The applicant admitted that he had not yet applied for presidential pardon.
The fourth applicant, Mr Vladas Beleckas, was born on 6 February 1954 and is currently serving a life sentence in Pravieniškės Correctional Institution. On 11 September 2000 the Vilnius Regional Court found him guilty of theft, robbery, destruction of property of historical and cultural value, and aggravated murder. By another judgment, the applicant was also convicted of absconding from justice. For all the crimes committed a final combined sentence of life imprisonment together with confiscation of all his property was imposed. The applicant has been serving his sentence for eighteen years, since March 1999.
Following the adoption of the new Criminal Code, the applicant asked the courts to reclassify his crimes and to commute his sentence. However, on 4 February 2004 the Court of Appeal refused to change the sentence of life imprisonment.
Between September 2010 and December 2013 the courts refused a number of requests (teikimas) by Lukiškės Prison administration to transfer the applicant to a correctional home. The applicant participated in at least two of those court hearings, and testified about his reformed personality. On other occasions he was represented by different lawyers.
In his written pleadings for transfer, the applicant stated that in Lukiškės Prison he had attended computer literacy courses, taken part in sports and in a group for psychological rehabilitation, and had been part of a Bible reading group. He had also communicated with the prison psychologist. The courts evaluated those factors positively. That being so, on the basis of the applicant’s character reports which Lukiškės Prison administration had drawn up for the purpose of possible transfer, the courts observed that in 2003 and 2008 he had received disciplinary punishments and had been placed for ten and fifteen days in a punishment cell, having been found in possession of a mobile phone, which was forbidden under the prison regulations. Although from 2003 until 2008 the applicant had received positive assessments and his behaviour was not conflictual, it was only in 2009, one month before he had asked the prison administration to intervene on his behalf so that he could be transferred to a correctional home, that he had fully admitted his guilt for the crimes committed. Even in his character report for 2008 the applicant was described as having no remorse about the crimes he had committed and had not made any serious resolutions. That led the courts to doubt the sincerity of his repentance. Moreover, as was apparent from his file, he had also committed a number of other small violations of the prison rules for which he had received a warning from Lukiškės Prison authorities without any disciplinary sanctions. It was also relevant that until March 2011 the applicant had remained on a list of persons likely to attempt to escape (linkusių pabėgti asmenų įskaita). Lastly, it was also pertinent that throughout his imprisonment the prison administration had assessed the applicant’s behaviour only as “satisfactory” (patenkinamai); he had not been assessed positively (teigiamai) until 2011. The courts thus held that it was not yet possible to conclude that the applicant had really changed and that therefore it was safe to make the conditions of serving his sentence less strict by transferring him to a correctional home. Only after further observation of the applicant’s behaviour would it be possible to reliably state that his personality changes were long term.
The applicant’s character assessment by Lukiškės Prison administration, drawn up for the purpose of his pardon plea on 30 April 2012, stated that he had taken part in a number of social rehabilitation programmes, as well as individual and theme discussions. As of August 2011 he had been working in the prison laundry and had shown a strong motivation to work. He also maintained good social contacts with his family. The report nevertheless stated that the applicant had misbehaved in 2003 and 2008, when prohibited objects had been found in his cell.
The applicant’s plea for presidential pardon was rejected by the Pardon Commission at its meeting on 29 January 2013.
On 21 December 2015 the Vilnius City District Court rejected the applicant’s request for transfer to a correctional home. The court noted that the applicant had good social contacts because he received visits often. In May 2015 he had been commended for having actively participated in social rehabilitation programmes, which showed that his behaviour was improving. However, the district court also noted the earlier breaches of prison rules committed by the applicant (see paragraph 29 above), which showed that it was still too early to transfer him to Pravieniškės.
By a ruling of 26 January 2016 the Vilnius Regional Court quashed that decision and granted the transfer request. On the basis of the applicant’s character assessments by Lukiškės Prison administration, the court held that the applicant’s behaviour had clearly improved as of April 2011, which was also proved by his active participation in the social rehabilitation programmes.
The fifth applicant, Mr Rolandas Lenkaitis, was born on 31 December 1973 and is currently serving a life sentence in Pravieniškės Correctional Institution.
On 11 October 2001 the Panevėžys Regional Court found the applicant guilty of aggravated murder and other crimes. For all the crimes committed, a final combined sentence of life imprisonment was imposed together with the confiscation of all his property and a fine. The applicant has been serving his sentence for sixteen years, since March 2001.
Following the adoption of the new Criminal Code, the applicant applied to the courts with a request to reclassify his crimes and to commute his sentence. In October 2003, the first-instance court reclassified the crimes in accordance with the new legislation, which provided for certain mitigation. Following the reclassification, the confiscation of the applicant’s property and the fine were lifted. However, with regard to the crime of murder, the court found no reason to change the life imprisonment sentence. In a final decision in that regard, the Court of Appeal upheld the decision of the lower court, holding that the maintenance of the life sentence for aggravated murder was substantiated and corresponded to the basic principles for imposition of a penalty taking into account the established circumstances, the gravity of the offence and the personality of the perpetrator.
According to the applicant’s character assessment carried out by the prison administration, while serving his sentence in Lukiškės Prison between 2001 and 2005 he had committed four disciplinary violations, including use of physical violence against another inmate and possession of prohibited objects. Between 2010 and 2013 the applicant had been commended four times. The assessment of March 2014 stated that the applicant had not paid compensation to the victims of the crimes he had committed (turi priteistą civilinį ieškinį, kurio nedengia) and had only partly acknowledged his guilt.
The applicant applied for a presidential pardon in 2013. His plea was rejected on 17 December 2013.
In January 2014 the Vilnius Regional Court approved the applicant’s transfer to Pravieniškės Correctional Institution (Pravieniškių pataisos namai – atviroji kolonija) to continue serving his life sentence. It was important for that court that the applicant had already spent more than twelve years in Lukiškės Prison, where reports about his behaviour had been positive. He had confessed to his crimes, was respectful towards the prison administration, worked as a painter in the prison, and had responded well to social rehabilitation measures. Accordingly, there were grounds for approving the applicant’s transfer to a correctional home (see paragraph 104 below).
The sixth applicant, Mr Aidas Kazlauskas, was born on 21 September 1968 and is currently serving a life sentence in Lukiškės Prison. On 14 April 1995 the Šiauliai Regional Court found him guilty of aggravated murder and theft. He was sentenced to the death penalty. On 7 August 1995 the Court of Appeal changed the sentence to life imprisonment, on the basis of Article 24 of the old Criminal Code. The applicant has been serving his sentence for more than twenty-two years, since December 1994.
Following the adoption of the new Criminal Code, the applicant asked the court to reclassify his crimes and to commute his sentence. In a final decision of 30 September 2003 the Court of Appeal held that there were no grounds for commuting the life sentence.
In January 2005, following a proposal by Lukiškės Prison administration, the court decided to transfer the applicant to Pravieniškės Correctional Institution to serve the remainder of his life imprisonment sentence. The court held that as the applicant had received positive character assessments the transfer could be allowed. However, in April 2005 the applicant attempted to kill another life prisoner by stabbing him with a knife. The other prisoner survived only because he ran away and called for help. The applicant was then convicted of attempted murder and sentenced to twelve years’ imprisonment. The sentence was combined with the previous one and a final sentence of life imprisonment, to be served in [Lukiškės] prison (bausmę paskiriant atlikti kalėjime), was imposed. In his written appeal the applicant asked to be transferred back to Lukiškės Prison and never to be returned to freedom, because he was afraid of liberty. On 19 January 2007 the Court of Appeal upheld the conviction.
The applicant’s yearly character assessment for 2012 showed that he had taken part in social rehabilitation and recreation (užimtumo) programmes for convicts. He had received no disciplinary punishments, but had been commended twice. The applicant worked in Lukiškės Prison. He had partly acknowledged his guilt but had shown no remorse at all for his crimes (nejaučia jokio sąžinės graužimo dėl padaryto nusikaltimo).
According to his lawyer, the applicant has never asked to be pardoned by the President of the Republic.
In 2015 the applicant asked the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court to refer to the Constitutional Court the question whether Article 158 of the Code for the Execution of Sentences, which prohibits life prisoners’ release on parole, was in compliance with Article 29 of the Constitution, which prohibits discrimination, and with Article 14 of the European Convention on Human Rights, as well as Article 1 of its Protocol No 12.
By a ruling of 14 May 2015 the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court refused to accept the request for examination. The administrative court noted that under Article 4 § 2 of the Law on Administrative Proceedings it could ask the Constitutional Court for interpretation of a legal norm if it considered, in a particular case, that that norm could be unconstitutional (see paragraph 108 below). Referral of a question to the Constitutional Court was within the discretionary powers of the administrative court, and the parties’ wish to have the question referred to the Constitutional Court did not bind the administrative court. In the applicant’s case, his request was of a general nature, therefore such a request could not be examined.
The seventh applicant, Mr Piotr Gervin, was born on 20 November 1984 and is currently serving a life sentence in Lukiškės Prison. On 17 March 2010 the Klaipėda Regional Court found the applicant guilty of aggravated murder and robbery. He started serving his life sentence seven years ago, in March 2010.
In the applicant’s annual character assessment for 2011, the Lukiškės Prison administration stated that he had taken part in social rehabilitation programmes and had reacted to them satisfactorily. He had not committed any breaches of discipline. He worked in the Lukiškės Prison and had been commended once. He had admitted his guilt. He had taken part in individual and collective discussions, but without showing much interest.
The applicant is not yet entitled to apply for a presidential pardon (see paragraph 76 below).
The eighth applicant, Mr Edmundas Svotas, was born on 1 January 1983. He is serving a life sentence at Lukiškės Prison. On 13 April 2010 the Panevėžys Regional Court found the applicant guilty of a number of crimes, including two aggravated murders, six robberies and illegal possession of a firearm. For all the crimes committed a final combined sentence of life imprisonment was imposed. The term of the sentence started nine years ago, in February 2008.
The applicant’s yearly character assessment for 2011 conducted by Lukiškės Prison administration disclosed that he had taken part in social rehabilitation and recreation programmes and had reacted to them satisfactorily. He was tactful, maintained constant contact with his family, had received no disciplinary penalties and had admitted his guilt.
The applicant is not yet entitled to apply for a presidential pardon (see paragraph 76 below).
The relatives of some of the applicants in this case (K. Matiošaitis, R. Lenkaitis, A. Kazlauskas, S. Katkus and J. Maksimavičius) or of other life prisoners have addressed the State authorities asking for legislative amendments establishing the possibility of parole for life prisoners in Lithuanian law. Their pleas and the authorities’ replies may be summarised as follows.
By a petition of 19 November 2007, J.B., another person sentenced to life imprisonment, filed a petition with the Seimas (the Lithuanian Parliament). He pointed out that life prisoners were a separate category of convict. After having served ten years in prison, they could ask for a milder detention regime – to be transferred to a correctional home. Nonetheless, the punishment of deprivation of liberty remained for life and they had no right to early release. He also maintained that because the
J.B. also noted that life prisoners were serving sentences for crimes of varying gravity – some had been convicted for one murder, others for multiple murders. He argued that if the possibility of early release were established in Lithuanian law, it would be a motivating factor for prisoners to learn social rehabilitation skills, and thus to reform.
On 1 April 2008 the Seimas granted the petition. A working group was created to consider legislative changes concerning the possibility for life prisoners to be released on parole.
In January 2009, the Ministry of Justice informed life prisoners’ relatives that it was preparing legislative amendments and consulting other institutions and legal scientists.
A month later, the Committee on Legal Affairs (Teisės ir teisėtvarkos komitetas) of the Seimas wrote to the petitioners stating that while Lithuanian penal legislation was in conformity with the European Convention on Human Rights, the Committee did not disregard the possibility that because society had developed, penal legislation could also evolve.
By a letter of 5 July 2013, the Ministry of Justice informed the third applicant, S. Katkus, that on 22 December 2011 the Seimas had amended the Code for the Execution of Sentences, including its provisions on conditional release. Nonetheless, the stipulation that life prisoners would not be released on parole remained intact. A working group had been created within the Ministry to discuss the issue further. The Ministry also observed that once persons sentenced to life imprisonment had served at least ten years of their sentence, they could ask the President of the Republic for a pardon. The President had once already changed life imprisonment to fixedterm imprisonment. Moreover, the Seimas could declare an amnesty. Lastly, a person could be released from prison if he or she fell terminally ill. The Ministry reiterated that Lithuania was not obliged under European Union law or any international treaties to regulate the issue in one way or another, because penal policy was the State’s own prerogative.
By a letter of 18 July 2013, the Committee on Legal Affairs of the Seimas informed the third applicant, S. Katkus, that the question of release on parole for life prisoners whose behaviour indicated that they were no longer dangerous to others was very complex and had wide social, legal and moral repercussions. Nonetheless, the issue was being discussed at the Ministry of Justice, so that the optimal suggestions for legal reform could be presented. The Committee was confident that the penal system, as established in the new Criminal Code, was in line with international standards.
In May 2015 the fourth applicant, V. Beleckas, raised the exclusion of life prisoners’ release on parole with the Ministry of Justice. On 26 May 2015 the Vice-Minister of Justice replied that it was desirable to see firstly whether a life prisoner had reformed, and then to transfer him to a correctional home where the regime was milder. Release on parole was possible only when a life prisoner proved that he or she did not pose a danger to others. Given that the present case was pending before the European Court of Human Rights, it would be useful to consider any new grounds for life prisoners’ release only after the Court delivered its judgment. The Vice-Minister lastly mentioned amnesty, pardon and release because of incurable illness as the existing ways of mitigating life sentence.
Under Article 105 of the old Criminal Code of 1961, in force in Lithuania until 30 April 2003, aggravated murder was punishable by eight to fifteen years’ imprisonment or by capital punishment. Article 24 of that Code provided that, when a person was sentenced to the death penalty, a court could change that sentence to life imprisonment. The death penalty could also be changed to life imprisonment by way of pardon. Persons sentenced to the death penalty but whose punishment had been changed to life imprisonment had to serve their sentence in prison (kalėjime).
On 9 December 1998 the Lithuanian Constitutional Court held that the death penalty for murder with aggravating circumstances provided for by Article 105 of the Criminal Code was in breach of Article 21 § 3 of the Constitution, which prohibits cruel punishment:
“3.4.  Following restoration of the independence of Lithuania on 11 March 1990, the Criminal Code, which had been adopted during the occupation and which provided for the death penalty for eighteen crimes against the State and criminal offences and sixteen military crimes, remained in force. It is noteworthy that the Lithuanian State authorities have considered the death penalty issue many times and adopted important decisions on restricting its application.
As early as 3 December 1991 the Law “on Amending and Supplementing the Republic of Lithuania’s Criminal Code, Code of Criminal Proceedings and Code of Correctional Labour” reduced the number of crimes punishable by the death penalty to one, intentional murder with aggravating circumstances, which was provided for by Article 105 of the Criminal Code.
The Law of 19 July 1994 “On Amending and Supplementing the Republic of Lithuania’s Criminal Code, Code of Correctional Labour, and Code of Criminal Proceedings” provided that ... a court, instead of sentencing a person to death, could replace this punishment by life imprisonment. The death penalty may also be replaced by life imprisonment under the pardon procedure.
The President of the Republic, by his decree of 25 July 1996, submitted to the Seimas for debate a draft law on a moratorium on carrying out the death penalty. In the opinion of the President of the Republic, following the enactment of such a law, temporarily, until a new Republic of Lithuania Criminal Code was approved in which the necessity of the death penalty might finally be decided, the carrying out of this punishment would be suspended. Although the draft law submitted by the President of the Republic has not been passed, since 1996 the death penalty imposed by courts has not been carried out as the President of the Republic has not considered those persons’ appeals for pardon. Without that procedure the death penalty may not by carried out.
In 1996 the Government submitted to the Seimas for debate a new draft Republic of Lithuania Criminal Code in which the death penalty was not provided for.
On 27 April 1997 the death penalty issue was discussed by the Baltic Assembly. It adopted a resolution recommending that the parliaments of the three Baltic states and their governments prepare to ratify Protocol No. 6 to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. In addition, the Baltic Assembly recognised that the inevitable preconditions for the adoption of such a decision were: a considerable decline in the crime rate as compared to the present one, especially with respect to grievous crimes against the person; the introduction of life imprisonment into legislation which currently provides for the imposition of the death penalty; essential reorganisation and reform of the prison system by bringing it into line with standards acceptable in Europe; and the creation of possibilities to detain separately persons who have committed criminal offences of different degrees.
On 24 June 1997, the Seimas considered a draft resolution to that effect, and its subsequent adoption is on the agenda of the Seimas. It is noteworthy that Recommendation no. 1339 of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe adopted on 22 September 1997 assessed the draft resolution as providing a legal basis for the current moratorium and meeting a pre-condition for ratification of Protocol No. 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights.”
After the aforementioned Constitutional Court’s ruling, on 21 December 1998 the Seimas passed a law changing the death sentence to life imprisonment for persons sentenced to death. The same month the Seimas also amended Article 105 § 2 of the old Criminal Code to the effect that aggravated murder became punishable by ten to twenty years of deprivation of liberty, or by life imprisonment.
Article 3 § 2 of the new Criminal Code, which came into force on 1 May 2003, provided that a criminal law nullifying the criminality of an act, commuting a penalty or otherwise mitigating the legal circumstances of the person who has committed a criminal act, could have retroactive effect. That applied to persons who had committed the criminal act prior to the coming into force of such a law, as well as to persons serving a sentence and those with previous convictions.
Article 129 § 2 of the new Criminal Code stipulates that aggravated murder is punishable by deprivation of liberty for five to twenty years or by life imprisonment. As that provision stands today, aggravated murder is punishable by eight to twenty years’ deprivation of liberty or by life imprisonment.
Apart from aggravated murder, in Lithuania life imprisonment could also be imposed for most serious crimes against humanity and war crimes (for example, genocide), certain crimes against the independence, territorial integrity and constitutional order of the State (for example, coup d’état), and some crimes against public security (for example, acts of terrorism).
Under Article 78 of the new Criminal Code, a person who commits a crime may be relieved from serving the entire or a part of the sentence by an amnesty passed by the Seimas.
Since 1990, the Seimas has declared seven amnesties – on the occasion, inter alia, of the re-establishment of Lithuania’s independence or to celebrate the adoption of the Lithuanian Constitution. Amnesties were applied to a great variety of criminal acts, most often to non-intentional or less serious crimes. Serious intentional crimes, for example, aggravated murder, were excluded from amnesties. The amnesties of 1998, 2000 and 2002 explicitly did not apply to life prisoners or those initially sentenced to the death penalty but whose sentence had been changed to life imprisonment.
Article 77 of the new Criminal Code provided that release on parole and replacement of the undischarged term of a custodial sentence with a more lenient penalty would not apply to a person sentenced to life imprisonment. Article 77 was repealed on 1 July 2012, when the Parole Law (Probacijos įstatymas) came into force. That Law establishes the rules on resettling convicted persons in society, aimed at preventing them from reoffending. It does not mention persons serving life sentences.
The Code for the Execution of Sentences provides that prisoners who have shown good behaviour and who therefore could improve their conduct under the authorities’ supervision but without being isolated from society, may be released on parole, if the court so decides (Article 157). Nonetheless, life prisoners and prisoners in respect of whom an initial death sentence has been changed to life imprisonment may not be released on parole (Article 158 § 1 (3)).
Release on parole is initially recommended by the Parole Commission, which exists in each prison and assesses the prisoner’s behaviour during his sentence, the social rehabilitation measures applied to him and their results, and the risk of the prisoner reoffending if released.
The new Criminal Code also provides that a convicted person who contracts a terminal illness may be dispensed from serving the undischarged term of the sentence. The court decides the issue taking into consideration the gravity of the criminal act committed, the personality of the convicted person, his conduct while serving the sentence, the nature of the illness and the period of the sentence already served. Lastly, a person who, following the commission of a criminal act or imposition of a penalty, starts to suffer from a mental disorder rendering him incapable of understanding the nature of his actions or controlling them, must be dispensed from serving the undischarged term of the sentence. When dispensing the person from a penalty, the court has to decide whether to subject him to compulsory medical treatment. In the event of the person’s convalescence, he may be ordered to serve the undischarged term of the sentence (Article 76).
Legislation on presidential pardon was established in Lithuania when the Provisional Fundamental Law (Laikinasis pagrindinis įstatymas), that is, a Provisional Constitution, of 11 March 1990 was enacted. Under Article 85 (1) § 9 of that Law, a collective organ of the State, the Presidium of the Supreme Council, had the right to examine and grant pardon pleas. Pardon pleas were first assessed by the Pardon Commission, comprising high-ranking State officials.
Once the Lithuanian Constitution had been issued on 25 October 1992 (in force on 2 November 1992), the right to grant pardon passed to the President of the Republic (Article 84 (1) § 23 of the Constitution; Article 79 of the Criminal Code).
On 11 January 1993 the Acting President of the Republic issued a decree “On the Examination of Pardon Pleas (Dėl malonės prašymų nagrinėjimo tvarkos)”. The decree stipulated that when examining pardon pleas, the following criteria were relevant: the nature of the crime committed and its danger to society; the personality of the person convicted (nuteistojo asmenybė), his behaviour and his attitude towards work; the time that has already been served; the prison authorities’ opinion; the opinion of non-governmental organisations and the prisoner’s former employer; as well as other circumstances. When a convict asked for pardon, the prison administration had to include in the file the court decisions convicting him or her, extensive details about the prisoner’s character (išsami charakteristika), including the prison administration’s recommendation and documents it found relevant. The decree did not contain any distinct provisions for persons sentenced to life imprisonment. Should a pardon plea be refused, a prisoner could submit a new plea after six months.
On 10 June 1994 the President of the Republic issued a new decree, which stipulated that pardon pleas from persons in respect of whom an initial death penalty had been changed to life imprisonment could only be examined if they had served ten years of their prison sentence. The criteria to take into account when examining the pardon plea and the list of documents to be submitted remained identical to those enumerated above. If a pardon plea was refused, a life prisoner could submit a new plea after six months.
On 15 April 1998 the President of the Republic issued another decree on the rules for examining pardon pleas. The criteria to be taken into consideration, the list of documents to be submitted, as well as the requirement that the prisoner had to have served ten years of his or her sentence before being eligible to submit a pardon plea, remained the same.
A new decree issued by the President of the Republic on 25 March 2003 stipulated that life prisoners could lodge a pardon plea after having served twenty years of their sentence. The relevant criteria were the same as those enumerated above. The only new criterion was whether the life prisoner had compensated the victim of his crime for the pecuniary damage caused.
On 15 February 2007 the President of the Republic issued the decree which is currently in force. One amendment was made to it on 11 November 2011: the term which had to be served before a life prisoner could ask for presidential pardon was reduced from twenty to ten years.
Pursuant to the aforementioned presidential decree of 2007, the Pardon Commission (Malonės komisija) consists of the President of the Supreme Court, the President of the Court of Appeal, the Minister of Justice, the Prosecutor General, the Chief Adviser to the President on Legal Affairs, the Adviser to the President on Legal Affairs, the Representative of the Lithuanian Lawyers’ Association, the Representative of the Lithuanian Prisoners Protection Society and the Representative of the Lithuanian Association for Crime Victims Support.
The current criteria pertinent for the examination of pardon pleas read as follows:
“7.  Pleas of convicts sentenced to imprisonment are examined only after the convict has commenced service of the sentence.
Pardon pleas from convicts sentenced to a fixed term or life imprisonment shall be submitted only via the administration of the correctional institution, which provides for examination copies of the judgments and decisions adopted in respect of the plea together with a thorough/detailed assessment (išsami charakteristika) of the convicts’ work and behaviour, as well as references to the payment of compensation for the pecuniary damage caused by the crime and other documents, which are significant for the consideration of a pardon plea.
Pardon pleas from convicts sentenced to life imprisonment shall be examined only after ten years of the prison sentence have been served.
...
Pardon is granted after considering the nature and gravity of the crime committed by the convict, the personality and behaviour of the convict, his/her attitude towards work, how much of the sentence has already been served, whether compensation for pecuniary damage caused by the crime has been paid, the opinions of the administration of the correctional institution, non-governmental organisations and former employers, and other circumstances.
If the President of the Republic grants a pardon plea in respect of a convict, he/she may be dispensed from serving his/her entire sentence or part of it.
...
The President of the Republic is not bound by the opinion of the Commission as regards granting pardon.
Pardon is granted to convicts by decrees of the President of the Republic.
If a pardon plea is not granted, a new pardon plea shall be considered only if at least six months have passed after the previous consideration...”
As regards pardon, the website of the Lithuanian President states the following:
“Pursuant to Article 84 of the Constitution, the President of the Republic grants pardons to convicted persons. It is an individual act of justice with regard to a specific person, which is based on humanity.
The State leader is approached as the last institution of truth and humanity. Combining mercy and justice, the act of pardon alleviates the fate of convicts. A Presidential pardon is an exclusive State act. The State leader grants freedom, reduces a prison sentence or a punishment imposed by a court. Pardon serves justice in one way or another.
The act of pardon is not a document contesting the validity and lawfulness of a court judgement. It is not a legal act. It is, rather, a moral act of attempting to evaluate the personality of a convicted person. The granting of a pardon features efforts to combine justice with mercy so that laws and the interests of society, third parties and aggrieved parties are not violated.
An appeal for pardon may be examined only after the entry into force of a judgement. Before taking a decision, the State leader consults the Pardon Commission. The President is not bound by the Commission’s opinion on granting pardon.
Although murderers and other perpetrators of violent crime can hardly expect to be granted pardon, laws enable all convicts to appeal for it. Even persons imposed a life sentence may appeal for pardon. Such convicts may approach the State leader with an appeal for pardon for the first time no sooner than [ten] years from the commencement of the sentence.
There is no initial selection of appeals for pardon. All appeals received must be examined. Only appeals by third parties are not examined, because convicts must personally approach the President. Appeals that do not meet the requirements for legal documents are not examined either. Prisoners’ appeals are sent via the administration of a prison facility, which usually attaches all required documents, such as court judgements, rulings, characteristics, etc.
Letters of intermediaries may be attached to appeals for pardon as well. Members of Parliament, public figures and sometimes even neighbours may act as intermediaries. Intermediation is not a deciding factor when taking a decision whether an appeal should be satisfied, but may influence the decision.
Convicts who do not obey the internal regulations of a prison facility will not be granted pardon. Documents provided by prison facilities show how many penalties or incentives convicts have and how they are characterised.
The number of previous convictions of persons appealing for pardon is an important circumstance as well. Appeals by a convict who has committed a crime only once and by a persistent offender will be treated differently.
The Presidential decree includes the following condition: if a person is refused pardon, he or she may appeal for pardon again no sooner than in six months.
Pardon is granted by a Presidential decree which enters into force after being published in the official state publication [official gazette].”
The Government submitted that between 9 April 1990 and 24 November 1992 there had been thirty-six hearings of the Pardon Commission of the Presidium of the Supreme Council, whereby 580 pardon pleas had been examined and 379 had been granted. The Presidium of the Supreme Council had granted pardon in changing the death sentence to life imprisonment with regard to three convicts. The Government had no information from the archives concerning mitigation of the sentence for life prisoners at that time.
In their supplementary observations of 15 September 2015 the Government stated that thirty-five life prisoners had requested presidential pardon, twenty of them had submitted their pardon pleas several times. Those life prisoners included the following applicants in the instant case: J. Maksimavičius (twice), V. Beleckas, K. Matiošaitis and R. Lenkaitis (each once).
In addition to the pardon granted to life prisoner J.B. (see paragraphs 84-86 below), the Government noted that the following numbers of persons sentenced to a fixed term of prison for murder or aggravated murder had been granted pardon by the President of the Republic:
In reply to the Court’s request, the Government provided information on the situation of life prisoners in Lithuania. They stated that on 15 August 2015 there were 118 life prisoners in Lithuania, of whom twenty-five were serving their sentence in Pravieniškės Correctional Institution.
The Government also referred to the example of J.B., who in 1996 had been sentenced to the death penalty for aggravated murder. The same year the Supreme Court changed his sentence to life imprisonment.
By decree no. 1K-1060 of 9 May 2012 the President granted J.B.’s pardon plea, commuting his life sentence to a fixed-term sentence of twenty-five years. Thereby J.B. also acquired the right to apply for parole. At a certain stage of his sentence, he was transferred to Pravieniškės Correctional Institution to serve his sentence.
In 2014 J.B. applied for release on parole. On the basis of an opinion of the Parole Commission (see paragraph 70 above), a report by the prison psychologist, a report on the accomplishment of J.B.’s individual social rehabilitation plan (pažyma apie nuteistojo individualaus socialinės reabilitacijos plano įvykdymą) and his personal file, the Kaišiadorys District Court found that it was too early to release him from prison. The court held that while the prisoner had fulfilled the measures described in his individual social rehabilitation plan, he had also committed two violations of the internal prison rules, and his behaviour had not improved until 2013. According to reports by the prison psychologist and a social behaviour report, he did not always act in a responsible manner. The prisoner’s way of thinking, his close links with other criminals, financial difficulties (he had not fully paid the civil claim against him), showed that there remained a likelihood that he would reoffend. The court also emphasised that the Parole Commission’s conclusions to the same effect had been based on written evidence in J.B.’s file and reports by competent specialists, all of which had been established in accordance with the methodology provided for by the relevant legislation. For the court, given that J.B.’s behaviour in prison had not been beyond reproach, it was not reasonable to expect that he would behave without fault if released on parole. The decision was later upheld by the Kaunas Regional Court.
On 15 September 2015 the Kaunas Regional Court rejected J.B.’s fresh application for release on parole. On the basis of J.B.’s individual social rehabilitation plan results the court considered that J.B. had not yet reformed sufficiently to be ready to reintegrate into society.
The Government also noted the example of I.A. In 1994 the Supreme Court had sentenced him to death for the murder of a journalist who had written articles disclosing a criminal gang, I.A.’s participation in that criminal gang and his unlawful possession of firearms. When passing sentence, the Supreme Court had changed the punishment to life imprisonment on the basis of Article 24 of the old Criminal Code.
Following the entry into force of the new Criminal Code in 2003, I.A. asked the court to reclassify his crimes and to impose a milder punishment. In 2004 the court noted that I.A. had already spent more than ten years in prison. During that time the State’s penal policy had changed and the death penalty had been abolished. As to imprisonment, its lower and upper limits had been extended, thus making it easier for the courts to individualise the punishment. Having taken into account the situation of I.A., including his character report drawn up by the prison authorities, the court changed his sentence to twenty-five years of imprisonment, to be served in a correctional home.
In 2012 the court released I.A. on parole, having concluded that his conduct had shown a marked improvement of personality during his sentence, the purpose of the punishment had been achieved, and that it could be further fulfilled by supervising him without isolating him from society (“asmenybės progresas bausmės atlikimo metu yra akivaizdus, bausmės paskirtis atlikta, ir jos tikslai toliau gali buti užtikrinami prižiūrint nuteistąjį I.A. neizoliuotą nuo visuomenės”).
Another example given by the Government was that of R.V. In 1993 the Supreme Court found R.V. guilty of murdering two people and sentenced him to death. By the same judgment the sentence was changed to life imprisonment.
After the new Criminal Code came into force and at the request of R.V., in 2003 the court reduced his sentence from life to twenty years’ imprisonment. The court took into account that R.V. had already served twelve years of his sentence and that the State’s penal policy had significantly changed.
In 2005 a court released R.V. from prison because he had a mental disorder which became more pronounced in prison, and subjected him to compulsory medical treatment in a psychiatric institution with a strict regime.
On 30 May 2013 life prisoner R.P. wrote to the Kaišiadorys District Court, asking the latter to refer to the Constitutional Court the question whether Article 158 of the Code for the Execution of Sentences, which prohibits life prisoners’ release on parole, was in compliance with the Constitution. R.P. noted that none of the amnesties declared in Lithuania since 1990 applied to life prisoners. Only one life prisoner had been pardoned by the President of the Republic. He also relied on the Committee of Ministers’ Recommendation (2003) 22, pursuant to which release on parole should apply to all prisoners, including those sentenced to life imprisonment. This also included the prisoner’s right to be heard when the question of parole was being decided, as well as the right to appeal to an independent higher institution. In R.P.’s view, amnesty or pardon were political measures, and therefore did not meet the recommended standards.
In his complaint R.P. also relied on Article 110 § 3 of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (see paragraph 119 below). According to R.P., in Lithuania life prisoners were de facto condemned to stay in prison until death, whereas in 1998 the Constitutional Court had found the death penalty to be in breach of the Constitution (see paragraph 62 above).
By the same request, R.P. also asked the court to annul the prison authorities’ decision refusing to collect materials about the applicant for the purpose of submitting those materials to the Parole Commission, so that the latter could examine the applicant’s release on parole.
By a ruling of 28 January 2014 the Kaišiadorys District Court firstly held that R.P.’s attempt to ask the Parole Commission to consider the question of his release was pointless, because Article 158 of the Code for the Execution of Sentences prohibited life prisoners’ release on parole. Secondly, life prisoners’ situation could be alleviated by way of amnesty or pardon. For the court of criminal jurisdiction, there was therefore no reason to grant R.P.’s request to refer his complaint to the Constitutional Court.
By a ruling of 13 February 2014 the Kaunas Regional Court dismissed R.P.’s appeal, including his request to address the Constitutional Court.
On 16 June 2016 the Supreme Court’s enlarged chamber of seven judges upheld H.D.’s sentence to life imprisonment. H.D. was convicted of a number of crimes, including running a criminal association and murder. H.D. argued that, without possibility of parole, a life sentence was inhuman, and therefore was in breach of the Lithuanian Constitution and of the Convention. The Supreme Court dismissed that argument, stating that the presidential pardon did not make life sentence irreducible. Under the case-law of the Court, in matters of criminal justice and sentencing the States had a margin of appreciation to prescribe the form – executive or judicial – which such review should take.
Both the old Criminal Code (Article 21) and the new Criminal Code (Article 41) set out the objectives of criminal punishment as follows: (1) to deter people from committing criminal acts; (2) to punish those who have committed a crime; (3) to deprive convicted persons of the opportunity to commit new crimes or to restrict such a possibility; (4) to exert an influence on those who have served their sentence to ensure that they comply with the law and do not relapse into crime.
In addition, the old Criminal Code stipulated that punishment did not have the goal of degrading a person or causing him physical suffering. The new Criminal Code also provides that punishment serves to implement the principle of justice.
The Rules for Correctional Facilities (Pataisos įstaigų vidaus tvarkos taisyklės), approved by the Minister of Justice on 2 July 2003 and applicable to prisons, correctional homes and other such facilities, including Lukiškės Prison and Pravieniškės Correctional Institution, stipulate that prisoners’ work in those facilities should be considered as a positive element of their education and development. Inasmuch as possible, work should correspond to and develop the prisoner’s abilities so that he is able to make a living when he leaves the prison. Prisoners should be given proper work or other activities, so that they are occupied the entire day (points 129131).
The Rules also stipulate that the prison administration must draw up an individual plan for the prisoner’s social rehabilitation, so that he is encouraged to reintegrate into society once he has served his punishment (point 163). When performing social rehabilitation work with a prisoner, the prison administration must evaluate his risk level. In the process of social rehabilitation, prisons are to receive assistance from all State and municipal institutions, and non-governmental and religious organisations. Psychologists working in prisons must assess convicts and provide recommendations to the prison administration in drawing up guidelines for the prisoner’s social rehabilitation. In particular, each correctional facility must have the following programmes:
(1)  adaptation of new prisoners (following assessment of the prisoner’s personality, needs, abilities and family connections);
(2)  reform (moral education so that the prisoner behaves in accordance with the rules acceptable to society; teaching of basic legal concepts, so that he aims to achieve his goals with legal means; cultural education; physical education);
(3)  prisoners’ reintegration in society, to start preparing the prisoner for release as soon as possible (“nuteistųjų integracijos į visuomenę programa: į pataisos įstaigą priimtus nuteistuosius reikėtų kaip galima greičiau pradėti rengti išėjimui į laisvę”). When supervising prisoners it should be emphasised that they remain part of society, not separated from it (nuteistieji tebėra visuomenės dalis); assistance by social workers is encouraged, as are contacts between the prisoner and his family.
As of 1 September 2015, the Code for the Execution of Sentences was supplemented by new Article 1371 on social rehabilitation planning, in which the convicted person must participate. According to the Government, individual social rehabilitation plans had to be drawn up by 1 December 2015.
The Government also noted that a number of social rehabilitation programmes for life prisoners had been organised at Lukiškės Prison. Those included an adaptation programme (an individual programme aimed at integrating convicts in their new social environment and creating preconditions for a successful correction process), life prisoner’s personality transformation, social rehabilitation, art, computer literacy, drug and HIV prevention, suicide and criminal subculture prevention, occupational programme (sport activities, religious events, attendance of concerts in prison, subscribing to a library, limited access to internet). They also included language classes and secondary education; higher education was also possible. In addition, the psychological service of Lukiškės Prison implemented programmes aimed at the development of communication skills, emotion recognition and coping with stressful situations, art therapy, mutual emotional support in a group, and yoga.
The Code for the Execution of Sentences states that life prisoners must serve the first ten years of their sentence in prison. Afterwards, if their behaviour and security requirements so allow, and on the recommendation of the prison administration, by court decision they may be transferred to a correctional home to serve the remainder of their sentence. In prison, life prisoners are held in solitary confinement, or, if they agree, with one other inmate. In correctional homes, life prisoners are held separately or isolated from other prisoners (Article 165). Persons sentenced to deprivation of liberty, including life prisoners, must follow the prison regulations and orders by the prison administration (Article 110).
.  The Code for the Execution of Sentences provided that once each two months life prisoners could have a short term visit by family members, lasting up to four hours. Starting from 1 January 2017 the possibility of supplementary short term visits for re-socialisation purpose has been established (Article 94 §§ 1 and 2).
As concerns vocational education (profesinis mokymas), Article 167 § 2 of the Code for the Execution of Sentences read, until 1 September 2015, that in respect of life prisoners it may be provided for only in a correctional home. Starting from 1 September 2015 the prohibition on providing vocational training in prison has been abolished.
Life prisoners may work (Article 167 § 3). Pursuant to Government Regulation no. 264 of 8 April 2009 “On Organising Vocational Training for Prisoners” (Dėl suimtųjų ir nuteistųjų, atliekančių laisvės atėmimo bausmes, bendrojo lavinimo ir profesinio mokymo organizavimo), a life prisoner may receive vocational training if more than three life prisoners have expressed such a wish. Another condition for such education is that the prison facility must be able to provide the necessary conditions so that the life prisoners’ vocational training can be organised separately from other prisoners. The Government specified that vocational training at Pravieniškės Correctional Institution, where life prisoners could be transferred to serve the remainder of their life sentence, was provided for the following occupations: woodworker, carpenter, cabinetmaker, and computer operator.
The Constitution reads as follows:
“The Constitutional Court shall consider and adopt decisions on whether the laws of the Republic of Lithuania or other acts adopted by the Seimas are in conflict with the Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania.
The Constitutional Court shall also consider whether the following are in conflict with the Constitution and laws:
1)  the acts of the President of the Republic;
2)  the acts of the Government of the Republic. (...)”
“The Government, not less than 1/5 of all the Members of the Seimas, and courts shall have the right to apply to the Constitutional Court concerning the acts specified in the first paragraph of Article 105.
Not less than 1/5 of all the Members of the Seimas and courts shall have the right to apply to the Constitutional Court concerning the conformity of the acts of the President of the Republic with the Constitution and laws.
Not less than 1/5 of all the Members of the Seimas, courts, as well as the President of the Republic, shall have the right to apply to the Constitutional Court concerning the conformity of the acts of the Government with the Constitution and laws. (...)”
The Law on Administrative Proceedings states that administrative courts shall not hear cases assigned to the competence of the Constitutional Court, also cases within the competence of the courts of general jurisdiction or other specialised courts. Investigation of the President of the Republic activities is outside the administrative courts’ jurisdiction (Article 16 § 2).
The Law also provides:
“(...)
If there is a reason to believe that a law or other legal act which should be applied in a particular case is in conflict with the Constitution, the court shall suspend the examination of the case and refer to the Constitutional Court a question whether that law or other legal act complies with the Constitution. Having received the Constitutional Court’s ruling, the court re-opens the examination of the case. The aforementioned rules are also applicable when the court has doubts whether an act of the President of the Republic or a Government act, which should be applied in a particular case, is not in contradiction with the laws of the Constitution.”
By a ruling of 13 May 2010 the Constitutional Court reiterated that the President of the Republic was part of the executive. The policy implemented by the President constituted overall activities of that institution of power within the competence defined in the Constitution and laws. Competent decisions and actions of the President formed an integral part of the policy implemented by the President. The Constitutional Court also held:
“13.1.  (...)
It has also been mentioned that the peculiarities of the constitutional status of the Seimas, the President of the Republic, the Government, and the Judiciary related with the implementation of state power and separation of state powers inter alia imply that these institutions may not take over the constitutional powers of each other, thus, also the courts to which persons concerned apply with petitions requesting to investigate acts adopted by the Seimas, the President of the Republic, or the Government or the activities of these institutions expressed in other ways may not take over the constitutional powers of the Seimas, the President of the Republic, or the Government, that is, adopt corresponding decisions for these institutions of power or oblige the said institutions of power to pass acts related with the implementation of State power.
Thus, the formula ‘the activities of the President of the Republic (...)’ of Paragraph 2 (...) of Article 16 of the Law on the Administrative Proceedings means such activities whereby State power is implemented. These activities may not be equated with the activities embraced by the notion “public administration” which is employed in the Law on the Proceedings of Administrative Cases.
2.  In this context the provision ‘Investigation of the activities of the President of the Republic <...>, the Government (as a collegial body) <...> shall be outside the jurisdiction of administrative courts’ of Paragraph 2 (...) of Article 16 of the Law on the Proceedings of Administrative Cases’, which is being disputed in the constitutional justice case at issue, is to be construed as inter alia meaning that the subject matter of the administrative dispute under consideration in the administrative court may not be such activities of the President of the Republic or the Government whereby state power is implemented.
(...)
It needs to be held that the provision ‘Investigation of the activities of the President of the Republic <...>, the Government (as a collegial body) <...> shall be outside the jurisdiction of administrative courts’ of Paragraph 2 (...) of Article 16 of the Law on the Proceedings of Administrative Cases does not prevent the person, who believes that his rights and freedoms have been violated because of the activities of the President of the Republic or the Government, from implementing his right to apply to court, which is entrenched in Paragraph 1 of Article 30 of the Constitution.
It also needs to be held that the disputed legal regulation, established in Paragraph 2 (...) of Article 16 of the Law on the Proceedings of Administrative Cases, also does not violate the constitutional imperatives that stem from Paragraph 1 of Article 109 of the Constitution, which provides that, in the Republic of Lithuania, justice shall be administered only by courts, and Paragraph 1 of Article 29 thereof, which provides that all persons shall be equal before the law, the court, and other state institutions and officials.”
In the conclusion of 24 January 1995, the Constitutional Court held that upon its ratification and enforcement, the Convention will become a constituent part of the legal system of the Republic of Lithuania and will be applied in the same way as laws of the Republic of Lithuania. The Constitutional Court also held that Articles 4, 5, 9, 14 and Article 2 of Protocol No. 4 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms were in compliance with the Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania.
In a ruling of 16 January 2007 the Constitutional Court reiterated that in Lithuanian legal system the Convention has the force of a law. The decrees by the President of the Republic may not be in contradiction with the Convention.
The relevant texts of the Council of Europe, the European Union and other international legal texts on the imposition and review of life sentences, including the obligations of Council of Europe member States when extraditing individuals to States where they may face such sentences, are set out in Kafkaris v. Cyprus ([GC], no. 21906/04, §§ 68-76, ECHR 2008), and Vinter and Others v. the United Kingdom ([GC], nos. 66069/09, 130/10 and 3896/10, §§ 60-75, 9 July 2013).
The relevant Council of Europe and international instruments on the objectives of a prison sentence, notably as regards the importance to be attached to rehabilitation, are outlined in Dickson v. the United Kingdom ([GC], no. 44362/04, §§ 28-36, ECHR 2007-V) and summarised in Vinter and Others (cited above, §§ 76-81). They have also been reiterated in Murray v. the Netherlands ([GC] no. 10511/10, §§ 70-76, 26 April 2016).
The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“the CPT”) prepared a report on “Actual/Real Life Sentences” dated 27 June 2007 (CPT (2007) 55). The report’s conclusion included recommendations that no category of prisoners should be “stamped” as likely to spend their natural life in prison; no denial of release should ever be final; and not even recalled prisoners should be deprived of hope of release.
On 16 April 2016 the CPT made public its 25th General Report, where it noted that in 2014 there was a total of some 27,000 life-sentenced prisoners in Europe. The CPT called upon the 47 Council of Europe member States to review their treatment of life-sentenced prisoners according to the individual risk they present, and to provide for their possible reintegration into society at some stage. The CPT underlined that although the majority of countries imposing life sentences require that a minimum period of between 20 and 30 years be served before a prisoner may benefit from conditional release, a number of others – including Bulgaria, Lithuania, Malta, the Netherlands and, for certain crimes, Hungary, the Slovak Republic and Turkey – do not have a system of conditional release for life-sentenced prisoners. As a result, some prisoners may never be released (except on compassionate grounds or by pardon). The detention regime should keep life-sentenced prisoners in contact with the outside world, offer them the possibility of release into the community under licence and ensure that at some stage their release can be safely granted, at least in most cases. To this end, these prisoners should be given a precise date for the first review for possible release, based on an individual plan defined at the outset of the sentence, and reviewed regularly. The CPT also noted that the conditions under which life-sentenced prisoners were held varied significantly from one country to another, and often even from one establishment to another. In many countries, life-sentenced prisoners were held together with other prisoners and benefited from the same rights in terms of work, education, recreational activities, and contact with the outside world. However, in a number of countries including Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Georgia, Latvia, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, the Russian Federation and Ukraine, life-sentenced prisoners were as a rule kept separate from other prisoners.
.  In the same report the CPT stated the following:
“Life means life”
“73.  As indicated above, in several Council of Europe member states, a person may be sentenced to life imprisonment without any prospect of conditional release. This is known as an “actual or whole life sentence”. The CPT has criticised the very principle of such sentences in several visit reports, expressing serious reservations regarding the fact that a person sentenced to life imprisonment is considered once and for all to be dangerous and is deprived of any hope of conditional release (except on compassionate grounds or by pardon). The Committee maintains that to incarcerate a person for life without any real prospect of release is, in its view, inhuman. It is also noteworthy that even persons who are convicted by the International Criminal Court (or special international tribunals) of the most serious crimes such as genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity may in principle benefit at a certain stage from conditional (early) release. Indeed, the CPT considers that a prison sentence which offers no possibility of release precludes one of the essential justifications of imprisonment itself, the possibility of rehabilitation. While punishment and public protection are important elements of a prison sentence, excluding from the outset any hope of rehabilitation and return to the community effectively dehumanises the prisoner. This is not to say that all life-sentenced prisoners should be released sooner or later; public protection is a crucial issue. However, all such sentences should be subject to a meaningful review at some stage, based on individualised sentenceplanning objectives defined at the outset of the sentence, and reviewed regularly thereafter. This would provide not only hope for the prisoner, but also a target to aim for which should motivate positive behaviour. It would thus also assist prison administrations in dealing with individuals who would otherwise have no hope and nothing to lose. The European Court of Human Rights has in recent years examined a number of cases where domestic courts had imposed life sentences on prisoners with no possibility for early or conditional release and where, barring compassionate or highly exceptional circumstances, a whole life sentence meant precisely that. The most authoritative judgment of the Court to date, delivered by the Grand Chamber in Vinter and Others v. the United Kingdom states that it was incompatible with human dignity, and therefore contrary to Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights, for a state to deprive a person of their freedom without at least giving them a chance one day to regain that freedom. Three main consequences can be drawn from the existing case-law of the Court. The legislation of member states must henceforth provide for a time during the serving of the sentence when there will be a possibility to review that sentence. Furthermore, member states must establish a procedure whereby the sentence will be reviewed. Finally, detention in prison must be organised in such a way as to enable life-sentenced prisoners to progress towards their rehabilitation.
The basic objectives and principles for the treatment of life sentenced prisoners
In the CPT’s view, the objectives and principles for the treatment of lifesentenced prisoners enunciated by the Committee of Ministers in Recommendation Rec (2003) 23 on the management by prison administrations of life sentence and other long-term prisoners remains the most pertinent and comprehensive reference document for this group of prisoners. In summary, these principles are:
the individualisation principle: each life sentence must be based on an individual sentence plan, which is tailored to the needs and risks of the prisoner;
the normalisation principle: life-sentenced prisoners should, like all prisoners, be subject only to the restrictions that are necessary for their safe and orderly confinement;
the responsibility principle: life-sentenced prisoners should be given opportunities to exercise personal responsibility in daily prison life, including in sentence planning;
the security and safety principles: a clear distinction should be made between any risks posed by life-sentenced prisoners to the external community and any risks posed by them to other prisoners and persons working in or visiting the prison;
the non-segregation principle: life-sentenced prisoners should not be segregated on the sole ground of their sentence, but be allowed to associate with other prisoners on the basis of risk assessments which take into account all relevant factors;
the progression principle: life-sentenced prisoners should be encouraged and enabled to move through their sentence to improved conditions and regimes on the basis of their individual behaviour and cooperation with programmes, staff and other prisoners.”
The CPT delegation visited Lukiškės Prison in 2004. In its followup report, published on 23 February 2006, the CPT noted:
“4.  Life-sentenced prisoners at Vilnius-Lukiškės Remand Prison
material conditions
The Unit for life-sentenced prisoners at Vilnius-Lukiškės Remand Prison was located in Building 1, which had recently been renovated. The material conditions of detention in that unit were on the whole satisfactory (although the paint was already peeling off the walls and ceiling in some of the cells). All cells were furnished with one or two beds, chairs, a table and a cupboard and were equipped with a partitioned toilet and a washbasin with hot/cold running water. Moreover, cells were clean, benefited from good access to natural light and ventilation, and were equipped with artificial lighting and heating. However, a typical cell (between 7 and 9 m²) only offered cramped living space for two prisoners, a shortcoming which was all the more serious bearing in mind that the prisoners concerned would spend many years in such conditions.
regime
A mere six out of the 79 life-sentenced prisoners were offered work. For the rest, the only daily out-of-cell activity offered was 1½ hours of outdoor exercise, which was taken in cubicles measuring some 20 m². The remaining 22½ hours of the day were usually spent locked up in their cell, reading, and (for prisoners who could afford them) listening to the radio or watching TV. It should be added that lifesentenced prisoners could not associate with any other categories of prisoners, as this was expressly prohibited by the legislation in force (in practice, they could only associate with their cellmate).
That said, the CPT welcomes the initiatives taken at local level to allow inmates access to a computer room (for one hour per week) and to indoor sports/recreation rooms (twice per month for two hours).
Long-term imprisonment can have a number of desocialising effects upon inmates. In addition to becoming institutionalised, long-term prisoners may experience a range of psychological problems (including loss of self-esteem and impairment of social skills) and have a tendency to become increasingly detached from society, to which many of them will eventually return. In the view of the CPT, the regimes which are offered to prisoners serving long sentences should seek to compensate for these effects in a positive and proactive way.
The prisoners concerned should have access to a wide range of purposeful activities of a varied nature (work, preferably with vocational value; education; sport; recreation/association). Moreover, they should be able to exercise a degree of choice over the manner in which their time is spent, thus fostering a sense of autonomy and personal responsibility. Additional steps should be taken to lend meaning to their period of imprisonment; in particular, the provision of individualised custody plans and appropriate psycho-social support are important elements in assisting such prisoners to come to terms with their period of incarceration and, when the time comes, to prepare for release. Moreover, the provision of such a regime to lifesentenced prisoners enhances the development of constructive staff/inmate relations and hence reinforces the security within the prison.
It is clear that the regime applied to life-sentenced prisoners at Vilnius-Lukiškės Remand Prison falls far short of the above criteria. Indeed, the prisoners were subject to a regime of small-group isolation, and certain of them to solitary confinement, for many years. This, combined with the quasi-total absence of a programme of activities (such as work or education) for the vast majority, can easily lead to personal degeneration of the prisoners concerned. Several of the prisoners met by the delegation claimed that they were seriously affected by the lack of human contacts with other inmates and staff. It is noteworthy in this regard that, since August 2000, four life-sentenced prisoners had committed suicide.
As for the rule that life-sentenced prisoners cannot associate with other sentenced prisoners or even other life-sentenced prisoners from other cells, it is totally unjustified. In this connection, the CPT wishes to stress that life-sentenced prisoners are not necessarily more dangerous than other prisoners. Many such prisoners have a long-term interest in a stable and conflict-free environment. Therefore, the approach to the management of life-sentenced prisoners (as indeed to all prisoners) should proceed from an individual risk/needs assessment to allow decisions concerning security, including degree of contact with others, to be made on a case-by-case basis.
The CPT calls upon the Lithuanian authorities to fundamentally revise the regime applicable to life-sentenced prisoners and the relevant legal provisions, in the light of the remarks made in paragraphs 72 to 74.
contact with the outside world
The negative effects of institutionalisation upon prisoners serving long sentences will be less pronounced, and they will be better equipped for release, if they are able effectively to maintain contact with the outside world.
Life-sentenced prisoners benefited, in principle, from the same possibilities to maintain such contacts as other sentenced prisoners. However, they could not benefit from long-term visits with their partner/family (during the initial ten years of imprisonment). The CPT recommends that the Lithuanian authorities extend the possibility of having long-term visits to all sentenced prisoners, including those serving life sentences.”
The CPT delegation visited Lukiškės Prison in 2008. In its ensuing report, published on 25 June 2009, the CPT noted:
“50.  At Lukiškės, the material conditions in the section for life-sentenced prisoners (described in the report on the 2004 visit) were acceptable. It should be recalled that, in principle, the prisoners were accommodated in individual cells. However, two lifesentenced prisoners could ask to share a cell; at the time of the visit, there were 14 such prisoners in two-bed cells.
The CPT has taken note of the efforts made by the authorities since 2004 to expand the programme of activities for life-sentenced prisoners. In particular, at the time of the 2008 visit, 26 life prisoners (out of 81) were working outside their cells for 8 hours a day. In addition to the daily outdoor exercise (1½ hours), the prisoners could study, engage in outside sporting activities once a week (1½ hours), take part in sports competitions (in the summer) and attend religious services and, more infrequently, cultural or artistic events (e.g. concerts). The prison also had 16 television sets and 8 radios for prisoners without means of support.
However, there is still progress to be made. Life-sentenced prisoners who did not work – that is to say, the majority – usually spent 22½ hours a day locked up in their cells. Education was generally confined to teachers handing out exercises at the cell doors, sometimes at very spaced-out intervals (e.g. monthly). The indoor sports/recreation rooms (to which life-sentenced prisoners had been allowed access twice a month for two hours in 2004) were no longer in use.
It should be added that, although there were some exceptions in practice, contact with other prisoners, including life-sentenced prisoners, was still prohibited by law (e.g. the inmates of each cell took their daily outdoor exercise separately from the others).
The CPT wishes to recall that the rule that life-sentenced prisoners must not associate with other prisoners – even life prisoners from other cells – is totally unjustified and unnecessarily restricts their regime. Life-sentenced prisoners do not necessarily pose a threat to safety and security. The approach to their management (and that of all prisoners) should therefore be based on an individual risk/needs assessment so that decisions concerning security, including contacts with other prisoners, can be taken on a case-by-case basis.
The CPT recommends that the Lithuanian authorities pursue their efforts to develop the regime applicable to life-sentenced prisoners, taking account of Recommendation Rec(2003)23 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on the management by prison administrations of life sentence and other long-term prisoners. The relevant legislation should be amended accordingly.”
The CPT delegation visited Lukiškės Prison in 2012 and the relevant part of its report (CPT/Inf (2014) 18) reads as follows:
“57.  At Lukiškės Prison, the material conditions in the unit for life-sentenced prisoners remained unchanged since the CPT’s visit in 2008 and were acceptable. As a rule, life-sentenced prisoners were held in individual cells but could request to be detained with another life-sentenced inmate. The only life-sentenced woman was held in the corridor reserved for the female prisoners. Her conditions of detention were satisfactory; her relatively large cell had been recently refurbished.
Persons sentenced to life have to spend their first ten years of imprisonment at Lukiškės Prison before having the possibility of being transferred to a Correction Home. In the past, this transfer was only possible after 20 years. Further, they can now apply for clemency after ten rather than 20 years. The CPT notes these developments.
Regarding the regime, the CPT acknowledges that a certain number of positive measures have been taken to expand the programme of activities. In addition to the activities described in the report on the 2008 visit (1½ hours of outdoor exercise, some possibility of work outside the cell, education, etc.), life-sentenced prisoners can now use a computer for up to three hours per day, like any other inmate. They can also have access to higher education. The Prison organised every month a conference/debate with a speaker at which all the prisoners, including life-sentenced inmates, were invited to participate. Possibilities of association with other life-sentenced prisoners also existed during religious services, certain sport activities as well as during the “knitting group”.
However, the CPT considers that further progress needs to be made. The vast majority of the life-sentenced prisoners were still spending 22½ hours in their cells as they were not enrolled in work activities or education. Little attempt seemed to be made by prison staff to engage them in the few activities available. Further, contacts with other prisoners were in general prohibited.
The Committee sees no justification for the systematic segregation of lifesentence prisoners and considers that the Lithuanian authorities should institute a process for integrating persons sentenced to life imprisonment into the general prison population. Particular reference should be made to the Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers’ Recommendation (2003) 23, on the ‘management by prison administrations of life-sentence and other long-term prisoners’ of 9 October 2003. One of the general principles set out in that recommendation is the non-segregation principle, according to which life-sentenced prisoners should not be segregated on the sole ground of their sentence. This principle should be read in conjunction with the security and safety principle, which calls for a careful assessment of whether prisoners pose a risk of harm to themselves, to other prisoners, to those working in the prison or to the external community. The assumption is often wrongly made that the fact of a life-sentence implies a prisoner is dangerous. In this context, the explanatory report to the Recommendation (2003) 23 notes that ‘as a general rule, the experience of many prison administrations is that many such prisoners present no risk to themselves or to others’ and that ‘they exhibit stable and reliable behaviour’. The director of Lukiškės Prison indicated to the delegation that only a small number – less than a handful – of the 88 life-sentenced prisoners in his establishment would be a potential threat to safety and security.
Consequently, the placement of persons sentenced to life imprisonment should be the result of a comprehensive and ongoing risk and needs assessment, based on an individualised sentence plan, and not merely a result of their sentence.
The CPT calls upon the Lithuanian authorities to fundamentally review the regime applicable to life-sentenced prisoners, taking account of the above-mentioned remarks. The relevant legislation should be amended accordingly.”
The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (1998, “ICC Statute”), in force in respect of Lithuania as of 1 August 2003, reads as follows:
“1.  The State of enforcement shall not release the person before expiry of the sentence pronounced by the Court.
The Court alone shall have the right to decide any reduction of sentence, and shall rule on the matter after having heard the person.
When the person has served two thirds of the sentence, or 25 years in the case of life imprisonment, the Court shall review the sentence to determine whether it should be reduced. Such a review shall not be conducted before that time.
In its review under paragraph 3, the Court may reduce the sentence if it finds that one or more of the following factors are present:
(...)
(b)  The voluntary assistance of the person in enabling the enforcement of the judgements and orders of the Court in other cases, and in particular providing assistance in locating assets subject to orders of fine, forfeiture or reparation which may be used for the benefit of victims; or
(...)”