The application concerns a police order for photographs as well as fingerprints and palm prints to be taken from the applicant and for a description of his person to be drawn up. The applicant submitted that this collection of identification data, ordered on the basis of only a few convictions for petty offences dating back a long time, amounted to a disproportionate interference with his right to respect for his private life under Article 8 of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1961 and lives in Dresden. He had been granted legal aid and was represented by Mr I.-J. Tegebauer, a lawyer practising in Trier.
The Government were represented by one of their Agents, Mr H.J. Behrens, of the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection.
On 7 May 2018 the Vice-President of the Section granted leave to Privacy International, under Article 36 § 2 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 3 of the Rules of Court, to intervene as a third party in the Court’s proceedings concerning the present case. By letter dated 14 June 2018 that organisation informed the Court that, having been unable to obtain any further information relating to the case, they did not consider themselves to be in a position to provide submissions which might assist the Court in the case.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 18 August 2011 the Dresden police, relying on Article 81b, second alternative, of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 24 below), ordered identification data to be collected from the applicant. In particular, photographs of the applicant’s face and body, including detail pictures, notably of possible tattoos, were to be taken, as well as fingerprints and palm prints. A description of his person was also to be drawn up. The order was based on criminal proceedings against the applicant (see paragraph 6 below).
The police found that, as required by Article 81b, second alternative, of the Code of Criminal Procedure, criminal proceedings had been opened against the applicant in June 2011 for receiving and handling stolen goods after he had bought a stolen bike. It further noted that the applicant was a recidivist. He had been sentenced, in particular, to a fine in 2010 for casting false suspicion on a third person of having committed a criminal offence. In 2009 proceedings for assault and damage to property against him had been discontinued following payment of a sum of money. In 2004 proceedings for fraud (concerning the renting of an apartment) had been discontinued as the applicant’s wrongdoing was considered to be minor. In 2001 the applicant had been sentenced to a term of imprisonment for fraud and making a false declaration in lieu of an oath (concerning cheques issued in respect of a closed bank account) and in 2000 he had been sentenced to a fine for fraud (conclusion of a friendly settlement in court despite his knowing that he would be unable to pay the sum agreed upon). Two further sets of proceedings for withholding wages and salaries and for damage to property had been discontinued in 1999 and 2000 respectively because they concerned insignificant secondary offences compared with the offences of which the applicant had been or could have expected to be convicted.
The police concluded that it was therefore likely that the applicant would commit or be suspected of similar offences in the future. In their view, the identification measures ordered were necessary and proportionate. They would facilitate investigation measures concerning future offences, in particular property offences, as the applicant could more easily be confirmed or excluded as a perpetrator.
On 24 August 2011 the applicant lodged an administrative appeal. He argued that in view of the three petty offences of which he had been convicted, some of them ten years previously, the order was disproportionate. On 16 May 2012 the Dresden police dismissed the appeal. The police confirmed, in particular, that criminal proceedings which had been discontinued without the applicant having been proven innocent could be taken into account, albeit to a lesser extent, alongside his convictions in assessing the likelihood that the applicant would commit or be suspected of offences in the future.
Subsequently, on 4 June 2012, the prosecution discontinued the criminal proceedings opened against the applicant in June 2011 for receiving and handling stolen goods (see paragraph 6 above), on the grounds that there was insufficient proof to prefer charges against the applicant. It could not be proved that the applicant had known that the bicycle which was as new and which he had bought for 29 euros at a flea market had been stolen.
On 16 March 2015 the Dresden Administrative Court dismissed an action lodged by the applicant on 15 June 2012 against the decision of the Dresden police, which had been upheld on appeal (see paragraph 8 above). It found that the requirements under Article 81b, second alternative, of the Code of Criminal Procedure for collecting identification data from the applicant were met.
The court noted that, as required by Article 81b, second alternative, of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the applicant had been suspected of an offence, namely receiving and handling stolen goods, at the time when the police order had been made. It was immaterial that the criminal proceedings in that regard had subsequently been discontinued.
The measures ordered had been and still were necessary for the purposes of the police records department, that is, for identification purposes. Referring to the principles developed in the well-established caselaw of the Federal Administrative Court and the Saxony Court of Appeal, the Administrative Court reiterated that measures taken for the purposes of the police records department were necessary if, in the light of the facts established in the course of the criminal (investigation) proceedings against the person concerned, there were reasons to suppose in the circumstances of the case, on the basis of criminological evidence, that the person concerned would in the future again be suspected with good reason of having participated in a criminal act, and that the identification material would then facilitate the investigations by showing the person concerned to be guilty or innocent. The circumstances of the case to be taken into account included the nature and severity of the criminal offence of which the person concerned was suspected and the manner in which the offence in question had been committed, the personality of the suspect and the length of time for which the person had not come to the notice of the criminal investigation authorities.
In the present case, taking into account the numerous occasions on which criminal investigation proceedings had been opened against the applicant, resulting in some cases in his conviction, the court took the view that the police could reasonably consider that there were reasons to suppose that the applicant might be suspected of a criminal offence in the future.
The court noted that in the period from 1986 to 2001 the applicant had been convicted thirteen times. It referred to the list of previous convictions set out in a judgment of the Dresden District Court of 2 December 2013, which included convictions for offences including traffic offences, intoxication, theft, fraud and insolvency offences. The applicant had been sentenced to terms of imprisonment ranging from two months to two and a half years on five occasions and to fines ranging from 20 daily rates to 330 daily rates on the remaining occasions.
According to the court, it was true that, compared with the period from 1986 to 2001, the frequency of investigation proceedings opened against the applicant had considerably decreased. However, the applicant had been sentenced to a fine of 40 daily rates in 2010 for casting false suspicion on a third person of having committed a criminal offence; this showed that the offence in question was not a petty offence. In 2007 proceedings for fraud (to the detriment of car insurance companies) were discontinued following the payment of a sum of money. In the same year, proceedings for fraud (sale of a damaged washing machine) were discontinued as there was insufficient proof to bring charges against the applicant.
The court stressed that, owing to the preventive nature of an order to collect identification data under Article 81b, second alternative, of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the necessity of such an order did not cease to exist when proceedings did not result in a conviction but were discontinued either following the payment of a sum of money or because the perpetrator’s guilt was considered to be minor, or because there was insufficient proof to bring charges against the perpetrator (unless, at the end of the proceedings, it was clear that the person concerned was innocent). The court further noted that even during the present proceedings, on 2 December 2013, the applicant had again been sentenced to a suspended fine, this time for the offence of insult.
Furthermore, the applicant’s state of health, namely his reduced mobility as a result of rheumatoid arthritis, did not exclude the risk of his being involved in the commission of offences, since the offences he had been suspected of to date had not necessitated much physical movement.
In the court’s view, having regard to the nature, severity and number of offences in respect of which investigation proceedings had been instituted against the applicant in the past twenty-five years, the order for the collection of identification data had been a proportionate interference with his personality rights. The applicant could obtain the deletion of his data from the police register if his future conduct showed that the data were no longer needed.
On 7 October 2016 the Saxony Administrative Court of Appeal, endorsing the reasons given by the Dresden Administrative Court, dismissed the applicant’s request to admit his appeal for examination.
On 17 November 2016 the applicant, represented by counsel, lodged a constitutional complaint with the Federal Constitutional Court against the Dresden police’s order of 18 August 2011, the judgment of the Dresden Administrative Court and the decision of the Saxony Administrative Court of Appeal. Setting out the content of the impugned decisions, he argued that the order for the collection of identification data from him violated, inter alia, his personality rights under the Constitution and his human dignity.
By a letter dated 24 November 2016 the registry of the Federal Constitutional Court informed the applicant that there were doubts about the admissibility of his constitutional complaint. The applicant was told that he might not have sufficiently substantiated his complaint as only his submissions, but not the copies of the impugned decisions of the authorities and courts, had been received at the court within the one-month time-limit.
Meanwhile, on 30 March 2017, the Dresden police collected identification data from the applicant in accordance with its order of 18 August 2011.
On 10 May 2017 the Federal Constitutional Court, without giving reasons, declined to consider the applicant’s constitutional complaint (file no. 1 BvR 804/17). According to the introductory part of the decision, the constitutional complaint was directed against the Dresden police’s order of 18 August 2011 and the judgment of the Dresden Administrative Court.
Article 81b of the Code of Criminal Procedure lays down the requirements for collecting identification data from a suspect. It reads as follows:
“Photographs and fingerprints of persons suspected of having committed an offence may be taken, even against their will, and measurements and other similar measures carried out with regard to them, in so far as this is necessary for the purposes of conducting the criminal proceedings or for the purposes of the police records department (für die Zwecke des Erkennungsdienstes).”
According to Articles 481 § 1 and 484 § 4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the use for the prevention of crime of personal data obtained in criminal proceedings or stored in police databases for the purposes of future criminal proceedings is regulated by the Police Acts of the Länder. The Saxony Police Act, in so far as relevant, provides as follows:
Section 43 The storage, modification and use of data
“(1) The police may save personal data in records or data files, and also modify and use them, in so far as this is necessary for the performance of their tasks ....
(2) The police may also save, modify and use personal data which they have acquired in the course of criminal investigation proceedings or from persons who are suspected of having committed a criminal offence, in so far as this is necessary in order to protect against threats to public safety, in particular for the purposes of taking precautionary steps aimed at preventing criminal offences. If the suspicion on the basis of which the data were saved no longer subsists, the data shall be deleted.
(3) The duration for which the data are saved shall be limited to what is strictly necessary. In the case of automated data files, time-limits shall be set for conducting a review of whether the continued searchable storage of the data is still necessary (review deadline). For non-automated data files and records, review deadlines or maximum storage periods shall be fixed. These should take into account the purpose of the storage, as well as the type and significance of the reason for the storage.
(4) The review deadlines or maximum storage periods to be fixed under subsection 3 may not exceed ten years for adults ... For cases of minor importance, shorter deadlines shall be set. ...”
The review deadlines or maximum storage periods referred to in the Saxony Police Act are laid down in the directive of 1 January 2007 issued by Saxony’s State Ministry of the Interior concerning the keeping of police archives of personal data in the police stations of the State of Saxony (Richtlinie des Sächsischen Staatsministeriums des Innern für die Führung kriminalpolizeilicher personenbezogener Sammlungen in den Polizeidienststellen des Freistaates Sachsen). It provides, in particular, as follows:
“5.2. If following a review storage is no longer permitted or the personal data are no longer necessary for the purposes of police work when the review deadlines or maximum storage periods under section 43(3) of the Saxony Police Act are reached, the data must be deleted.
...
4. Defining review deadlines or maximum storage periods
4.1. The decisions on setting review deadlines or maximum storage periods in the individual case at hand, and on deletion, are to be made by the police service handling the matter.
4.2. Personal data are to be deleted, as a rule, following prior review:
- after two years, in particular
- in cases of minor significance,
- in cases concerning children,
- where the person concerned has died ... .
- after five years where young adults and adults are concerned, and in special cases after ten years ... .
Cases of minor significance usually relate to offences prosecuted at the victim’s request and offences dealt with in simplified proceedings.
Special cases usually relate to criminal offences of considerable significance, ... .”
A decision by the police refusing the request for the deletion of the data can be made subject to judicial review by the administrative courts in accordance with the general provisions of administrative procedural law.
The Council of Europe Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data (“the Data Protection Convention” or “Convention 108”), of 28 January 1981, has been ratified by all 47 Council of Europe member States. It entered into force in respect of Germany on 1 October 1985 and is currently being modernised. Article 2 defines “personal data” as “any information relating to an identified or identifiable individual (‘data subject’)”.
The Data Protection Convention provides, in particular, as follows:
Article 5 – Quality of data
“Personal data undergoing automatic processing shall be
...
(b)  stored for specified and legitimate purposes and not used in a way incompatible with those purposes;
(c)  adequate, relevant and not excessive in relation to the purposes for which they are stored;
...
(e)  preserved in a form which permits identification of the data subjects for no longer than is required for the purpose for which those data are stored.”
Article 6 – Special categories of data
“Personal data revealing racial origin, political opinions or religious or other beliefs, as well as personal data concerning health or sexual life, may not be processed automatically unless domestic law provides appropriate safeguards. The same shall apply to personal data relating to criminal convictions.”
Article 7 – Data security
“Appropriate security measures shall be taken for the protection of personal data stored in automated data files against accidental or unauthorised destruction or accidental loss as well as against unauthorised access, alteration or dissemination.”
Data protection principles in the context of law enforcement under EU law are notably laid down in Directive (EU) 2016/680 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data by competent authorities for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Council Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA. The Directive provides, in particular:
“Article 4
Principles relating to processing of personal data
Member States shall provide for personal data to be:
...
(c)  adequate, relevant and not excessive in relation to the purposes for which they are processed;
...
(e)  kept in a form which permits identification of data subjects for no longer than is necessary for the purposes for which they are processed;
(f)  processed in a manner that ensures appropriate security of the personal data, including protection against unauthorised or unlawful processing and against accidental loss, destruction or damage, using appropriate technical or organisational measures.”
“Article 5
Time-limits for storage and review
Member States shall provide for appropriate time limits to be established for the erasure of personal data or for a periodic review of the need for the storage of personal data. Procedural measures shall ensure that those time limits are observed.”
“Article 10
Processing of special categories of personal data
Processing of personal data revealing racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, religious or philosophical beliefs, or trade union membership, and the processing of genetic data, biometric data for the purpose of uniquely identifying a natural person, data concerning health or data concerning a natural person’s sex life or sexual orientation shall be allowed only where strictly necessary, subject to appropriate safeguards for the rights and freedoms of the data subject, and only:
(a)  where authorised by Union or Member State law;
(b)  to protect the vital interests of the data subject or of another natural person; or ...”