The case originated in an application (no. 49304/09) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Mr Rimantas Biržietis (“the applicant”), on 31 August 2009.
The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms E. Baltutytė.
The applicant alleged that a prohibition on his growing a beard while in prison had violated his right to respect for his private life under Article 8 of the Convention.
On 8 July 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1953 and lives in the village of Patiltė (Utena Region).
On 20 November 2006 the applicant began serving a prison sentence at the Marijampolė Correctional Facility. The prison regulations were explained to him, which included a prohibition on prisoners growing beards (see paragraph 17 below). The applicant signed to confirm that he had read and understood the rules.
On 4 October 2007 the applicant submitted a request to the Prison Department to allow him to grow a beard for health reasons. He stated that he had been diagnosed with tongue cancer and had undergone radiation treatment, and therefore shaving irritated his skin.
On 17 October 2007 the applicant was examined by the correctional facility’s medical personnel. The subsequent medical report stated that no traces of irritation had been found on the applicant’s skin and that, according to the applicant himself, the main reason why he wanted to grow a beard was that his electric razor was almost broken and he could not afford to buy a new one. On 23 October 2007 the Prison Department denied the applicant’s request, based on the results of the examination.
The applicant later submitted another request to grow a beard to the Prison Department, and on 19 November 2007 it was denied on the same grounds.
On 5 December 2007 the applicant submitted a complaint to the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court. He argued that there was no law prohibiting beards in prison, so the Marijampolė Correctional Facility did not have the right to establish such a prohibition in its internal regulations. He also contended that the prohibition, which had been applied to him regardless of his health problems, had caused him great mental suffering and had breached his rights.
On 21 April 2008 the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court upheld the applicant’s complaint. The court acknowledged that prisons were in principle justified in having rules on prisoners’ beards in so far as it was necessary for hygiene-related reasons. However, it dismissed the Prison Department’s argument that the prohibition on beards was necessary for the purpose of the swift identification of prisoners, and held that such a restriction was contrary to the requirement to reintegrate prisoners into society. Accordingly, the court concluded that the prohibition on the applicant having a beard was against the law and was neither necessary nor proportionate.
However, on 24 March 2009 the Supreme Administrative Court overturned the first-instance judgment. Firstly, the court noted that the applicant had not proven that he had been unable to shave regularly because of health reasons (see paragraph 8 above). The court also noted that although prisoners’ human rights and fundamental freedoms could only be restricted by laws and not by legal acts of a lower order, the desire to grow a beard could not be considered as such a right or freedom. Therefore, unless it was related to other rights, such as, for example, religious freedom, the growing of a beard could be restricted by internal prison rules. Lastly, the Supreme Administrative Court considered that a prohibition on growing beards could be justified by the prison authorities’ need to swiftly identify prisoners, and thus it was necessary and proportionate.
On 15 December 2009 the applicant was released from the Marijampolė Correctional Facility on probation.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Execution of Penalties provide the following:
“Article 5.  The principle of legality
...
Restrictions on the rights and freedoms of convicted persons, as well as their duties, can only be imposed by laws of the Republic of Lithuania.
A convicted person’s conduct can only be restricted by a prohibition or duty. The institution or officer executing the penalty may only act in accordance with the methods and means established by law ...
Article 12.  General duties of convicted persons
Convicted persons must comply with any obligations established by law and act in accordance with the rules of conduct which apply to them.
Convicted persons must comply with instructions or orders given by the institution or officer executing the penalty ...
Article 110.  Special duties of convicted persons who are serving a sentence of imprisonment
Convicted persons who are serving a sentence of imprisonment must:
1)  comply with the established order of the correctional facility;
2)  comply with requests from the administration of the correctional facility; ...
Article 116.  Internal order of correctional facilities
Correctional facilities shall have an established internal order. Convicted persons must be informed of their rights and duties and the restrictions placed on them.”
At the material time, the relevant parts of the Internal Rules of Correctional Facilities, approved by the Minister of Justice on 2 July 2003, provided:
“XI.  The regime of imprisonment – one of the means of correction
The sentence of imprisonment is a penalty in and of itself. Therefore, the conditions and regime of serving a sentence of imprisonment in correctional facilities must not increase the suffering of convicted persons, except when that is justified by the need to isolate them and ensure discipline ...
Compliance with sanitary and anti-epidemic rules in correctional facilities
The staff of correctional facilities, visitors and prisoners must strictly comply with sanitary and anti-epidemic requirements ...
Newly arrived prisoners undergo decontamination and must take a shower. The staff of correctional facilities cannot demand that a prisoner shave his or her head, unless there is written confirmation by a doctor that that is necessary for health or sanitary reasons ...
At least once a week prisoners are given the opportunity to go to a sauna, to receive clean bedding and underwear; they must have regular access to the services of a barber ...”
At the material time, the relevant parts of Hygiene Norm No. HN76:1999, approved by the Minister of Healthcare on 22 October 1999, provided:
“13.14.  In accordance with an established schedule, prisoners and detainees shall take a shower or bath at least once every seven days, cut their hair and shave regularly.”
At the material time, the Internal Rules of the Marijampolė Correctional Facility, approved by the head of the Marijampolė Correctional Facility on 26 July 2006, established various restrictions for prisoners, including the prohibition to store or consume alcoholic beverages or narcotic substances, to keep pets, to smoke outside the specially designated areas, and to put tattoos on oneself or other persons. Paragraph 3.18 of that document read:
“3.  It is prohibited: ...
18.  to grow a beard; ...”
At the material time, a prohibition on growing beards was also part of the internal rules of Lukiškės Remand Prison, and the Alytus and Pravieniškės Correctional Facilities, as approved by the heads of those facilities.
In August 2008 the Parliamentary Ombudsperson received a complaint from a prisoner serving a sentence in the Pravieniškės Correctional Facility who complained that he had been punished by five days of solitary confinement for refusing to shave off his beard and moustache. In her report no. 4D-2008/2-1015 the Ombudsperson stated:
The Ombudsperson also stated that the prohibition on prisoners growing beards was not in line with domestic legal acts of higher authority and recommended that the head of the Pravieniškės Correctional Facility ensure compliance of the facility’s internal rules with those legal acts.
.  The relevant parts of the Recommendation Rec(2006)2 of the Committee of Ministers to member states on the European Prison Rules, adopted on 11 January 2006 at the 952nd meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies, provide the following:
“Basic principles
...
Restrictions placed on persons deprived of their liberty shall be the minimum necessary and proportionate to the legitimate objective for which they are imposed ...
Hygiene
...
4.  Adequate facilities shall be provided so that every prisoner may have a bath or shower, at a temperature suitable to the climate, if possible daily but at least twice a week (or more frequently if necessary) in the interest of general hygiene.
5.  Prisoners shall keep their persons, clothing and sleeping accommodation clean and tidy.
6.  The prison authorities shall provide them with the means for doing so including toiletries and general cleaning implements and materials ...
General approach to good order
Good order in prison shall be maintained by taking into account the requirements of security, safety and discipline, while also providing prisoners with living conditions which respect human dignity and offering them a full programme of activities in accordance with Rule 25 ...
Security
1.  The security measures applied to individual prisoners shall be the minimum necessary to achieve their secure custody ...”
.  In its report to the Turkish Government on the visits to Turkey from 10 to 16 December 2000 and 10 to 15 January 2001 and from 18 to 21 April and 21 to 24 May 2001, the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) stated: