The case originated in an application (no. 42916/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Ms Elena Varnienė (“the applicant”), on 16 November 2004.
The applicant was represented by Mr R. Lelertavičius, a lawyer practising in . The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms E. Baltutytė.
The applicant alleged that her rights under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 had been breached by the State’s reluctance to restore her property rights to a particular plot of land, and by the fact that the court decision made in her favour was set aside in violation of the res judicata principle.
On 19 June 2006 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant was born in 1920 and resides in .
In 2000, the local authorities restored the applicant’s rights to part of a plot of land located near house no. 43 in  in the Valakupiai neighbourhood in . The plot had belonged to her late mother, but had been nationalised in the 1940s.
The applicant brought an action against the  local authority, claiming restitution of her property rights to the remaining 0.33 hectares of the plot in natura.
On 21 December 2001 the  dismissed her action as unsubstantiated. It noted that in the Government ruling no. 239 (see Relevant domestic law and practice part below) the area where the plot was located was designated as a forest of national importance. Given that such forests were to be bought out by the State, in accordance with Article 13 of the Law on the Restoration of the Rights of Ownership of Citizens to Existing Real Property enacted in 1997 (hereinafter “the Law on Restitution”), there was no legal basis to grant the applicant’s action. The court also implied that the applicant could obtain restitution in another form, as Article 16 of the Law on Restitution provided.
On 12 February 2002 the  quashed the decision and granted the applicant’s action. On the basis of topographic plans provided by the local authorities the court found that the disputed plot of land was situated adjacent to the buildings that belonged to the applicant. The court noted that the documents concerning the return in natura of that plot had been prepared before the Government ruling no. 239 was adopted. Nevertheless, that ruling merely noted that 13,990 hectares of land constituted forests of national importance; the boundaries of those plots had not been marked. For the appellate court, there were no factual data to support the claim that the disputed 0.33 hectares of land were in a forest of national importance. The court also noted that by a letter of 23 March 2001 the  local authority had confirmed that the boundaries of forests of national importance in Valakupiai neighbourhood had not [yet] been established. Lastly, and as it had been confirmed by the  local authority, there were no other obstacles to return the plot in natura.
The appellate court thus ordered the Vilnius local authority to restore the applicant’s rights to “the 0.33 hectares of land adjacent to the house no. 43 in  in ”. That decision became final and effective.
In 2003, the applicant brought an action against the  local authority, complaining that the decision of 12 February 2002 had not been executed.
On 31 October 2003 the  granted her action, obliging the  local authority to take relevant measures to execute the court decision of 12 February 2002. The court noted that the local authority had not established any additional circumstance, which had materialised after 12 February 2002, that would make it impossible to restore the property rights in natura.
The  local authority appealed, arguing that the disputed plot in fact was in the forest of national importance. It noted that, contrary to what had been concluded by the lower court, there was new evidence to that effect. Firstly, on 7 August 2002 the Ministry of Environment had presented a report no. 08-03-4386 stating that the forest did include the plot; the local authority submitted that before preparing the above report, a specialist of the Forestry Department had checked the plot on the spot [and confirmed that there was a forest]. Secondly, another report no. 12-2-430 of 22 January 2003 by the Ministry of Environment also confirmed, on the basis of the latest topographic data from Valakupiai neighbourhood, the presence of a national forest on the disputed plot. Thirdly, an extract from the  territorial plan also showed that the disputed plot fell into the category of property to be bought by the State. The Vilnius local authority argued that all those new pieces of evidence had been presented to the Vilnius Regional Administrative Court before it adopted the decision of 31 October 2003, but the court had not taken them into account.
The appeal was received at the registry of the Supreme Administrative Court on 20 November 2003.
By a ruling of 1 December 2003 the president of the  took notice of the appeal and ordered the parties to submit written responses to it.
On 9 February 2004 the president of the  lodged a recommendation for the reopening of the case. He wrote that although the  had found that there were no data to establish that the disputed plot of land was in the forest of national importance, the documents by the Ministry of Environment and the  local authority allowed the conclusion that that plot could be in such a protected area.
On 12 February 2004 a Chamber of three Supreme Administrative Court judges decided to reopen the proceedings. It found that the  could have erred in fact and thus in law when adopting the decision of 12 February 2002. In particular, the  had found that there were insufficient data to prove that the plot at issue was in the forest of national importance, because the borders of such forests had not been marked. However, such forests were marked on the topographic plans by the Ministry of Environment, attached to the Government’s ruling no. 239. Should the disputed plot be located in the areas marked on those topographic plans, it could belong only to the State.
The execution proceedings were stayed until the resolution of the merits of the applicant’s claim for the 0.33 hectares of land.
In the meantime, the  ordered the Forestry Department at the Ministry of Environment to provide the court with maps showing forests of national importance in the Valakupiai neighbourhood.
On 20 May 2004 the  quashed its decision of 12 February 2002. It noted that the applicant’s claim had to be determined on the basis of the Government’s ruling no. 239 and Article 13 of the Law on Restitution, and reiterated that the topographic plans by the Ministry of Environment were an inseparable part of the Government’s ruling no. 239. The court decision reads:
“after the proceedings in the applicant’s case had been resumed, the  had obtained an extract of the forests’ topographic map approved by the Government’s ruling no. 1154 of 23 October 1997 [which on 1 March 2000 was partly amended by the Government’s ruling no. 239]. Having compared that map with other maps in the case-file (pages 137 and 240), it is clear that the plot of land to be returned [in natura] to the applicant is in the forest of national importance. This fact was confirmed by relevant State institutions. It follows that pursuant to Article 13 § 1 of the Law on Restitution, the applicant may not claim restitution of the disputed plot, situated near the house no. 43 in  in , in natura. It must also be concluded that the , when it decided the case on appeal, had not identified the boundaries of forests of national importance, and thus applied the law erroneously...”
In the light of the above, the  held that “the original ruling of 21 December 2001 of the , whereby the applicant’s restitution claim had been dismissed, was, in principle, correct”.
As it transpires from the documents submitted by the Government, page 240 of the administrative case-file is a topographic map of Valakupiai neighbourhood; the document’s date is 11 May 2004. The disputed plot appears to be in the national forest.
By a letter of 13 March 2012 the Government informed the Court that, as it concerned the 0.33 hectares plot of land in Svajonių street, the applicant still had a possibility to obtain another plot of land of equal value or to receive monetary compensation. The Vilnius City Land Management Department had informed the applicant about her options. However, the applicant insisted that she be given that particular plot and had not expressed her wish as to other possible way of compensation.
The process of restitution of property in Lithuania was initially regulated by the Law on the Procedure and Conditions for Restoration of Ownership Rights to Existing Real Property (Įstatymas  piliečių nuosavybės teisių į išlikusį nekilnojamąjį turtą atstatymo tvarkos ir sąlygų), enacted on 18 June 1991 and amended on numerous occasions. The Law provided for two forms of restitution – return of the property in natura or compensation for it, if its physical return was not possible.
On 27 May 1994 the  examined the issue of the compatibility of the Constitution with the domestic laws on the restoration of property rights. As concerns the possessions which had been nationalised by the Soviet authorities since 1940, the  held:
“The rights of a former owner to particular property have not been restored until the property is returned or appropriate compensation is afforded. The law does not itself provide any rights while it is not applied to a concrete person in respect of a specific property. In such a situation the legal effect of a decision by a competent authority to return the property or to provide compensation is such that only from that moment does the former owner obtain property rights to a specific property.”
The  also held that fair compensation for property which could not be returned in natura was compatible with the principle of the protection of property.
On 1 July 1997 the Lithuanian Parliament enacted the Law on the Restoration of the Rights of Ownership of Citizens to the Existing Real Property (Piliečių nuosavybės teisių į išlikusį nekilnojamąjį turtą atkūrimo įstatymas). That Law abolished the Law of 18 June 1991.
Article 13 § 1 (1) of the Law on Restitution at the material time provided the State was to buy the forests assigned to town forests and forest parks, on the ground that such forests were of national importance. Article 16 of the Law stipulated that the bought property was to be compensated for by transferring into a person’s ownership a plot of land of equal value. Should the person refuse such compensation, pecuniary compensation was also possible.
By ruling no. 239 of 1 March 2000, partly amending earlier ruling no. 1154, the Government approved an area of 13,990 hectares of forests in  as forests of national importance. The topographic plans of those forests were prepared by the Ministry of Environment and attached to the ruling.
The Law on Administrative Proceedings reads:
Article 145.  Coming into Effect of the Decision, Ruling or Order of the Appellate Court
“The decision, ruling or order of the appellate court shall become effective on the day it is made and shall not be subject to appeal by cassation.”
Article 153.  Grounds for the Re-opening of the Proceedings
“1.  If a case has been disposed of by virtue of an effective court decision, ruling or order, the proceedings may be resumed on the grounds and according to the procedure established in this Section.
The proceedings may be resumed on the following grounds:
1)  if the European Court of Human Rights finds that a decision of the court of the  is not in conformity with the European Convention on the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms or its Protocols;
(...)
10)  in case of submission of clear evidence that there was a violation of substantive law norms, because of which an unlawful decision, ruling or order could have been adopted;
(...)”
Article 154.  Entities Entitled to File a Petition for the Re-opening of Proceedings
“1.  The right to file a petition for the re-opening of the proceedings shall be vested in the parties to the proceedings and their statutory representatives, the persons excluded from the hearing of the case, if the decision, ruling or order which has become effective infringes their rights or interests protected by law, also in the prosecutor and entities of public administration with a view to protecting the public interest or the rights of the State and individuals and interests protected by law.
The president of the Supreme Administrative Court of Lithuania shall have the right to submit the recommendation to resume the proceedings on his own initiative or on the proposal of the president of the Regional administrative court.”
 Article 156.  Time-Limits for Filing a Petition for Re-opening of the Proceedings
“1.  A petition for reopening of the proceedings may be filed within three months from the day when the entity who filed it learned or should have learned of the circumstances furnishing grounds for re-opening.
Persons who have failed to observe for good reason the time limits for filing the petition for reopening of the proceedings may be granted the restoration of the status quo ante provided the petition for the re-opening of the proceedings has been filed within one year from the day the decision became effective.
A petition for the reopening of the proceedings shall be inadmissible if more than five years have lapsed from the day the decision or order became effective.”
Article 6.246 of the Civil Code establishes a general rule of
The ruling of the Constitutional Court of 19 August 2006 reads:
“...by virtue of the Constitution, a person has the right to claim compensation for damage caused by the unlawful actions of State institutions and agents, even if such compensation is not foreseen by law; the courts adjudicating such cases ... have the power to award appropriate compensation by directly applying the principles of the Constitution ... as well as the general principles of law, while being guided inter alia by the principle of reasonableness, etc.”