The case originated in an application (no. 3504/02) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksandr Petrovich Bogdanov (“the applicant”), on 15 March 2001.
The applicant complained about the insufficiency of the award made in his favour by the judgment of the Krasnoarmeyskiy Town Court of 14 September 1998. He also complained that the above judgment was not enforced.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr P. Laptev, the Representative of the  at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 19 November 2003 the Court decided to communicate the complaint concerning non-enforcement of a judgment in his favour to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1960 and lives in the Novolobinskaya village, Krasnodar Region.
In 1992 the applicant was convicted of theft and sentenced to 5 years and 6 months’ imprisonment. Following the revision of his criminal case by way of supervisory review in 1995, his sentence was reduced. However, this decision was erroneously sent to the prison administration with a considerable delay. As a result, the applicant was released eight months later than provided by the court decision.
In September 1996 the applicant brought civil proceedings claiming damages in this respect. On 14 September 1998 the Krasnoarmeyskiy Town Court of the Saratov Region awarded the applicant 1,000 Roubles, to be paid by the Ministry of Finances of . The parties did not appeal and this judgment became final.
The  issued an execution order and on 23 October 1998 (or, according to the Government, on 20 October 1998) it was forwarded to the Kirovskiy District Court of Saratov. On 26 October the Kirovskiy District Court received the execution order. On the same day the execution order was forwarded to the court bailiffs for execution. However, it never reached the bailiffs.
The applicant asserted that in the following years he requested the Kirovskiy District Court of Saratov and the bailiffs’ service to resume the enforcement proceedings. In reply to one of his letters, on 16 April 2001 the Saratov Region Chief Bailiff advised the applicant to file a request to the Krasnoarmeyskiy District Court with a view to obtain a duplicata of the execution order. However, as the Government suggested, he did not do so.
On 20 October 2004 the Krasnoarmeyskiy District Court of the Saratov Region issued a duplicata of the execution order. It is unclear whether the court did it on its own motion or upon the applicant’s initiative. In December 2004 it was forwarded to the Ministry of Finance, with a copy to the applicant. In a cover letter of 6 December 2004 the District Court noted that the parties had been duly notified about the hearing but failed to appear. The Court also drew the applicant’s attention to the fact that he should provide the Ministry of Finance with his bank account details.
For relevant provisions of Russian law on enforcement of court judgments against budget-funded organisations see Wasserma  v. Russia (dec., no. 15021/02, 25 March 2004), and Shatunov and Shatunova v. Russia (dec., no. 31271/02, 30 June 2005).
On 9 September 2002 the Russian Government adopted Decree No. 666 which enacted the “Rules of Execution by the Ministry of Finance of court judgments against the Treasury of the  arising from the claims for damages caused by unlawful acts or omissions of the State authorities or State officials”. Pursuant to this Decree, the judgment creditor should forward to the Ministry of Finance a writ of execution, a copy of the court’s judgment duly attested, and an application form, containing, inter alia, information on the plaintiff’s bank account. On 20 May 2003 the Supreme Court of the  in its decision no. KAC 03-205 ruled that the Rules, adopted by Decree No. 666, concerned the voluntary execution of court decisions against the Federal treasury and did not prevent the creditor from seeking enforcement through the court bailiffs.