The case originated in an application (no. 16912/08) against the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Macedonian national, Ms Desanka Petreska (“the applicant”), on 26 March 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr J. Vojčeski, a lawyer practising in Skopje. The Macedonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr K. Bogdanov.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the domestic courts had decided her case contrary to earlier case-law in identical cases and that the impugned proceedings had been unreasonably lengthy.
On 27 January 2014 these complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1953 and lives in Skopje.
The applicant was employed by the State Intelligence Agency (Агенција за разузнавање, “the employer”).
On 28 February 2001 she was dismissed from work as redundant given that internal regulations (Правилник за систематизација на работните места, “the Regulations”) of 27 February 2001 provided for reduced number of employees for posts such as the post held by the applicant.
On 9 April 2001 the applicant challenged her dismissal before the Skopje Court of First Instance (“the first-instance court”).
After three remittal orders, on 29 November 2005 the first-instance court dismissed the applicant’s claim, finding that she had been dismissed on 28 February 2001 on the basis of the Regulations, which had been adopted by the employer and approved by the Government on 27 February 2001. It further found that the Government’s approval had been received by the employer on 2 March 2001, but that had been irrelevant given that it was only the date when approval had been given by the Government that was important for the entry into force of the Regulations.
On 14 December 2005 the applicant appealed, arguing inter alia that the Regulations could not have applied to her case, as it could only be adopted after the employer had received the Government’s approval. The applicant relied on another final judgment of the Skopje Court of Appeal (“the appellate court”) in a similar case concerning a former colleague of the applicant, in which it had been established that the Regulations had not entered into force at the time of the dismissal (see paragraph 17 below). She contended that under the relevant law (see paragraph 16 below) the Regulations could only be adopted after the Government’s approval had been obtained.
On 23 February 2006 the appellate court dismissed the applicant’s appeal. It found that the Government had approved the Regulations on 27 February 2001, that they had entered into force the same day, and that the applicant’s dismissal of 28 February 2001 was therefore lawful.
On 7 April 2006 the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court. In it she argued, inter alia, that the Regulations could only be adopted after the Government’s approval had been obtained, and that they had thus not entered into force at the time of her dismissal. She referred to the earlier judgment of the appellate court (see paragraph 17 below), and argued that it had deviated from its established practice on the matter without providing any reasons. She further contended that the dismissal of her former colleagues, which had been based on the same grounds, had been quashed and they had been reinstated to their posts.
On 25 October 2007 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law. It found that on 27 February 2001 the Government had approved the Regulations, which had thus entered into force the same day. On 15 January 2008 the applicant was served with the Supreme Court’s judgment.
Under Article 101 of the Constitution, the Supreme Court is the highest court providing uniformity in the implementation of laws by the courts.
Under section 372(3) of the Civil Proceedings Act, an appeal on points of law is always admissible, irrespective of the value of the claim, in labour disputes concerning dismissal from work.
Under section 5(2) of the State Intelligence Agency Act, the manager of the Agency adopts an act regulating the work organisation and post structure of the Agency following previous approval of the Government (по претходно прибавена согласност на Владата).
The applicant submitted an excerpt from a final judgment of the appellate court (ГЖ.бр. 2146/04 of 21 April 2004) in a case concerning the dismissal of her former colleague, a certain Ms N.I. In that case, the court found that the Regulations had been adopted before the Government’s approval had been obtained, and that therefore they had not been in force at the time of the dismissal (28 February 2001). The Supreme Court rejected as belated an appeal by the employer against this judgment on points of law (Рев.бр. 503/04 of 6 July 2005).
The applicant further submitted a copy of a judgment of the Supreme Court (Рев.бр.486/2005 of 6 July 2006) upholding the lower courts’ judgments, which had found that the dismissal of 28 February 2001 of another colleague of the applicant, a certain Mr B.I., had been unlawful. In that case the Supreme Court found that Mr B.I. had been dismissed, like the applicant, as redundant, notwithstanding that the Regulations had not provided for reduced number of employees for posts such as the post held by Mr B.I. In its judgment the Supreme Court did not specifically address the issue of the validity of the Regulations.