The case originated in an application (no. 70135/14) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksey Nikolayevich Malinin (“the applicant”), on 7 October 2014. The application was updated on 14 September 2015.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Ms V. Bokareva, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the refusal to issue a residence order in his favour in respect of his sons, and the judicial authorisation for the children to travel abroad with their mother, had violated his right to respect for his family life.
On 26 May 2015 and 8 March 2016 the above complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application of 7 October 2014 was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1979 and lives in Nizhniy Novgorod Region.
On 25 January 2006 the applicant’s wife, I., gave birth to a son, N. On 25 August 2008 I. gave birth to another son, V. The family lived in Vladimir.
In July 2011 the applicant and I. divorced.
On 8 October 2011 the applicant took the children away from their home in Vladimir and brought them to the town of Shakhunya in Nizhniy Novgorod Region where his mother lived. He did not obtain I.’s consent.
On an unspecified date the applicant applied to the Shakhunskiy District Court of Nizhniy Novgorod Region for a residence order under which N. and V. would live with him in Shakhunya. On 24 October 2011 I. lodged a counterclaim, asking for a residence order under which the children would live with her in Vladimir.
On an unspecified date in November 2011 the applicant returned the children to their mother in Vladimir.
On 19 January 2012 experts appointed by the court issued their report. They found that the applicant was self-confident, domineering and inclined to lie. He was emotionally stable but, at the same time, easily carried away and fickle in his interests, which could mean that he would not always wish to take care of his children. The applicant strived to spend a lot of time with the children and was against punishing them. I. was seen to be impulsive, anxious, diffident and emotionally unstable. Her intellectual capacities were low. Her manner of upbringing was erratic: she vacillated between excessive demands and punishments and insufficient demands and punishments. Her manner of upbringing could be detrimental to the children’s psychological development. The children were anxious and stressed. N. had a closer emotional connection with his father than with his mother. As regards V., any situations involving his mother were stressful to him because they were associated with excessive demands and punishments.
The childcare authority issued an opinion that the children should reside with their mother. The mother had better living conditions. The children attended school (N.), a nursery school (V.) and various extracurricular activities at her place of residence in Vladimir. I. took good care of the children and did not prevent them from seeing their father.
The applicant submitted audio recordings of his conversations with his children. A psychologist, who had analysed those recordings, stated in court that the parents were both uncooperative and were both equally responsible for the stress from which N. and V. suffered. The audio recordings submitted by the applicant showed that he had tried to manipulate the children into saying that they wanted to live with him. In her opinion, the children had a stronger attachment to the mother. It was preferable that they lived with her in Vladimir where the living conditions were more comfortable and where they had constantly lived since their birth.
On 20 February 2012 the Shakhunskiy District Court granted I.’s application for a residence order in her favour and dismissed a similar application by the applicant. The court doubted the authenticity of an employment certificate from a private company submitted by the applicant. Given that he had not produced any official documents confirming his employment, the court found that he had not proved that he had a permanent income. There was no evidence that the applicant had supported his children financially during the period since his separation from I. in February 2011 until October 2011, when the children had been living with their mother. He had started to pay child maintenance only after he had lodged his application for a residence order in October 2011. The applicant had moreover asked that the children’s residence be fixed at his mother’s address, which showed that he did not have any intention of taking care of them personally. It was clear from the audio recordings submitted by the applicant, as analysed by a psychologist, that the applicant had attempted to manipulate the children and to force them to make a choice between the parents. He was therefore willing to reach his aims by any means, even at the price of making his children suffer. He had moreover taken the children away from their home in Vladimir and brought them to his mother’s residence in Shakhunya without I.’s consent. According to witness statements, I. had always taken good care of the children. It was I. who had always accompanied them to school and extracurricular activities. The fact that she had a partial disability had never so far prevented her from raising them and caring for them. The fact that the applicant’s living conditions were better was insufficient in itself for making a residence order in his favour. Nor was the court convinced by the applicant’s assertion that the children had a stronger attachment to him than to their mother. The children had always lived with their mother, except for several weeks during the summer holidays when they had stayed with him at his mother’s residence in Shakhunya. There was no evidence that I. had shouted or excessively punished the children. Although the experts had indeed found her manner of upbringing to be erratic, their report did not mention that she could cause detriment to their psychological development. Moreover, it was evident from the audio recordings that it was the applicant who had tried to turn the children against their mother. The childcare authorities had also considered that it was in the children’s interest to live with the mother. Given that I. had never prevented the applicant from seeing the children, the applicant would be able to visit them as often as he liked, while the children would continue living in the environment familiar to them.
On 29 May 2012 the Nizhniy Novgorod Regional Court upheld the judgment on appeal, finding that it had been lawful, well reasoned and justified. The applicant’s cassation appeal was rejected by a judge of the Nizhniy Novgorod Regional Court on 30 November 2012.
In January 2013 the applicant applied to the Oktyabrskiy District Court of Vladimir for a reconsideration of the children’s residence arrangements. He asked for a residence order under which N. and V. would live with him in Vladimir. He submitted, in particular, that the children wished to live with him. He had been picking them up from school almost every day lately and bringing them back to I. only to sleep. I. shouted at the children, slapped them and humiliated them. She did not work and lived on social benefits and child maintenance. In the alternative, he asked for a contact order, claiming that I. occasionally prevented him from seeing the children.
On 4 March 2013 N. and V. were assessed by a psychologist who found that their psychological state was good. They were resigned to their parents’ divorce and no longer experienced any negative emotions in that connection. Their relationship with their mother was friendly and supportive. They considered her as family, while their father was considered to be a friend who came regularly to play with them.
On 22 March 2013 the childcare authority issued its opinion on the case. It found that both parents had satisfactory living conditions. N. had expressed a wish to live with the applicant. The childcare authority considered that it was desirable to perform a psychological expert examination of the children to assess their attachment to each parent. However, I. objected to any assessment of her children by a psychologist. The childcare authorities had however learned that she had secretly seen a psychologist. The children had told the psychologist that they wished to live with their father. However, given that the children had not yet reached an age at which they were able to form their own opinions on the matter, as they were still highly impressionable and changeable, the childcare authority considered that it was possible for the children to continue living with their mother. The applicant should be able to have regular contact with the children for two weekends per month.
On 6 May 2013 the Oktyabrskiy District Court rejected the applicant’s application for a residence order and maintained the residence order in favour of I. It found it established that I. was unemployed and that the applicant had a permanent job. The living conditions of both parents were satisfactory. The court took note of the expert report of 19 January 2012 (see paragraph 11 above), observing that the experts had found that the parent-child relationships were complicated in the applicant’s family. The expert report did not however contain an explicit finding that the children were attached to their father more than to their mother. The applicant had not proved that I. had shouted at the children, humiliated them or neglected her parental responsibilities. Evidence showed that she was taking good care of the children. There was therefore no reason to change the children’s residence arrangements established by the judgment of 20 February 2012.
The court further held that N. and V. were entitled to maintain contact with their father and his paternal family and determined the contact schedule as follows. The applicant was to be able to have contact with the children each weekend from 5 p.m. on Saturday until 7 p.m. on Sunday at the applicant’s place of residence, with the mother’s prior agreement.
On 25 September 2013 the Vladimir Regional Court upheld the judgment on appeal. A cassation appeal by the applicant was rejected by a judge of the Vladimir Regional Court on 14 May 2014.
On 4 October 2013 the applicant lodged a new application for a residence order in his favour with the Oktyabrskiy District Court. He submitted that V. currently lived with him and did not want to return to his mother who shouted at him and physically punished him. Both V. and N. had stated many times that they wanted to live with him. He devoted a lot of time to the children by picking them up after school, bringing them for walks and educating them. He had a comfortable and stable income and good living conditions. By contrast, I. did not work and did not have any income except social payments and the child maintenance payments that she received from the applicant. It was therefore the applicant who maintained the children financially. The applicant further relied on the expert report of 19 January 2012 (see paragraph 11 above) from which it was apparent that the children had a stronger attachment to their father than to their mother, that any situations involving their mother were stressful for them and that the mother’s methods of upbringing were detrimental to the children’s psychological development. The applicant submitted audio recordings of many conversations he had had with the children between March 2012 and September 2013. The children invariably stated that they wanted to live with the applicant, complained that their mother shouted at them and whipped them with a belt, and protested, crying, that they did not want to return living with her.
On 19 February 2014 the childcare authority issued its opinion on the case. It found that V. had indeed lived with the applicant during his (V.’s) illness from 25 September to 31 October 2013. He had however then returned to his mother. The children also stayed with the applicant on weekends. The applicant always accompanied V. to nursery school and N. to extracurricular activities. He paid child maintenance without delay and regularly gave additional financial support to the children. The applicant and I. were attending mediation sessions. The applicant was in permanent employment and had a high stable income. I. was partly disabled and did not work. Her mother and grandmother helped her in raising the children. According to I., the children were very attached to their father, spoke to him over the telephone every day and spent their holidays with him. The childcare authority concluded that the children were attached to both parents, that I. was taking good care of their health and development and that their living conditions were comfortable. It was therefore possible for the children to continue living with their mother.
A representative of the childcare authority stated at the hearing that she had followed the family for some time. She had the impression that the children were equally attached to both parents and both parents took equally good care of them. Recently she noted positive changes in the highly conflictive relationship between the parents. In particular, the mother allowed the father to spend more time with the children than before. The father picked up the children from school and they spent weekends and part of their holidays with him. She considered that there was no reason to change the children’s residence arrangements and recommended that the children should continue living with their mother.
I. stated that she loved her children and took good care of them. She also alleged that the applicant’s motives for asking for a residence order in his favour were mercenary as he wanted to use the flat that belonged to the children. She therefore asked that the residence order previously granted to her be maintained.
The applicant’s neighbour stated that she often saw the applicant walking and playing with the children. She thought that he was a very good father and that the children loved him. In October 2013 I. had come to the applicant’s flat in the middle of the night on at least three occasions. She had shouted, had threatened to break the windows and to take the children away from the applicant by force. The neighbours had had to call the police, who took I. away.
In reply to the applicant’s request to play the audio recordings submitted by him on 4 October 2013 (see paragraph 22 above), the judge stated that it was not necessary because the other party had not contested them. The applicant’s written description of those audio recordings had been examined at the hearing.
The applicant also asked that a copy of the expert report of 19 January 2012 be admitted as evidence. Both I. and the childcare authority objected, arguing that the expert examination had been made two years before and was therefore out of date. The court rejected the application, finding that the expert report had been analysed by the courts which had issued previous residence orders.
On 19 February 2014 the Oktyabrskiy District Court ordered an expert psychological examination of the children to assess their relationship with both parents.
On 8 April 2014 the expert found that it was not possible to make an expert report because I. had refused to come to the examination or to bring the children. The court considered that it was not necessary to reiterate the order for an expert examination as there was sufficient material for making a decision on the case.
On 8 April 2014 the Oktyabrskiy District Court rejected the applicant’s application for a residence order in his favour. The court found no circumstances warranting the change of the residence arrangements established in the residence orders of 20 February 2012 and 6 May 2013. It had no reason to doubt that I. loved her children and took good care of them. The applicant’s allegations that I.’s manner of upbringing were detrimental to the children’s development had not been confirmed by the evidence in the case. The criminal proceedings on charges of fraud against her had been discontinued. Her living conditions were satisfactory. The fact that she had no employment or income did not justify granting a residence order to the applicant. She did not prevent the applicant from seeing the children as much as he liked. As indicated in the judgment of 6 May 2013, the expert report of 19 January 2012 did not contain an explicit finding that the children were more attached to their father than to their mother. The childcare authorities had found that the children had been equally attached to both parents. There were therefore no reasons to issue a residence order in favour of the applicant.
On 1 July 2014 the Vladimir Regional Court upheld the judgment on appeal, finding that it had been lawful, well-reasoned and justified. In particular, it held that the applicant had not proved that there had been sufficient reasons to change the residence arrangements established by the earlier residence orders. No exceptional circumstances warranting the children’s separation from their mother had been established. It had not been proved that the children had had an exceptionally strong attachment to the father or wished to live with him and him only. In such circumstances, and taking into account the children’s age, their established way of life, the satisfactory living conditions of both parents and the opinion of the childcare authorities’ on the case, the decision to maintain the residence order in favour of the mother was in the best interests of the children. The Regional Court further dismissed the applicant’s complaint that the District Court had not assessed the family situation with sufficient thoroughness because it had not questioned the children and had refused to admit the expert report of 19 January 2012 as evidence. The Regional Court held that, given that the children were under ten years old, their opinion on the residence issue could not be taken into account. As regards the expert report of 19 January 2012, it had been made in the framework of separate proceedings and had been already assessed by the courts in those proceedings. The District Court considered that the expert opinion was not necessary because the evidence included in the case file was already sufficient to adjudicate the dispute.
A cassation appeal by the applicant was rejected by a judge of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation on 8 December 2014.
On 4 December 2014 the Oktyabrskiy District Court of Vladimir authorised, against the applicant’s will, a trip abroad for the children for the winter holidays. On 15 December 2014 the children left for Germany with their mother. They returned to Russia on 9 January 2015. The decision of 4 December 2014 was later annulled by the Oktyabrskiy District Court because it found that it had no territorial jurisdiction over the case.
On an unspecified date I. applied to the Leninskiy District Court of Vladimir for a judicial authorisation for the children to travel to Germany during the approaching school summer holidays, complaining that the applicant had refused to give such an authorisation. The applicant submitted in reply that if the children left for the entire summer holidays he would not be able to see them for three months. He also submitted that there was a risk that the children might not return from Germany. He asked for an interim measure prohibiting the children from leaving Russia pending the proceedings.
On 12 March 2015 the Leninskiy District Court rejected the applicant’s application for interim measures, finding that the application of interim measures requested would amount to a prejudgement of the case.
On 6 May 2015 the Leninskiy District Court authorised the children’s trip abroad for the period from 1 June to 31 August 2015. The court found it established that I. intended to travel to Germany together with V. and N. during the summer school holidays. She had received an accommodation guarantee from her new partner’s sister, who lived permanently in Germany. The applicant had however refused to give V. and N. an authorisation to travel without giving reasons. The court found that the parents could not exercise parental rights to the detriment of their children’s rights. In particular, the children’s right to travel could not be made dependant on the parents’ willingness to authorise their going abroad, especially in the case of a disagreement between the parents. The court considered that the children’s trip abroad would not breach the applicant’s rights and would encourage the children’s development, education and broad-mindedness.
The applicant appealed. He submitted that under domestic law if a child left Russia accompanied by one of the parents an authorisation from the other parent was not required; such authorisation was required only if the child went abroad unaccompanied by the parents. A judicial travel authorisation could be given only if one of the parents had formally objected to the child’s going abroad (see paragraph 51 below). Given that the applicant had never lodged such an objection in accordance with the procedure prescribed by law, the judicial travel authorisation had been unlawful and unnecessary.
On 9 July 2015 I. married her partner, a national of Germany. She then left for Germany with N. and V. In September 2015 she gave birth to a child. N. and V. are now living in Germany with their mother, her new husband and their half-brother.
The applicant lodged an additional appeal, submitting that although the decision of 6 May 2015 had not yet become enforceable, I. had been able to leave with the children for Germany. That fact had clearly demonstrated that a judicial authorisation was not required for leaving Russia. It had however been used by I. to obtain a German visa for the children, which she could not have otherwise obtained without his agreement. The applicant also complained that the children had not returned to Russia by 31 August 2015, although the judicial authorisation had been valid only until that date.
On 2 December 2015 the Vladimir Regional Court upheld the decision of 6 May 2015 on appeal. The Regional Court held that it had been lawful, well reasoned and justified. In particular, it found that the applicant had not submitted to the District Court any evidence showing that the trip abroad would have been contrary to the children’s best interests.
On 8 September 2015 the bailiffs service opened, at the applicant’s request, enforcement proceedings in respect of the contact order of 6 May 2013 (see paragraph 20 above).
In October 2015 the applicant complained about the bailiffs’ inaction to the Oktyabrskiy District Court. On 16 December 2015 the Oktyabrskiy District Court rejected his complaint, finding that the bailiffs had taken measures to enforce the contact order but enforcement had been impossible through no fault of the bailiffs service, specifically because I. and the children had been living in Germany. On 3 March 2016 the Vladimir Regional Court upheld that decision on appeal. Cassation appeals by the applicant were rejected by a judge of the Vladimir Regional Court on 21 October and then by a judge of the Supreme Court on 30 December 2016.
Meanwhile, the bailiffs asked the Oktyabrskiy District Court for a suspension of the enforcement proceedings on the grounds that I. and the children were abroad and it was therefore impossible to take any coercive measures against her. On 8 February 2016 the Oktyabrskiy District Court rejected the bailiffs’ request, finding that the children’s residence abroad was not a sufficient reason to suspend the enforcement proceedings.
The applicant also submitted numerous requests to various Russian authorities, including in January 2016 to the Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation, for assistance in recovering his children and in enforcing the contact order of 6 May 2013. In December 2015 he complained of the authorities’ inaction to the Leninskiy District Court. On 4 February 2016 the Leninskiy District Court rejected the applicant’s complaint, finding that those authorities had no competence in the matter. The only authority competent to assist him in re-establishing contact with his children was the bailiffs service. On 12 May 2016 the Vladimir Regional Court upheld that judgment on appeal.
According to the Government, in April 2016 the bailiffs service advised the applicant to apply for recognition and enforcement of the contact order to the competent German authorities, via the Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation, in accordance with the Convention of 19 October 1996 on Jurisdiction, Applicable Law, Recognition, Enforcement and Co-operation in Respect of Parental Responsibility and Measures for the Protection of Children. There is no evidence that the applicant used that procedure.
On an unspecified date I. applied to the Leninskiy District Court for a residence order under which N. and V. would live with her in Germany. The applicant lodged a counterclaim, asking for a residence order under which the children would live with him in Vladimir. He also asked for an interim order to return the children to Russia and to ensure that until their return the children communicated with him via VOIP calls every Wednesday, Friday and Sunday at 9 p.m. (Moscow time). On 24 May 2016 the Leninskiy District Court refused the applicant’s application for an interim order, finding that he had not proved that the failure to take interim measures might complicate or make impossible the execution of the forthcoming judgment. On 22 June 2016 the Vladimir Regional Court upheld that decision on appeal. The residence order proceedings are pending.
The Family Code provides that in the event of the parents’ separation, a child’s residence arrangements shall be determined by an agreement between them. If no such agreement can be reached, the child’s residence arrangements are determined by a court order, having regard to the child’s best interests and his or her opinion on the matter. In particular, the court must take into account the child’s attachment to each of the parents and siblings, the relationship between the child and each of the parents, the child’s age, the parents’ moral and other personal qualities and the possibilities each of them have for creating conditions for the child’s upbringing and development (in the light of such considerations as each parent’s occupation, employment schedule, and financial and family situation) (Article 65).
The parent residing separately from the child is entitled to maintain contact with the child and to participate in his or her upbringing and education. The parent with whom the child resides may not hinder the child’s contact with the other parent, unless such contact undermines the child’s physical or psychological health or moral development. The parents may reach a written agreement on the manner of exercise of parental authority by the parent residing separately from the child. If the parents are unable to come to an agreement, any dispute between them shall be decided by a court after an application by the parents (or one of the parents), with the participation of the childcare authorities. If one of the parents does not comply with the court decision, measures provided by civil-procedure law may be taken against him or her. If that parent systematically refuses to comply with the court decision, a court may, after an application by the parent residing separately from the child, transfer the child’s residence to that parent, taking into account the child’s interests and the child’s opinion (Article 66, as in force at the material time).
A child is entitled to express her or his opinion on all family matters concerning him or her, including in the course of any judicial proceedings. The opinion of a child over ten years old must be taken into account, except where it is contrary to his or her interests (Article 57).
The Procedure for Entering and Leaving the Russian Federation Act, (Law no. 114-FZ of 15 August 1996, as amended on 10 January 2003  hereinafter “the Entry and Leaving Procedures Act”) provides that as a rule a citizen of Russia who is a minor can leave Russia only together with at least one of her or his parents, adoptive parents or guardians. If a citizen of Russia who is a minor leaves unaccompanied, he or she must have an authorisation to travel from the above-mentioned persons, certified by a notary and mentioning the dates and destinations of travel (section 20(1)). If one of the parents, adoptive parents or guardians objects to the minor’s leaving the Russian Federation, the decision on whether it is permissible for the minor to leave the State is taken by a court. The procedure for filing an objection to the minor’s leaving Russia is to be established by the competent federal executive authorities (section 21). Order no. 273 of 12 May 2003 by the Government of the Russian Federation provides that such an objection is to be filed, in writing, by a parent, adoptive parent or a guardian to the local office of the Federal Migration Service or the Border Control Service.