The case originated in an application (no. 8026/04) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Ilya Viktorovich Yegorychev (“the applicant”), on 18 February 2004.
The applicant was represented by Ms E. Liptser and Mr R. Karpinskiy, lawyers practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the length of his pre-trial detention had not been justified, that he had been convicted by a court whose composition had been in breach of the relevant domestic law and that he had not been afforded an opportunity to question most of the prosecution witnesses.
On 24 September 2008 the above complaints were communicated to the Government under Articles 5 § 3, 6 §§ 1 and 3 (d) of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1968 and lives in Moscow.
.  On 14 June 2001 charges of fraud were brought against the applicant, and he signed a written undertaking not to leave his place of residence. Some of the applicant’s assets, specifically his flat, parking spaces and three cars, were frozen.
.  On 21 June 2001 the investigation of the criminal case against the applicant was terminated and he began examining the case file.
.  However, on 26 September 2001 the investigation resumed.
On 26 September 2001 the Prosecutor General’s Office of Russia decided that in view of the seriousness of the charges faced by the applicant, the risk of his absconding, as well as the necessity to “secure the enforcement of the conviction” the applicant should be placed in pre-trial detention.
.  On 28 September 2001 the applicant was remanded in custody and placed in a specialised detention facility at the Moscow Clinical Hospital no. 20 owing to a provisional diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction, arterial hypertension and an exacerbating duodenal ulcer. He stayed there until 20 November 2001, following which he was transferred to a remand prison. The attending doctor found the applicant fit to participate in the investigative actions.
.  In the meantime, on 8 October 2001 the investigation was completed and the applicant was informed that he could start to examine the case file.
On the same date the applicant brought an application for release. He argued that there was no indication that he would abscond or otherwise obstruct the administration of justice: the applicant had no criminal record; he had a family, a permanent job and a permanent place of residence, and he suffered from a number of chronic cardiovascular and surgical diseases; the choice of a custodial measure had thus not been justified.
.  On 24 October 2001 the Moscow Babushkinskiy District Court examined the applicant’s arguments with references to his medical documents, documents attesting to his family situation, his positive references from work, and the arguments by the investigator to the effect that the applicant had ignored the investigator’s summonses to appear on 22 and 25 July, 13 and 14 August and 24 September 2001 without giving reasons, that he had often been several hours late to appear before the investigator, that he could appear for fifteen minutes and then leave saying that nobody could tell him when to come and when to leave, and that throughout the summer, in the eyes of the investigator, the applicant had been out of contact. Having considered the reasons which prompted the choice of preventive measure, in particular, the seriousness of the charges against the applicant and his conduct during the pre-trial investigation, the District Court held that there were no grounds for releasing the applicant.
On 20 November 2001 the Moscow City Court upheld the above decision on appeal.
On 22 November 2001, 21 January and 9 April 2002 the Deputy Prosecutor General extended the applicant’s detention until 28 January, 28 April and 28 June 2002 respectively.
.  Meanwhile, on 15 January 2002 the forensic medical expert did not confirm the applicant’s medical diagnosis.
.  On 20 June 2002 the criminal case against the applicant was submitted to the Moscow Presnenskiy District Court for trial.
The Moscow Presnenskiy District Court repeatedly extended the applicant’s detention pending trial. Such extensions were granted upon the prosecutor’s request on 16 December 2002, 19 March, 23 June, 24 September, 23 December 2003 and 24 March 2004. On each occasion the District Court referred to the seriousness of the charges against the applicant and the risk of his absconding or otherwise obstructing justice, and the absence of grounds for changing the preventive measure imposed. Those decisions were upheld on appeal by the Moscow City Court on 21 January, 27 May, an unknown date and 3 December 2003, 23 March and 29 April 2004 respectively.
.  On 26 May 2004 the Moscow Presnenskiy District Court sitting in a bench composed of Judge F. (presiding judge), Ms Kh. and Ms Shch. (lay judges) convicted the applicant of fraud and sentenced him to seven years and six months’ imprisonment. The court further held that the civil claim against the applicant, as well as the question of lifting the restriction imposed on the applicant’s property, should be referred for consideration within the framework of the civil procedure.
.  The applicant appealed. He complained that, inter alia, the judgment had been given by a court whose composition had not been in accordance with law. In particular, he referred to the fact that the lay judges who participated in the examination of his case had at the same time been examining a criminal case against a certain Mr Tver. He also complained that the trial court had read out the testimonies of the majority of the witnesses for the prosecution, including testimonies by key prosecution witnesses, and had thus deprived him of the possibility of cross-examining them. This was despite the absence of any exceptional circumstances which had prevented the court from securing their attendance at the court hearing.
On 17 August 2004 the Moscow City Court reduced the sentence to six years and upheld the rest of the judgment on appeal. In reply to the applicant’s argument regarding the alleged unlawfulness of the composition of the trial court, the City Court held that the composition of the court had remained unchanged throughout the trial in accordance with Article 242 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, and that the participation of lay judges, who had also been involved in the examination of another case, had had no legal consequences and had not amounted to a violation of the law. The City Court further held that the reading out of the testimonies of certain witnesses had been carried out by the trial court on the request of the prosecutor and in compliance with the requirements of Article 281 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
.  On 30 December 2004 the Presidium of the Moscow City Court, by way of supervisory review, modified the charges the applicant had been convicted on and reduced his sentence to five years six months’ imprisonment.
.  On 9 March 2005 the Sukhinichskiy District Court, Kaluga Region, ordered the applicant’s conditional early release.
.  For a summary of domestic provisions on pre-trial detention, detention during the trial and time-limits for trial see Khudoyorov v. Russia (no. 6847/02, §§ 76-96, ECHR 2005X (extracts)).
The Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic, in force until 1 July 2002, provided that hearings in firstinstance courts dealing with criminal cases should, subject to certain exceptions, be conducted by a single professional judge or by one professional and two lay judges. In their judicial capacity, lay judges enjoy the same rights as a professional judge (Article 15).
.  The Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation (Law no. 174-FZ of 18 December 2001) in force as from 1 July 2002 does not provide for the participation of non-professional judges in the administration of justice in criminal matters. It provides that serious crimes should be dealt with by either a single professional judge or by three professional judges provided that the accused has submitted such a request prior to the appointment of a trial hearing (Article 30 § 2(3)).
.  It further provides that the composition of a court examining the case should remain unchanged throughout the trial (Article 242 § 1).
.  The Federal Law on enactment of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation (Law no. 177-FZ of 18 December 2001) provides that the Federal Law on the Lay Judges of the Federal Courts of General Jurisdiction ceased to have force from 1 January 2004 (Section 2.1).
.  Section 7 provides that Article 30 § 2(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in so far as it concerns the examination of serious crimes by three professional judges, came into effect from 1 January 2004. Before that date such crimes were to be dealt with by a single professional judge or, if an accused had filed such a request prior to the appointment of a trial hearing, by one professional judge and two lay judges.
.  The Federal Law on the Lay Judges of the Federal Courts of General Jurisdiction in the Russian Federation (“the Lay Judges Act”) in force between 10 January 2000 and 1 January 2004 (see paragraph 25 above) provided that lay judges were persons authorised to sit in civil and criminal cases as non-professional judges (section 1(2)).
Section 2 of the Lay Judges Act provided that lists of lay judges had to be compiled for every district court by local self-governing representative authorities, such lists being subject to validation by the regional legislature.
Section 5 of the Lay Judges Act determined the procedure for the selection of lay judges. It provided that the president of a district court had to draw at random from the list a number of lay judges to be called to the competent district court. The number of lay judges assigned to every professional judge had to be at least three times the number needed for a hearing.
In accordance with section 9, lay judges were called to serve in a district court for a period of fourteen days, or as long as the proceedings in a particular case lasted. Lay judges could not be called more than once a year.
On 14 January 2000 the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation issued a regulation on the procedure for the selection of lay judges. The regulation provided that the President of a district court should draw 156 names at random for each judge from the general list of lay judges. The lay judges for a particular case were to be drawn by lot by the judge to whom the case had been assigned.
.  The Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation provides that witnesses must be examined directly by the trial court (Article 278).
.  Statements given by the victim or a witness during the pre-trial investigation can be read out with the consent of the parties in two cases: (i) if there is a substantial discrepancy between those statements and the testimony before the court; or (ii) if the victim or witness has failed to appear in court (Article 281 § 1).
.  The court may, without seeking the consent of the parties, read out earlier statements by the absent victim or witness in the case of (1) death, (2) serious illness, (3) refusal to appear by the victim or the witness if they are citizens of other States or (4) natural disaster or other force majeure circumstances (Article 281 § 2).
.  If a witness fails to comply with a summons to appear without good reason, the court may order the police or bailiffs to bring him to the courtroom by force (Article 113).
.  The Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation provides for the possibility to re-open criminal proceedings on the basis of a finding of a violation of the Convention made by the European Court of Human Rights (Article 413).