The case originated in an application (no. 5659/07) against the Republic of Moldova and the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Mr Iurie Coţofan (“the applicant”), on 16 January 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr I. Manole, a lawyer practising in Chișinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent at the time, Mr M. Gurin, and the Russian Government were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, a breach of his right to the peaceful enjoyment of his possessions.
On 14 September 2015 the complaints under Article 13 and under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention were communicated to the respondent Governments and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The Russian Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1961 and lives in Corjova.
He had his car registered with the authorities of the Republic of Moldova and had Moldovan registration plates installed on it.
On 16 December 2006 a customs officer of the self-proclaimed “Moldovan Republic of Transdniestria” (“MRT”) stopped the applicant at a checkpoint and seized his car on the ground that upon entry on the territory of Transdniestria he had failed to stop at the border. He was later obliged to pay a fine of 58 United States dollars in order to recover the car.
On 19 December 2006 the applicant’s driving licence was seized on the ground that he had failed to comply with traffic rules. His car was also seized, on the ground of his failure to comply with customs regulations, but the seizure report was destroyed and he was able to recover his car five hours later after the intervention of a group of Russian peacekeepers. His driving licence was not returned and he was issued a temporary driving licence.
According to the applicant, he complained to the authorities of Moldova, but they informed him that there was nothing they could help him with. The Moldovan Government disputed the fact that the applicant had informed them about the circumstances of the present case.
Reports by inter-governmental and non-governmental organisations, the relevant domestic law and practice of the Republic of Moldova, and other pertinent documents were summarised in Mozer v. the Republic of Moldova and Russia ([GC], no. 11138/10, §§ 61-77, 23 February 2016).