The case originated in an application (no. 43875/09) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mr İslam H.M. Asalya (“the applicant”), on 14 August 2009. The applicant is stateless and holds a passport issued by the Palestinian Authority.
The applicant was represented by Ms L. Demir, Mr A. Yılmaz and Ms Ü. Sırımsı Candemir, lawyers practising in Tekirdağ and Istanbul. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 4 January 2010 the President of the Chamber to which the case was allocated decided, in the interests of the parties and the proper conduct of the proceedings before the Court, to indicate to the Government of Turkey, under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, that the applicant should not be deported to Israel and/or the Gaza Strip until the outcome of the procedure before the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (“the UNHCR”) in his regard was known. It was also decided on the same date to give the case priority under Rule 41 of the Rules of Court.
On 31 August 2011 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1988 and lives in Istanbul.
The applicant is a Palestinian who lived in the Gaza Strip until March 2008. He claims to have lost approximately twenty-five relatives to Israeli attacks over the years, and to have personally suffered three missile attacks between 2000 and 2007. According to his allegations before the Court, he was directly and personally targeted in the most recent attack, in 2007, as the missile that struck near him on that day immediately followed an anonymous call on his mobile phone asking him to confirm his name, a ruse by the Israeli forces to identify his location. That attack left him severely injured and rendered him paraplegic.
On 25 March 2008 the applicant was taken to Turkey by a humanitarian organisation, the Foundation for Human Rights and Freedoms and Humanitarian Relief (İnsani Yardım Vakfı, “İHH”), along with fortynine other injured civilians from the Palestinian territories, to have access to better medical care.
In June 2008 the Ministry of the Interior (“the Ministry”) issued the group of Palestinians with short-term residence permits in view of their continuing medical treatment in Turkey.
On 30 April 2009 the applicant married a Turkish national, who was also his physiotherapist. Because he was married to a Turkish national, he was granted a long-term temporary residence permit valid until 17 May 2010.
On 12 August 2009, at approximately 11 a.m., two police officers from the Istanbul Police Headquarters arrived at the applicant’s house. They informed the applicant and his wife that his presence was required at the police headquarters for an interview and that he would be brought back afterwards. Once he was at the police headquarters, however, he was verbally informed that his temporary residence permit had been cancelled in accordance with orders received from the Ministry and that he would soon be deported from Turkey. Without being given any further information as to the reasons for the deportation order, when it would be carried out and where he would be deported to, the applicant was placed in the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Admission and Accommodation Centre attached to the Istanbul Police Headquarters.
According to the police record drawn up on the same day at 3.30 p.m., the Ministry had decided on 27 July 2009 to deport the applicant. This decision had been taken at the request of the National Intelligence Agency of Turkey, which had received intelligence regarding the applicant’s possible involvement in acts of international terrorism. Neither the Ministry’s deportation order nor the police record in question was served on the applicant.
Upon learning of the applicant’s detention, on 12 August 2009 his wife got in touch with a local human rights organisation, Mazlumder, which in turn contacted the UNHCR to seek assistance in securing the applicant’s release and halting his deportation. Mazlumder also informed the UNHCR of the poor conditions in which the applicant was being detained, including the fact that he had spent the night sleeping on a table, that he was not able to use the squat toilets at the detention centre, and that his medical treatment had been stopped on account of his detention.
On 14 August 2009 the applicant brought an action against the Ministry before the Ankara Administrative Court seeking the quashing of the deportation order, and also requested a stay of its execution until the matter had been examined by the administrative court. He maintained before the administrative court that the deportation order was unlawful, in view of his marriage to a Turkish citizen and possession of a residence permit valid until May 2010. The unlawful deportation order had moreover not been communicated to him at any point, nor had the Ministry sought his response prior to its delivery. The State authorities had similarly not put forward any concrete evidence to demonstrate why his continued presence in Turkey was perceived as a threat to national security. The applicant claimed that in the event of his deportation to Israel or elsewhere, his right to life and right to liberty and security would be put at risk, that he would face torture or even death at the hands of Israeli forces or their collaborators, and that the unity of his family would be destroyed. Furthermore, his medical treatment would be stopped, causing irreversible harm to his health. The applicant lastly complained that his detention was unlawful, and also maintained that the conditions of his detention at the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Admission and Accommodation Centre were highly degrading, in view of the lack of basic infrastructure to accommodate people with disabilities in his situation. As he was not able to use the squat toilet available at the place of detention, he had to be taken to a hotel nearby by police officers each time he had to relieve himself. It appears that his wife was occasionally able to accompany them to the hotel. His medical treatment was also stopped during his detention there, which was likely to result in the worsening of his condition.
In a decision delivered on the very same day, the Ankara Administrative Court asked the Ministry for a copy of its deportation order of 27 July 2009, as well as all the information and documents which formed the basis of that decision. Moreover, noting the irreversible nature of the harm that might be caused in the event of the applicant’s deportation, it ordered a stay of its execution until a further decision.
On the same date, the applicant’s lawyer applied for release from the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Admission and Accommodation Centre on the basis of the Ankara Administrative Court decision granting a stay of execution.
Following a decision of the Ministry on 18 August 2009, the applicant was released from the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Admission and Accommodation Centre.
On 9 September 2009 the Ministry submitted its replies to the Ankara Administrative Court in relation to the applicant’s request for the quashing of the deportation order. It stated that the decision to deport had been taken on the basis of a National Intelligence Agency report dated 16 July 2009. The report indicated that within the context of ongoing investigations in connection with international terrorism the applicant had been identified as having had contact with some telephone numbers registered in Israel on issues such as “procurement of arms, new recruits to the group, and measures to be taken to ensure the confidentiality of activities”. His presence in Turkey was therefore perceived as a risk to national security within the meaning of section 8 (5) of the Passport Act (Law no. 5682) and section 19 of the Act on the Residence and Travel of Foreigners in Turkey (Law no. 5683). It also submitted a number of supporting documents as an annex. These documents were not made available to the applicant, nor were they later submitted to the Court.
On 16 September 2009 the Ankara Administrative Court decided that there were no elements warranting the suspension of the applicant’s deportation. It thus reversed its previous decision of 14 August 2009.
On 30 September 2009 the applicant appealed against the decision of the Ankara Administrative Court lifting the stay of execution of his deportation. He submitted that the Ministry had not put forward any tangible evidence in support of its allegation that he posed a threat to national security such as to necessitate his deportation from Turkey. If the Ministry went through with its decision, his physical integrity would be irreparably damaged on account of the termination of the medical treatment he was undergoing in Istanbul. Furthermore, his deportation would disrupt the family life he had since established in Turkey, and would deprive him of the vital assistance and care undertaken by his wife. In addition, if deported he would most certainly be subjected to torture by Israeli forces and his life would be put at risk. Lastly, the applicant drew the administrative court’s attention to his pending application to the UNHCR for refugee status, and also complained of the conditions in which he had been detained between 12 and 18 August 2009 at the Kumkapı Foreigners’ Admission and Accommodation Centre, which had lacked basic amenities to accommodate people with disabilities, such as a non-squat toilet and a lift.
On 14 October 2009 the Ankara Regional Administrative Court rejected the applicant’s appeal against the Ankara Administrative Court’s decision of 16 September 2009, which had effectively lifted the stay of execution of his deportation, without providing any reasons.
In the meantime, on 25 September 2009 the applicant had applied to the UNHCR for refugee status. On 22 October 2009 he was interviewed by the Ankara office of the UNHCR as part of the refugee status determination process.
On 22 December 2009 the applicant’s lawyer was informed by the State authorities that, pursuant to the latest decision of the Ankara Regional Administrative Court, the applicant was requested to leave Turkey within fifteen days, and that if he refused to comply with that request he would be deported forcibly.
On 24 December 2009 the applicant claimed asylum in Turkey. He stated that he had been forced to leave Gaza because of the persecution he had faced there. Following an Israeli attack on his house in Gaza, which had left him severely injured, he had come to Turkey to seek medical treatment. This treatment was still ongoing, and in the meantime he had married a Turkish citizen. He claimed that although he had never been involved in any acts of violence, he was wanted by Israel as a terrorist. Returning to his country would entail a great risk to his life, if not from Israeli attacks then because of the termination of his treatment. He would also face torture if captured by the Israelis.
On the same date, the applicant’s lawyer also sent a letter to the Foreigners’ Department of the Istanbul Police Headquarters, reiterating the grounds of appeal against the applicant’s deportation. The lawyer emphasised in the letter that the Ministry’s deportation order had not been served on the applicant, and that the administrative proceedings for the annulment of the deportation order were still pending before the Ankara Administrative Court, which had not yet delivered a judgment on the merits. She referred in this regard to the National Action Plan on Asylum and Immigration, adopted by the Government of Turkey on 25 March 2005, which held that the execution of deportation decisions was to be suspended once administrative proceedings seeking to overturn them had been instituted.
On 28 December 2009 the applicant’s representative asked the Court, under Rule 39 of its Rules of Court, to adopt an interim measure to halt the applicant’s imminent deportation from Turkey.
On 4 January 2010 the President of the Chamber to which the case was allocated decided, in the interests of the parties and the proper conduct of the proceedings before the Court, to indicate to the Government of Turkey, under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, that the applicant should not be deported to Israel or the Gaza Strip until the delivery of a decision by the UNHCR in his regard.
In the light of the interim measure applied by the Court, on 6 January 2010 the Foreigners’ Department of the Istanbul Police Headquarters ordered that the applicant be granted a three-month temporary residence permit, renewable until further notice.
On 22 April 2010 the Ankara Administrative Court quashed the deportation decision of 27 July 2009, as the applicant’s deportation had become unfeasible in view of the interim measure applied by the Court, which was binding on the Turkish authorities. The Ministry appealed against this judgment.
On 31 December 2010 the Supreme Administrative Court upheld the judgment of the Ankara Administrative Court, and on 6 July 2012 it refused the Ministry’s rectification request.
In the meantime, following a number of interviews, on 27 October 2010 the General Security Directorate of the Ministry granted the applicant a temporary residence permit for six months, apparently renewable, in view of his status as an asylum seeker.
On 1 June 2011 the applicant informed the Turkish authorities that he wanted to withdraw his asylum claim, for reasons unknown to the Court.
On 18 March 2013 the General Security Directorate of the Ministry decided to grant the applicant a long-term residence permit, valid for one year, on the basis of evidence that he had established a genuine family life in Turkey. The decision also indicated that this permit would be extended in due course if further inquiries in respect of his marriage demonstrated that he was continuing to maintain a family life in Turkey.
In June 2013 the applicant withdrew his application to the UNHCR for refugee status in order to avoid being resettled to a safe third country as a result of the refugee status determination process, which might have entailed separation from his wife.
A description of the relevant domestic law and practice at the material time may be found in the case of Abdolkhani and Karimnia v. Turkey (no. 30471/08, §§ 29-45, 22 September 2009).
The Convention entered into force on 3 May 2008, was signed by Turkey on 30 March 2007, and was ratified on 28 September 2009. The relevant parts provide:
“For the purposes of the present Convention:
... ‘Reasonable accommodation’ means necessary and appropriate modification and adjustments not imposing a disproportionate or undue burden, where needed in a particular case, to ensure to persons with disabilities the enjoyment or exercise on an equal basis with others of all human rights and fundamental freedoms ...”
“2.  States Parties shall ensure that if persons with disabilities are deprived of their liberty through any process, they are, on an equal basis with others, entitled to guarantees in accordance with international human rights law and shall be treated in compliance with the objectives and principles of this Convention, including by provision of reasonable accommodation.”
In his Interim Report of 28 July 2008 (A/63/175), the then United Nations (“UN”) Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, Mr Manfred Nowak, noted as follows:
“50.  ... Persons with disabilities often find themselves in [situations of powerlessness], for instance when they are deprived of their liberty in prisons or other places ... In a given context, the particular disability of an individual may render him or her more likely to be in a dependent situation and make him or her an easier target of abuse ...
States have the further obligation to ensure that treatment or conditions in detention do not directly or indirectly discriminate against persons with disabilities. If such discriminatory treatment inflicts severe pain or suffering, it may constitute torture or other form of ill-treatment ...
The Special Rapporteur notes that under article 14, paragraph 2, of the CRPD, States have the obligation to ensure that persons deprived of their liberty are entitled to ‘provision of reasonable accommodation’. This implies an obligation to make appropriate modifications in the procedures and physical facilities of detention centres ... to ensure that persons with disabilities enjoy the same rights and fundamental freedoms as others, when such adjustments do not impose disproportionate or undue burden. The denial or lack of reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities may create detention ... conditions that amount to ill-treatment and torture.”
Recommendation no. R (98) 7 of the Committee of Ministers of 8 April 1998 concerning the ethical and organisational aspects of health care in prison, provides, in so far as relevant:
 “50.  Prisoners with serious physical handicaps and those of advanced age should be accommodated in such a way as to allow as normal a life as possible and should not be segregated from the general prison population. Structural alterations should be effected to assist the wheelchair-bound and handicapped on lines similar to those in the outside environment ...”
The Court notes that the Israel Defence Forces have been widely reported to carry out military operations targeting specific persons, usually suspected terrorists. In a decision it rendered in December 2006 (“the Targeted Killings case”), the Israeli Supreme Court ruled that targeted killings were not per se illegal. The UN Human Rights Committee noted its concerns on this practice in its Concluding Observations on Israel on 3 September 2010 (CCPR/C/ISR/CO/3):
“10.  The Committee notes the State party’s affirmation that utmost consideration is given to the principles of necessity and proportionality during its conduct of military operations and in response to terrorist threats and attacks. Nevertheless, the Committee reiterates its concern, previously expressed in paragraph 15 of its concluding observations (CCPR/CO/78/ISR), that, since 2003, the State party’s armed forces have targeted and extrajudicially executed 184 individuals in the Gaza Strip, resulting in the collateral unintended death of 155 additional individuals, this despite the State party’s Supreme Court decision of 2006, according to which a stringent proportionality test must be applied and other safeguards respected when targeting individuals for their participation in terrorist activity (art. 6).
The State party should end its practice of extrajudicial executions of individuals suspected of involvement in terrorist activities ... The State party should exhaust all measures for the arrest and detention of a person suspected of involvement in terrorist activities before resorting to the use of deadly force. The State party should also establish an independent body to promptly and thoroughly investigate complaints about disproportionate use of force.”
In the same report, the Human Rights Committee also made the following observations:
“11.  The Committee notes with concern that the crime of torture, as defined in article 1 of the Convention against Torture and in conformity with article 7 of the Covenant, still has not been incorporated into the State party’s legislation. The Committee notes the Supreme Court decision on the exclusion of unlawfully obtained evidence, but is nevertheless concerned at consistent allegations of the use of torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, in particular against Palestinian detainees suspected of security-related offences. .... The Committee also expresses its concern at information that all complaints of torture are either denied factually, or justified under the “defence of necessity” as “ticking time bomb” cases.”
In its report of 23 June 2009 on Israel (CAT/C/ISR/CO/4) the UN Committee against Torture made similar remarks on the problem of torture and ill-treatment of Palestinian detainees:
“19.  The Committee is concerned that there are numerous, ongoing and consistent allegations of the use of methods by Israeli security officials that were prohibited by the September 1999 ruling of the Israeli Supreme Court, and that are alleged to take place before, during and after interrogations.”
According to the 2009 and 2010 Human Rights Reports of the United States Department of State on Israel and the Occupied Territories, Israeli law, as interpreted by a 1999 High Court decision, prohibits torture and several interrogation techniques but allows “moderate physical pressure” against detainees considered to possess information about an imminent terrorist attack. The decision also indicates that interrogators who abuse detainees suspected of possessing such information may be immune from prosecution. Various human rights organisations have reported that “moderate physical pressure” has been used in practice to include beatings, requiring an individual to hold a stress position for long periods, and painful pressure from shackles and restraints applied to the forearms.