The case concerns an alleged breach of Article 11 of the Convention as a result of the injuries suffered by the applicant during the forceful dispersal of a demonstration. The applicant instituted criminal proceedings against the police officers who had allegedly injured her in the course of the dispersal.
The applicant was born in 1967 and lives in Santovenia de Pisuerga. The applicant was represented by Mr J.A. Blanco Rodríguez, later replaced by Ms C. López Cedrón, lawyers practising in Valladolid.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr R.A. León Cavero, State Attorney.
On Sunday 2 February 2014 the applicant took part in a demonstration in Valladolid against budgetary cuts and high unemployment rates, among other social issues. The protest was organised by an association in favour of unemployed people’s rights (Asociación parad@s en movimiento Valladolid).
The authorities had been notified in advance of the demonstration as required by Spanish legislation. The organisers themselves had requested the public-security resources needed to regulate road traffic and guarantee the proper progression of the demonstration.
The protest proceeded without incident until its official end. After that, a group of around fifty to sixty protesters continued marching in the streets of Valladolid city centre, mostly through pedestrian streets, and moved towards a square, Plaza de San Lorenzo. This protest was spontaneous and the authorities had not been informed of it.
On that same day, a political party was holding a congress in Valladolid. Some politicians were having lunch in a restaurant located in Plaza de San Lorenzo when the group of protesters gathered in the square.
The protesters stood in front of the restaurant holding a placard which read “stop the criminalisation of social protest” (paremos la criminalización de la protesta social) and denounced cases of corruption.
Immediately after the protesters stopped their march and stood in Plaza de San Lorenzo, the police approached them and asked the protesters to remove the placard they were displaying and to peacefully dissolve the protest and allow traffic to pass as normal.
Several police vans were parked in the roadways adjacent to the square. The police officers approached the protesters on foot. They were not wearing body armour or protective helmets, but they carried truncheons and their service pistols. They tried to remove the placard and held some of the protesters and pushed them away from the group in an attempt to dissolve the demonstration.
The protesters did not approach the entrance to the restaurant or enter its premises.
The protesters refused to put down the placard; the police then forced them to do so. They were forcefully separated, some of them tried to resist, and tension escalated. Some of the police officers’ interventions included pushing protesters to the ground, hitting protesters with truncheons, or kicking them, even when they were already lying on the ground.
One of the protesters tried unsuccessfully to take an officer’s gun out of its holster. He was subdued by the officer and arrested. Two other protesters were arrested for violent conduct or threats. A fourth protester’s arrest was ordered but he managed to escape from the police. Two police officers were also injured.
The applicant was not among the protesters who were arrested. She was holding the placard in the first line of the demonstration when she was struck violently by a police officer. The applicant suffered injuries to her mouth and her hand. She claimed that while protecting her head with her hand, her hand had been hit with a truncheon, which in turn had caused her to injure her mouth. She was taken to hospital for medical care. According to the medical report, she had suffered a direct trauma to her left hand, and had an open cut, bruises, a fracture and inflammation in her head.
According to a medical report issued on 3 June 2014 by the Institute of Legal Medicine of Valladolid, the applicant’s injuries had taken ninety days to heal, during which time she was not able to perform her usual activities. Another report, issued later, stated that the applicant’s injuries had completely impeded her return to her usual activities. On 15 February 2016 the applicant was given the status of “permanently incapacitated to perform her usual activities” as a consequence of her injuries.
According to the police report, the protesters repeatedly tried to enter the restaurant and succeeded in interrupting the traffic in the square. It noted furthermore that the applicant had been among the six protesters who had had to be taken to hospital for treatment of injuries.
On 22 February 2014 criminal proceedings were brought before Valladolid investigating judge no. 4 against ten police officers for causing bodily harm and against some of the protesters for disobedience, resisting police officers and assault. The applicant appeared before the investigating judge on 4 April 2014 to give a statement as a witness and victim.
On 23 and 31 May 2016 investigating judge no. 4 provisionally discharged (sobreseimiento provisional) the police officers under investigation and decided to continue the proceedings against four of the protesters (auto de continuación del procedimiento por los trámites del procedimiento abreviado). On 21 November 2016, after the charges had been presented by the public prosecutor, investigating judge no. 4 decided to address proceedings against four protesters (other than the applicant) and send them to the competent criminal judge for them to be examined on the merits (auto de apertura del juicio oral).
The defendants lodged appeals against the decisions of 23 and 31 May 2016 with the Audiencia Provincial of Valladolid. On 17 October 2016 the Audiencia Provincial confirmed the dismissal of the proceedings against the policemen. The Audiencia Provincial of Valladolid stated that the police intervention had been justified “not because the protesters [had] tried to enter [the restaurant], for which there [was] no evidence, but because the protesters [had been] holding a placard with which they [had] occupied a public road, preventing the movement of vehicles and people .... everything [had been] due to a police response to a situation of violence and disorder generated by people who [had] refused to abide by police orders to dissolve the demonstration and remove the placard ... [the individuals had refused to] identify themselves properly, kicked, struggled, insulted and pushed the police officers, who had had to repel that action, resulting in injuries on both sides. What differentiate[d] one action from another, obviously, [was] that the police [had] acted legitimately, while the demonstrators [had] opposed the actions of the police in an active and violent manner”.
On 15 November 2016 the applicant lodged an amparo appeal. She argued that her right to a fair trial had been violated by the refusal of the investigating judge and the Audiencia Provincial to further enquire into the alleged offences committed by the police officers against her and other protesters. She also claimed that her rights to freedom of thought, of expression and of assembly and association had been violated.
On 22 February 2017 the Constitutional Court declared the appeal inadmissible as the applicant had not duly complied with the obligation to prove that her appeal was one of “special constitutional relevance”.
On 19 April 2019, a hearing was held before Valladolid criminal judge no. 3 against three of the accused protesters (no information has been submitted about why the case against the fourth protester was not heard on the same day). By a judgment of 20 April 2018 given by the same judge, the three protesters were acquitted (two of them because the public prosecutor had withdrawn the charges against them, and the third one because no evidence had been found incriminating him).
The judgment stated that “the events [had taken] place when the police [had] tried to take the placard away from those holding it ... it [could] be seen [in the footage] that police officers were kicking people”. The judge found that the attitude and behaviour of the protesters had not justified the indiscriminate use of force by the police against them. The judge furthermore pointed out that the protesters had not impeded the movement of traffic, threatened anyone or tried to enter the restaurant, and they had not attacked the police officers. He stated that “the right to freedom of assembly [had been] violated when the only response after the [end of the official demonstration] ... [had been] to use force even when there [had] been no danger to the physical integrity of the people inside the restaurant”. In his view, the protest had been violently dispersed without any prior warning to dissolve the demonstration or to put down the placard.
No criminal proceedings were ever initiated against the applicant.
On 16 January 2017, the applicant brought an administrative claim against the Ministry of the Interior for liability for the injuries suffered. It was rejected in a decision of the Ministry of Interior dated 28 August 2017.
The applicant then appealed to the Audiencia Nacional. In a judgment of 27 March 2019, the Audiencia Nacional found that the State was liable for the conduct of the police agents who had intervened in the dispersal of the protest, that the police intervention had been disproportionate in its response to the group of protesters and in view of the force used against the applicant, and that the applicant had no legal duty to bear the damage caused to her purely because she had taken part in the protest. Among other evidence such as videos provided and the statements of two witnesses, the Audiencia Nacional took into account the judgment of 20 April 2018 given by Valladolid criminal judge no. 3 and reproduced that text in full. The administration was ordered to pay to the applicant 10,000 euros. The amount was fixed by the Audiencia Nacional taking into account the standard harmonised amounts for redress established as guidelines for cases such as the present one in domestic legislation, the seriousness of the injuries, the number of days needed to heal, the damage to her appearance and the sequelae.
The relevant provision of the Spanish Constitution reads as follows:
Section 21
“1.  The right to peaceful unarmed assembly is recognised. The exercise of this right shall not require prior authorisation.
In the event of meetings in public places and of demonstrations, prior notification shall be given to the authorities, who may ban them only when there are well-founded grounds to expect a breach of public order, involving danger to persons or property.”
The relevant provisions of Right of Assembly Act (Institutional Law 9/1983 of 15 July 1983), regulating the right of assembly provide as follows:
Section 3
“1.  Meetings shall not be subject to prior authorisation.
The governmental authority shall protect meetings and demonstrations against those who attempt to prevent, disturb or undermine the lawful exercise of this right.”
Section 5
“The government authority shall suspend and, if appropriate, dissolve the meetings and demonstrations in the following cases:
a)  When they are considered unlawful under criminal law.
b)  When disturbances of public order occur, endangering persons or property.
c)  When paramilitary uniforms are worn by attendees.
Such resolutions shall be communicated beforehand to the attendees in the manner provided by law.”
Section 8
“The holding of meetings in places of public transit and demonstrations must be communicated in writing to the corresponding governmental authority by their organisers or promoters ...”
The relevant provision of the Protection of Public Safety Act (Institutional Law 4/2015 of 30 March 2015) reads as follows:
Section 23
Assemblies and demonstrations
“1.  The authorities to whom this Law refers shall adopt the necessary measures to protect the holding of assemblies and demonstrations, preventing the disruption of public safety. They will order the dissolution of assemblies in places of public transit and of demonstrations in the cases established in section 5 of Institutional Law 9/1983 of 15 July 1983, regulating the right of assembly. They will also disperse vehicles grouped together deliberately (disolver las concentraciones de vehículos) when these hamper, put in danger or hinder the traffic on those roads.
The intervention measures for the maintenance or reestablishment of public safety in assemblies and demonstration shall be gradual and proportionate to the circumstances of the case. The dissolution of assembles and demonstrations will constitute the last resort.
Before adopting the measures mentioned in the above section, the acting units of the Security Forces and Corps shall warn of such measures the persons affected, even orally should the urgency of the situation make it unavoidable. In cases of public safety risk being posed by weapons, explosive devices or blunt objects, or any other objects dangerous in some way, the Security Forces and Corps shall be able to dissolve the assembly or demonstration or remove the vehicles and obstacles without the need for a prior warning.”