The case originated in an application (no. 27335/13) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksandr Viktorovich Shalya (“the applicant”), on 15 March 2013.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 19 December 2013 the complaint concerning an excessive duration of the applicant’s pre-trial detention was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
The applicant was born in 1981 and lives in the Krasnodar Region.
On 29 November 2010 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of murder. On 27 October 2011 and other dates he was additionally charged with membership in a criminal syndicate and other offences.
On 27 January, 19 April, 19 July, 20 September, 17 October and 25 November 2011, 19 January, 16 April and 19 October 2012 and on other dates the authorised period of the applicant’s detention was extended. Each time the courts relied chiefly on the gravity of the charges against him. On 1 November 2012 the Krasnodar Regional Court considered and rejected, in a summary fashion, the applicant’s and his co-defendants’ appeals against the extension order of 19 October 2012.
The jury found the applicant not guilty of the offences he was charged with. On 19 June 2013 the applicant was acquitted and released. On 30 September 2013 the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation upheld the acquittal on appeal.
Invoking his “right to rehabilitation” under Article 133-135 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the applicant brought a claim against the Federal Treasury for the loss of income and reimbursement of legal fees. He did not seek any compensation for non-pecuniary damage. By judgment of 28 January 2014, the Krasnodar Regional Court granted his claim in part.
Article 133 of the Code of Criminal Procedure governs the exercise of the “right to rehabilitation” which is, in essence, the restoration of the person to the status quo ante following an acquittal or discontinuance of the criminal proceedings. This right includes the right to compensation in respect of pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage and the restoration of labour, pension, housing and other rights. The damage must be compensated for in full, irrespective of the fault of the investigator, prosecutor or court (paragraph 1). Paragraph 2 confers the “right to rehabilitation” on defendants who have been acquitted, against whom charges have been dropped, in respect of whom proceedings have been discontinued or whose convictions have been quashed in their entirety or in part. However, no right to compensation arises where the prosecution is terminated on “non-rehabilitative” grounds, such as in the case of an amnesty or where the prosecution has become time-barred (Article 133 paragraph 4). Paragraph 3 provides that “any individual who has been unlawfully subjected to preventive measures in criminal proceedings shall have the right to rehabilitation”. In a judgment acquitting an individual a court has to mention explicitly that he has the right to “rehabilitation” (Article 134). A claim for compensation of pecuniary damage is to be lodged with the same authority which issued the decision to acquit or the decision to terminate the criminal prosecution (Article 135 § 2), whereas any claims for monetary compensation of non-pecuniary damage are to be lodged with civil courts and examined under the relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure (Article 136 § 2).