The case originated in an application (no. 62798/09) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Artur Germanovich Ivanov (“the applicant”), on 6 November 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr A.V. Glukhov, chairman of the nongovernmental human rights organisation Schit i Mech based in Novocheboksarsk, in the Chuvash Republic. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant alleged that he had been subjected to ill-treatment by the police, and that the State, while having conducted an effective investigation into the incident, had failed to award him just compensation.
On 19 September 2016 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1977 and lives in Novocheboksarsk.
The facts of the applicant’s ill-treatment in police custody were established in a judgment of the Novocheboksarsk Town Court of the Chuvash Republic (“the Town Court”) of 22 August 2008 and upheld on 11 November 2008 by the Supreme Court of the Chuvash Republic. The facts are as follows.
On 10 April 2007 the applicant was stopped by police officers on a street near his home and taken to district police station no. 1 of Novocheboksarsk to have his identity checked. At the police station a district police officer (участковый уполномоченный милиции), Officer M. from the Novocheboksarsk town police station, who wore a police uniform, threatened the applicant by saying that a criminal case against him would be opened, grabbed him by his clothing, violently pushed him backwards against a wall several times and punched his left ear.
According to a forensic medical expert’s report, the applicant had a traumatic rupture of the left eardrum with a haemorrhage, which caused a short-term – lasting between six and twenty-one days – health disorder. Accordingly, this qualified as “insignificant” health damage.
Officer M. was convicted under Article 286 § 3 (a) of the Criminal Code (abuse of power with the use of violence) and sentenced to three years’ imprisonment and a twoyear ban on exercising official power.
In January 2009 the applicant brought a civil claim in the amount of 312,487 Russian roubles (RUB) against the Ministry of Finance of the Chuvash Republic in respect of non-pecuniary damage. He argued, inter alia, that his illtreatment by the police had amounted to inhuman and degrading treatment proscribed by Article 3 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”), and that, in accordance with the Plenary Supreme Court Resolution no. 5 of 10 October 2003, the domestic courts were to apply the Convention in accordance with the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights (“the Court”). He also argued that, in calculating the amount of compensation due in respect of nonpecuniary damage for a violation of the Convention, the domestic courts therefore had to take into account the sums awarded by the Court under Article 41 of the Convention in similar cases. He stated that his claim had been calculated based on the sum awarded by the Court in the case of Ribitsch, in which a violation of Article 3 of the Convention had been found on account of inhuman and degrading treatment in police custody (see Ribitsch v. Austria, 4 December 1995, Series A no. 336).
On 6 April 2009 the Town Court allowed the applicant’s civil claim in part. It noted that, under Article 61 § 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure, a judgment in a criminal case which had become enforceable was binding on a court examining the civil-law consequences of the acts of a person against whom the judgment had been delivered, in so far as it established whether those acts had taken place and whether they had been committed by that person. Article 53 of the Constitution and Articles 151 and 1069 of the Civil Code provided for State liability for harm caused to individuals by State agents. Relying on Articles 1099-1101 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation and section 8 of the Plenary Supreme Court Resolution no. 10 of 20 December 1994, the Town Court held that RUB 20,000 would be just and reasonable satisfaction for the applicant’s mental suffering as a result of his ill-treatment by the police officer, treatment which had undermined his honour and dignity and caused him insignificant health damage.
The applicant appealed against the judgment. On 6 May 2009 the Supreme Court of the Chuvash Republic upheld the judgment on appeal, fully endorsing the Town Court’s calculation of the amount of compensation in respect of nonpecuniary damage. It disagreed with the applicant that, in determining the amount of compensation for nonpecuniary damage, the domestic courts had to be guided by the amounts of such compensation awarded by the Court in similar cases, stating as follows:
“Indeed, in accordance with Article 15 § 4 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation, commonly recognised principles and norms of international law and international agreements of the Russian Federation are an integral part of [the Russian Federation’s] legal system. However, this does not mean that the amount of compensation for non-pecuniary damage determined by the European Court of Human Rights in a specific case has a binding effect on national courts examining other cases where a violation of similar norms and principles can be found. The determination of the amount of compensation for non-pecuniary damage in specific cases is the prerogative of national courts examining such cases.”
The Constitution of the Russian Federation
“The internationally recognised principles and rules of international law and the international treaties to which the Russian Federation is a party are an integral part of its legal system. Where such international treaties provide for rules different from those in the domestic legislation, the rules of the international treaty shall prevail.”
“Everyone shall have the right to compensation by the State for harm caused by the unlawful action (or inaction) of State organs or their officials.”
An individual’s life and health, personal dignity and integrity, honour and goodwill are considered to be the person’s “non-property rights” or “intangible assets” protected under the Civil Code of the Russian Federation (Article 150). If certain actions impairing an individual’s personal non-property rights or encroaching on other intangible assets have caused him or her non-pecuniary damage (physical or mental suffering), the court may impose on the perpetrator an obligation to pay pecuniary compensation for that damage. The amount of compensation depends on the offender’s degree of fault and other significant circumstances. The court must also take into account the degree of physical or mental suffering experienced by the victim (Article 151). The degree of physical or mental suffering is assessed on the basis of the circumstances of the case and the personality of the victim. The amount of compensation must be reasonable and equitable (Article 1101). Other specific circumstances attesting to the degree of suffering must also be taken into account (section 8 of the Resolution of the Plenary Supreme Court of the Russian Federation no. 10 of 20 December 1994).
A State agency or a State official is liable to a citizen for damage caused by their unlawful actions or failure to act. Compensation for such damage is at the expense of the federal, regional or municipal treasury (Article 1069 of the Civil Code). Compensation for non-pecuniary damage is unrelated to any award in respect of pecuniary damage (Article 1099). Irrespective of the tortfeasor’s fault, non-pecuniary damage shall be compensated for if the damage was caused: by a hazardous device; in the event of an unlawful conviction or prosecution or the unlawful application of a preventive measure or unlawful administrative punishment; through the dissemination of information which was damaging to a person’s honour, dignity or reputation; and in other instances specified by law (Article 1100).
The relevant part of the Resolution of the Plenary Supreme Court of the Russian Federation no. 5 of 10 October 2003 on the Application of Universally Recognised Principles and Norms of International Law and International Treaties of the Russian Federation by Courts of General Jurisdiction reads:
“10.  ... As a member State of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, the Russian Federation recognises the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights as compulsory in issues relating to the interpretation and application of the Convention and its Protocols, in the event of a presumed breach of the provisions of the [Convention and its Protocols] by the Russian Federation, if such a breach has taken place after the entry into force of [the Convention and its Protocols] in respect of the Russian Federation (section 1 of the Federal Law on the Ratification of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and its Protocols, no. 54 of 30 March 1998). This is why the Convention should be applied by courts with regard to the practice of the European Court of Human Rights, in order to avoid any violation of the Convention.”
The relevant part of the Resolution of the Plenary Supreme Court of the Russian Federation no. 21 of 27 June 2013 on the Application of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of 4 November 1950 and its Protocols by Courts of General Jurisdiction reads:
“9.  In compliance with the generally recognised principles and rules of international law, [and] the provisions of Articles 1 and 34 of the Convention as interpreted by the European Court, for the purposes of restoring a person’s violated rights and freedoms, a court needs to establish the fact of a violation of such rights and freedoms, reflecting [that violation] in the judicial decision. The pecuniary and (or) non-pecuniary damage caused by such a violation is liable to be compensated for in accordance with the procedure prescribed by law.
When establishing the amount of monetary compensation for non-pecuniary damage, the courts can take into consideration the amount of just compensation awarded by the European Court in this respect in the case of similar violations. ...”