The case originated in an application (no. 65970/12) against the Republic of Poland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Roman Dziunikowski (“the applicant”), on 2 October 2012.
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms J. Chrzanowska, and subsequently by Mr J. Sobczak, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been subjected to inhuman and degrading treatment while being arrested by the police and while being questioned afterwards.
On 14 April 2014 the complaints concerning the alleged degrading treatment, the quality of the investigation, and the length of the applicant’s pre-trial detention were communicated to the Government, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1964 and lives in Warsaw.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant is a doctor specialising in emergency medicine. He had two heart attacks in 2005 and in 2008; he is overweight and suffers from coronary artery disease and kidney disorders. At the material time he worked at the first-aid station in Babice Stare.
On 10 January 2011 the applicant was charged with benefitting from the proceeds of prostitution on the part of an unknown number of women. The contents of this decision were presented to the applicant on 13 January 2011. On the same day the Warsaw Regional Prosecutor ordered the applicant’s detention and compulsory appearance (zatrzymanie i przymusowe doprowadzenie). The compulsory appearance and the need to apply preventive measures were justified by reference to the suspicion that the applicant might tamper with evidence: it was found that one of the persons who together with the applicant had allegedly committed the offence had tried to persuade other persons to give false testimony.
On 12 January 2011 at 6 a.m., when the applicant’s night shift was almost over, several policeman and anti-terrorist brigade officers arrived at the first-aid station where the applicant worked in order to arrest him. The applicant claims that one of the officers kicked him in the chest and stomach. In compliance with the officers’ orders he lay on the floor face down and was handcuffed behind his back.
Subsequently, the applicant was taken to one of his flats in Warsaw, where the police officers searched the premises. According to the applicant, the handcuffs were too tight and he had a pain in his hand. Only nearly half an hour after he had so requested, the handcuffs were loosened and he was handcuffed again, this time with his hands in front of his body. According to the applicant, he also had a strong pain in his chest but was not offered any help or allowed to take medications. He further submits that at the time of the search the police officers shouted at him with offensive words, such as “you whore, you bandit, you fat pig!” – apparently without any particular reason.
Then the applicant was taken to his second flat in Warsaw, which was searched as well.
Subsequently, the applicant was transported to a police station where, according to his statements, he was hit in the face and then beaten by several policemen, who also kicked him in the stomach and thighs. His person and clothes were searched. The search started at 11.40 a.m. and ended at 11.50 a.m. According to the search record, during the search “no obstacles or problems appeared”. The applicant signed the record, which reads:
“(the applicant) does not demand that the confirmation of the search by the prosecutor be served on him [and] does not raise any reservations as to the way the search was performed.”
After that, still on 12 January 2011, the applicant was taken to Solec Hospital, where he was hospitalised. The medical certificate issued by that hospital reads as follows:
“[T]he patient [suffers from] chronic coronary artery disease [and has had] two heart attacks and numerous vein angioplasties. For the last three weeks [he has been] suffering from repeated chest pain. Today – [suffered] pain three times while resting (ból spoczynkowy). Recommendation: hospitalisation in ‘R’ cardiological [intensive care] ward.”
On 12 January 2011 an X-ray examination of the applicant’s skull was ordered. According to the medical certificate issued by the Solec Hospital on that day no injuries on the top of the applicant’s skull could be traced.
Two further medical certificates dated 13 January 2011 issued by Solec Hospital read as follows:
“The patient currently remains in the intensive cardiological ward with suspected acute coronary syndrome. At the moment his state is stable. We are looking for a place to perform an angiography, which will ultimately allow [us] to state whether the patient may be detained without medical supervision. Until that examination, [the patient] needs to be hospitalised and to remain in the intensive care ward.
“We do not see any medical [reasons for not] undertaking prosecution- or court-related activities with the patient, who at the moment remains in the cardiological intensive care ward.”
On 13 January 2011 the applicant was transported to the Ministry of the Interior’s Hospital in Warsaw, where he underwent coronary catheterisation.
On 14 January 2011 the Warsaw District Court asked the doctor responsible for the applicant whether his state of health allowed for him to be questioned as a suspect by the court and whether he could be detained on remand – including in the detention centre’s hospital ward. The court’s letter was marked “urgent”.
On the same day the doctor responsible for the applicant replied that:
“At the present moment the patient, R.D. [...] does not require further hospitalisation in the Clinic of Invasive Cardiology (Klinika Kardiologii Inwazyjnej). At the same time there are no medical reasons for excluding the applicant’s being questioned today.”
On 14 January 2011 at 1 p.m. the Warsaw District Court decided to detain the applicant on remand for three months. The court relied on a strong suspicion that the applicant had indeed committed offences with which he had been charged. It did not, however, indicate the evidence relied on, because a large part of the investigation material was classified as confidential. The court also considered that the applicant might try to obstruct the proceedings.
On 21 January 2011 the applicant’s lawyer lodged an appeal against the detention decision.
On 10 February 2011 the Warsaw Regional Court dismissed the appeal and upheld the challenged decision.
On 31 March 2011 the Warsaw District Court extended the applicant’s detention for further three months – that is to say until 12 July 2011. The court also relied on the probability that a heavy penalty might be imposed on the applicant, because he had been additionally charged with the illegal possession of arms and psychoactive substances (four bullet cartridges and 3.5 grams of an illegal psychoactive substance had been found in his flat).
The applicant’s lawyer appealed and, on 9 May 2011, the Warsaw Regional Court upheld the challenged decision.
On 6 July 2011 the Warsaw District Court, relying on the same grounds as previously, extended the applicant’s detention for a further three months – that is to say until 12 October 2011.
On 10 August 2011 the Warsaw Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s lawyer’s appeal and upheld the decision extending the applicant’s detention.
On 27 September 2011 a bill of indictment against the applicant was lodged with the Warsaw District Court. The applicant was accused of having committed three offences: deriving material benefit from prostitution practiced by another person (under Article 204 § 2 of the Criminal Code); illegal possession of ammunition (under Article 263 § 2 of the Criminal Code); and possession of drugs (under Section 62 § 1 of the Act on the Countering of Drug Abuse).
On 5 October 2011 the Warsaw District Court again extended the applicant’s detention, until 12 January 2012.
A further appeal by the applicant’s lawyer was dismissed by the Warsaw Regional Court on 10 November 2011.
On 21 December 2011 the Warsaw District Court extended the applicant’s detention until 29 February 2012. The court found that it was necessary to hear three witnesses without the presence of the applicant because of the reasonable fear that he might attempt to obstruct the proceedings; one of the witnesses, M.M., had stated at the investigative stage of the proceedings that she was afraid of the applicant, and another witness, P.J.S., stated that he was still afraid of the applicant. The court found that a hearing in the absence of the applicant was necessary in view of the fact that the applicant had been charged with cooperating with groups which aimed to commit crimes. It furthermore held that it would examine the need for the applicant to be further detained after the witnesses M.M., M.S. and P.J.S. had been heard.
On 12 January 2012 the Warsaw Regional Court dismissed an appeal lodged against this decision by the applicant’s lawyer.
On 24 February 2012 the Warsaw District Court extended the applicant’s detention until 6 April 2012. After an appeal by the applicant’s lawyer, this decision was upheld by the Warsaw Regional Court on 27 March 2012.
At a hearing on 3 April 2012 the Warsaw District Court decided to lift the applicant’s detention. The court held that after the witnesses M.M., M.S. and P. J.S. had been heard, the fear that the applicant might influence their testimony was no longer pertinent. At the same time the court pointed to the high probability that the applicant had committed the offences with which he was charged and imposed on him a less severe preventive measure – namely a prohibition on his leaving the territory of Poland.
The applicant submits that owing to the state of shock in which he had found himself following his arrest he had not demanded that his body be examined for any injuries that he may have sustained at the time of his arrest.
Only twelve days after the alleged events – that is to say on 24 January 2011, when he was questioned by the prosecutor – did he complain of the beating which had allegedly taken place on 12 January 2011.
The applicant then underwent then a body check (oględziny). As can be seen from the case file, the applicant had not requested such a check; it had been ordered by the prosecutor. According to the record of the check, which was conducted on 24 January 2011, the applicant had the following body injuries:
“Irregularity of the mucous membrane on the inner part of lips, three [different] shades of skin colouring on the right side of the stomach – one about 5-5.5 cm., ... [one] about 3 cm., yellow colour inside with blue borders and one on the other side of umbilicus barely visible, with yellow colouring; on the right arm close to elbow on the inner side three [areas of] yellow colouring; one [area of] yellow colouring on the right thigh.”
The medical opinion ordered by the prosecutor, issued after the examination of the medical documentation of the case, dated 8 April 2011, read, in so far as relevant, as follows:
“[I]n the medical documentation from Solec Hospital dated 12 January 2011 there is no note of any injuries [having been] found on R.D.’s body. In [an entry in] the medical records of the detainee [dated] 14 January 2011 it is stated that in the course of an initial examination of the applicant no injuries were found on the applicant’s body.”
The opinion further relied on the record of the body search, on 24 January 2011 (see paragraph 35 above) and concluded that:
“The irregularity of the mucous membrane on the inner part of lips [and] colouring on the applicant’s right arm and on the right thigh are the result of blunt trauma [and are] at least seven days old ... . [T]hese injuries are of a light nature and resulted in impairment to health, within the meaning of Article 157 § 2 of the Criminal Code, lasting less than seven days and did not expose R.D. to a direct threat to life or grievous bodily harm. These injuries could have appeared at the time and under the circumstances described by R.D.; they could also have been caused by some other blunt trauma sustained within the period of some two hours.
...
The skin colouring on the stomach was caused by injections of the medication Clexane, which the applicant received during his hospitalisation in Solec Hospital.”
For the first four months the investigation was conducted by N.M. – the same prosecutor who had ordered the applicant’s arrest.
On 13 May 2011 the proceedings were severed and the part concerning the alleged abuse of power by the police officers was transferred to the Warsaw District Prosecutor.
The prosecutor questioned several witnesses, in particular the applicant’s two colleagues (paramedics) who had been working with him at the time of his arrest. They were questioned on 20 June 2011. One of them, R.S., testified that he had not witnessed the moment of arrest because he had been sleeping in another room. When he had woken up, the applicant had already been handcuffed. He had not seen any of the policemen hit or insult the applicant. According to R.S., the policemen had behaved “normally”. The other paramedic, K.S. had been sleeping in the same room as the applicant. He had been woken up by banging on the door. When he had opened the door, “about five anti-terrorist officers” had entered the room. They had ordered the applicant to lie on the floor, which he had done. Then he had been handcuffed with his face down. According to K.S. there had been no argument at the time of arrest; the applicant “had obeyed orders”. The police officers had “behaved normally, although they [had been] vulgar”. When the prosecutor read out to K.S. a part of the applicant’s testimony concerning his arrest, K.S. continued:
“I now recall that indeed one of the police officers said ‘I will show you what police means’. I am not sure how many officers entered the room or who entered first. I do not remember a flying kick or the second kick. I was not looking at R. [that is to say the applicant] all the time. At the beginning, when I opened the door, R. was standing close to me. However, he was knocked over (przewrócony na ziemię) and handcuffed some three metres from me. I do not know how he found himself there. Now I do not remember the moment of R.’s being knocked over, I might not have seen it. I was shocked and I was also looking at my other colleague [R.S.]. It was narrow and tight there and [there were] several policemen, so I could not see everything ...”
The prosecutor also questioned all the police officers and antiterrorist brigade members who had come to arrest the applicant on the morning of 12 January 2011. They all denied having abused their power by beating or hitting the applicant. One of the police officers, T.R., who was also a doctor, confirmed that when they had been in the applicant’s flat in Warsaw, the applicant had complained of a pain in his chest and had informed the police officers that he suffered from coronary artery disease and hypertension. T.R. testified that, speaking as a doctor, he had not observed any symptoms which would require medical intervention and denied that in the flat the applicant had asked to be allowed to take medications. He confirmed however that the applicant, when taken to the police station, had asked to be allowed to take medication; on that occasion his request had been granted.
In a letter of 12 September 2011, the applicant contested the reliability and accuracy of the medical opinion of 8 April 2011, especially as regards the provenance of the injuries on his stomach. He requested that a fresh opinion be commissioned and indicated questions that he considered should be posed to the forensic expert.
At the request of applicant, a new expert opinion was ordered. The expert was asked questions indicated by the applicant. The relevant part of the opinion, dated 2 December 2012, reads as follows:
“If the injuries of the applicant’s mucous membrane are treated as scarring it should be stated that this injury was sustained in a result of a dull blow of rather moderate power ... [I]t cannot be excluded that such an injury might be the result of a strong slap ... .
The haematoma on the applicant’s right arm and right thigh are the result of three dull blows of moderate power. The nature of the injuries, especially those on the applicant’s arm, indicates that they might be a result of his having been held firmly.
... [T]aking into consideration the nature of injuries to the applicant’s stomach and the fact that the applicant was administered Clexane twice in Solec Hospital on 12 and 13 January, and after that in the Ministry of the Interior’s Hospital on 13 and 14 January 2011, it cannot be excluded that [those injuries] could be the result of haematomas which appeared after the injection of that medication. Such changes as those noted in the course of the applicant’s body search of 24 January 2011 are usually not typical, but could be the result of intradermal administration of medication.
...
From the medical standpoint it cannot be excluded that the haemetomas on the applicant’s stomach could also be the result of dull blows; however, it must be noted that in the case file (in the medical documentation) ... there is no information dated 12-13 January 2011 of these injuries. Assuming that the injuries appeared in the afternoon of 12 January 2011, their effects ([allegedly] resulting from numerous kicks) should have been noticeable and noted in the medical examination.
On the basis of the nature of the injuries and the fact that a body search was conducted only several days after the events it is impossible to establish whether those injuries were the result of the injection of the medication Clexane or as a result of a dull blow (for example, a kick).
In summary, the injuries sustained by the applicant, as recorded in the course of the body check of 24 January 2011, are not (in the submission of R.D.) typical of those caused by numerous blows and kicks to somebody’s head, torso and limbs. Moreover, the injuries to the right thigh are not typical of so called “defensive injuries”, which appear when one attempts to shield oneself from a blow.”
On 21 December 2011 the Warsaw District Prosecutor discontinued the investigation. Having analysed (i) evidence from all witnesses – including those of the applicant’s colleagues who had been present at the moment of the arrest and all police officers present at the police station at the time of the alleged beating of the applicant – and (ii) the two expert opinions referred to above, the prosecutor concluded that “it was not possible to establish facts beyond doubt as regards the suspicion of the [commission of the] offence of abuse of power by the police officers”. The prosecutor found that the applicant’s version of the events was denied by the police officers and, “more importantly, it had not been confirmed by the remaining, objective and impartial evidentiary material.” Within three days of the arrest the applicant had been examined by various doctors on three occasions – in two hospitals and at the detention centre – and on none of those occasions had any information of the applicant’s injury been recorded. The prosecutor concluded that the only evidence which might confirm the applicant’s version of events was the statement made by the applicant himself. The prosecutor did not completely deny that the applicant’s statements had any credibility but held that even though all possible evidence had been adduced it was still impossible to establish the course of the events of the case. Therefore, applying the principle of in dubio pro reo, the proceedings against the police officers had to be discontinued.
On 4 January 2012 the applicant’s lawyer appealed and requested that the decision of 21 December 2011 be quashed and the case be returned to the prosecutor for completion of the investigation. He pointed to the fact that the prosecutor’s findings had not corresponded to the expert opinions obtained in the course of proceedings. In particular, whereas the prosecutor managed to find possible alternative explanations for the applicant’s other injuries, the origin of the injuries on his mucous membrane was not explained. He further raised that the prosecutor had failed to investigate into the genuine need to have recourse to an anti-terrorist brigade in order to arrest the applicant. Finally, the applicant’s lawyer requested that the prosecutor question certain T.B. who, in another set of proceedings stated that one of the policemen present at the applicant’s arrest, M.Z., had tried to obtain false evidence which would charge the applicant.
On 26 March 2012 the Warsaw District Court upheld the challenged decision. It endorsed the prosecutor’s reasoning and held that the version of events, as described by the applicant, could not be confirmed by the exhaustive evidence produced in the course of the proceedings. It further held that the applicant’s appeal did not raise any new circumstances and only amounted to contesting the prosecutor’s assessment of evidence. As regards the request to supplement the expert opinion and to hear T.B. the court held that it would not influence the result of the case and it would only cause the unnecessary prolongation of the proceedings. The court did not refer to the applicant’s lawyer’s argument concerning the examination of the necessity to use the anti-terrorist brigade.
Article 231 § 1 of the Criminal Code provides as follows:
“A public official who, exceeding his authority, or not performing his duty, acts to the detriment of the public or an individual’s interest shall be subject to the penalty of deprivation of liberty for up to three years”.
The relevant domestic law and practice concerning the imposition of detention on remand (aresztowanie tymczasowe), the grounds for its extension, release from detention, and the rules governing other so-called “preventive measures” (środki zapobiegawcze) are set out in the Court’s judgments in the cases of Gołek v. Poland, no. 31330/02, §§ 27-33, 25 April 2006, and Celejewski v. Poland, no. 17584/04, §§ 22-23, 4 August 2006.