The case originated in an application (no. 74318/01) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by twelve Turkish nationals, Mr Resul Sadak, Mr Nihat Osal, Mr Mehmet Çakar, Mr Rustem Bayar, Mr Tahir Kutlu, Mr Cengiz Balık, Mr İzzet Belge, Mr Abdurrazak İnan, Mr Mehmet Temelkuran, Mr Mehmet Nezir Ayan, Mr Yakup Uyar and Mr Erdal Güler (“the applicants”), on 1 April 2001.
The applicants were represented by Mr T. Elçi, a lawyer practising in . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) did not designate an Agent for the purposes of the proceedings before the Court.
On 3 November 2005 the Court declared the application partly inadmissible and decided to communicate to the Government the complaint concerning the applicants’ right to be brought promptly before a judge. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
At the time of the events giving rise to the application, Mr Resul Sadak was the provincial leader and the other applicants were members of the Peoples’ Democracy Party (Halkın Demokrasi Partisi, hereinafter “HADEP”) in Şırnak, which was a province in the State of Emergency region.
On 23 September 2000 Resul Sadak, Nihat Osal, Mehmet Çakar, Rustem Bayar, Tahir Kutlu, Cengiz Balık, İzzet Belge, Abdurrazak İnan, Mehmet Temelkuran, Mehmet Nezir Ayan and Yakup Uyar went to Batman in order to participate in the Batman Provincial Congress of HADEP in two cars belonging to Yakup Uyar and Erdal Güler. On their way back to Şırnak from Batman, they were stopped in Düzova village, in Cizre, and arrested by gendarmerie officers. The applicants were then taken to the Şırnak provincial gendarmerie command.
On 27 September 2000 at 2 p.m. Erdal Güler was taken into custody. He was kept in custody until 11 a.m. on 1 October 2000.
On 1 October 2000 the applicants were brought before the Şırnak public prosecutor and the Şırnak Magistrates’ Court (sulh ceza mahkemesi). On the same day, the Şırnak Magistrates’ Court ordered that Resul Sadak, Nihat Osal, Mehmet Çakar, Rustem Bayar1, Tahir Kutlu, Cengiz Balık, İzzet Belge, Abdurrazak İnan2, Mehmet Temelkuran, Mehmet Nezir Ayan and Erdal Güler be detained on remand and that Yakup Uyar be released.
Subsequently, criminal proceedings were brought against the applicants on charges of aiding and abetting the PKK contrary to Article 169 of the Criminal Code and Article 5 of Law no. 3713, and illegal possession of firearms and explosives contrary to Article 264 § 5 of the Criminal Code and Article 13 § 2 of Law no. 6136.
On 12 December 2000 the  ordered the applicants’ release pending trial.
In 2002 and 2003 the applicants were acquitted of the charges against them.
At the material time Article 16 of Law no. 2845 on the Establishment and Rules of Procedures of State Security Courts provided:
“Any person arrested in connection with an offence within the jurisdiction of State Security Courts shall be brought before a judge and questioned within forty-eight hours at the latest, not including the time needed to convey the detainee to the judge.
If the offence is a joint one committed by three or more persons, this period can be prolonged for up to four days by a written order of the public prosecutor owing to the difficulties in collecting evidence or to the number of perpetrators, or for similar causes. If the investigation is not concluded within this period, it can be prolonged for up to seven days upon the request of the public prosecutor and the decision of the judge.
The period of seven days referred to in the second paragraph can be prolonged for up to ten days upon the request of the public prosecutor and by decision of the judge in respect of persons arrested in regions where a state of emergency has been declared in accordance with Article 120 of the Constitution.
...”
At the material time, according to Article 128 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, any person who was arrested and/or in respect of whom a prosecutor made an order for his or her continued detention, could challenge that measure before the appropriate district judge and, if successful, be released.
Article 1 of Law no. 466 on the Payment of Compensation to Persons Unlawfully Arrested or Detained provides:
“Compensation shall be paid by the State in respect of all damage sustained by persons:
(1)  who have been arrested, or detained under conditions or in circumstances incompatible with the Constitution or statute;
(2)  who have not been immediately informed of the reasons for their arrest or detention;
(3)  who have not been brought before a judicial officer after being arrested or detained within the time allowed by statute for that purpose;
(4)  who have been deprived of their liberty without a court order after the statutory time allowed for being brought before a judicial officer has expired;
(5)  whose close family have not been immediately informed of their arrest or detention;
(6)  who, after being arrested or detained in accordance with the law, are not subsequently committed for trial ..., or are acquitted or discharged after standing trial;
(7)  who have been sentenced to a term of imprisonment shorter than the period spent in detention or ordered to pay a pecuniary penalty only...”