The applicant was born in 1953 and lives in Diyarbakır. The applicant was represented by Mr M. Biçen, a lawyer practising in Diyarbakır.
The Government were represented by their Agent.
The Government did not object to the examination of the application by a Committee.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
At the time of the events giving rise to the present application, the applicant was the president of the Ergani district branch of the DTP (Party for a Democratic Society).
On an unspecified date a criminal investigation was instituted against the applicant for dissemination of propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation, namely the PKK (Kurdistan Workers’ Party). The allegations against the applicant were based on (i) speeches that he had allegedly made in the village coffee house in Ergani in which he had allegedly praised the PKK and its leader, Abdullah Öcalan, stating that the activities of the organisation should be supported, and (ii) his actions during his nephew’s wedding party in 2008.
On 6 March 2009 the Diyarbakır public prosecutor filed an indictment with the Diyarbakır Assize Court charging the applicant, under section 7 (2) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act (Law no. 3713), with disseminating propaganda on behalf of a terrorist organisation. The public prosecutor noted that the applicant had disseminated propaganda in favour of the PKK in the village coffee house that he frequented and that he had waved a piece of cloth symbolising the PKK and had chanted the slogans “Leader President Öcalan” (“Serok Apo”) and “Long live Öcalan” (“Biji Apo”) during his nephew’s wedding party.
At the first hearing held on 28 April 2009 the trial court decided that the applicant should be compelled to appear after noting that he was absent. The trial court further decided, without giving any reasons, to examine two anonymous witnesses, namely Salihli X1 and Salihli X2, in the absence of the parties.
At the second hearing held on 2 June 2009 the applicant was present and he stated that he would like to give evidence with the assistance of a lawyer. The public prosecutor requested that the applicant be remanded in custody in the light of the fact that he had acted in a blatant (pervasız) and callous (fütursuz) way by making speeches with a view to convincing the villagers to adopt the purpose and strategy of the leader of the terrorist organisation. At the end of the hearing, the trial court ordered the applicant’s detention and directed that an expert report be obtained regarding the video recording of his nephew’s wedding party.
On 22 May 2009 the trial court held a hearing of its own motion during which it examined the anonymous witness Salihli X1 in the presence of the public prosecutor, but in the absence of the applicant and his lawyer. Salihli X1 stated that the applicant had frequented the village’s coffee house, where he had made speeches praising the PKK, its activities and its leader Abdullah Öcalan, and had stated that families should encourage their children to learn Kurdish and to join the PKK. As for the wedding party, Salihli X1 stated that no slogans had been chanted, but that some people had waved and danced with the flags symbolising the colours of the terrorist organisation (red, yellow and green), adding that he had not seen the applicant among them.
On 25 May 2009 the trial court held another hearing of its own motion during which it examined the other anonymous witness, Salihli X2, in the presence of the public prosecutor, but in the absence of the applicant and his lawyer. Salihli X2 gave very similar statements to those of Salihli X1, although, unlike the latter, he asserted that he had seen the applicant dancing and waving a red, yellow and green flag, allegedly symbolising the PKK, and chanting the slogans “Leader President Öcalan” (“Serok Apo”) and “Long live Öcalan” (“Biji Apo”) while doing a victory sign during the wedding party.
On 5 June 2009 the court received an expert report regarding the video footage of the wedding party of the applicant’s nephew. According to that report, the applicant was seen in the footage dancing and waving a red, yellow and green flag, allegedly symbolising the PKK, while a group of people were shouting slogans and carrying banners praising the PKK and Abdullah Öcalan, and displaying photographs of the latter and flags of the socalled “Confederation”.
At the fifth hearing held on 14 July 2009 the applicant gave evidence in person and pleaded not guilty, arguing that he had only been to the village coffee house for fifteen minutes during the run-up to the elections because he had been the president of Ergani district branch of the DTP. When the trial court read out the evidence given by the anonymous witnesses, the applicant objected to their statements, arguing that he had not disseminated any propaganda on behalf of a terrorist organisation. He further denied having chanted any slogans at the wedding, and when asked about the statements he had made to the gendarmerie on 19 November 2008, when he had stated that he did not consider Abdullah Öcalan as a terrorist leader, but rather saw him as the leader of all the peoples of Turkey, the applicant stated that these had been part of the informal conversation he had had with the officers, and not any propaganda on behalf of a terrorist organisation.
At the same hearing, the applicant’s lawyer submitted that since neither he nor the applicant knew the identities of the anonymous witnesses, they could not challenge them on personality grounds. He also argued that the applicant’s acts could not be considered as propaganda on behalf of a terrorist organisation as they had been part of his political activities as a politician. Lastly, he went on to argue that it was traditional to wave pieces of cloth consisting of the colours red, yellow and green.
At the hearing held on 18 August 2009 the applicant’s lawyer made his defence submissions together with his additional investigation requests. The trial court rejected his request that the two anonymous witnesses be examined again, considering that their testimony was not the sole evidence in the case file. At the end of the hearing, the trial court convicted the applicant under section 7 (2) of Law no. 3713 for disseminating propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation, on the basis of the testimony of the two anonymous witnesses, the applicant’s defence statements, the video footage of the wedding and the expert report. The applicant was sentenced to three years’ imprisonment.
In its reasoning, the Assize Court firstly noted that, based on his statements to the public prosecutor and during the trial, the applicant had not considered the PKK to be a terrorist group but an organisation which, according to him, fought for the rights of the Kurdish people, and he had regarded Abdullah Öcalan as the leader of the people of Turkey. In the trial court’s view, such statements had shown the applicant’s approval of, and support for, the activities of the PKK and its leader. Thus it interpreted those statements as the applicant’s efforts to legitimise the terrorist organisation and its leader. Then the court referred to the statements of the two anonymous witnesses, Salihli X1 and Salihli X2, and stated that their identities had been kept secret for fear of their being targeted by the PKK, given that they had testified against a person who had been spreading its propaganda. It went on to note that the applicant’s statements throughout the proceedings had demonstrated that he held opinions similar to the explanations given by the anonymous witnesses regarding the words he had used. Further, the trial court also listed the content of the expert report and its findings regarding the wedding party held by the applicant’s nephew.
On the basis of the content of the case file, the Diyarbakır Assize Court concluded that the applicant had praised the PKK and Abdullah Öcalan in his speeches during the gatherings in the village coffee house and that those gatherings had consequently constituted illegal demonstrations. The court also concluded that the applicant’s actions during his nephew’s wedding party, that is to say waving a red, yellow and green flag allegedly symbolising the PKK, had prompted other persons to chant slogans and wave banners in favour of the PKK and its leader. As a result, the Assize Court found the applicant guilty of disseminating propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation. According to the trial court, as the applicant’s speeches and acts were in support of a terrorist organisation, which employed the method of armed violence, and of its convicted leader, they could not be considered to fall within the applicant’s freedom of expression.
On 7 September 2009 the applicant lodged an appeal against the judgment of 18 August 2009. In his statement of appeal the applicant contended that neither he nor his lawyer had been able to question the anonymous witnesses and that his requests to do so had been rejected for no reason. The applicant further contended that his opinions, which he had expressed when he had made a statement to the public prosecutor and which did not constitute propaganda in favour of a terrorist organisation, had served as a basis for his criminal conviction.
On 15 July 2010 the Court of Cassation upheld the first-instance court’s judgment.
The relevant legal framework relating to anonymous witnesses may be found in Balta and Demir v. Turkey, no. 48628/12, §§ 24-5, 23 June 2015.
At the material time, section 7 (2) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act read as follows:
“Any person who disseminates propaganda in support of a terrorist organisation shall be liable to a term of imprisonment of between one and five years...”