The case originated in an application (no. 46159/99) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a company incorporated under Cypriot law, Rock Ruby Hotels Ltd (“the applicant”), on 25 January 1999.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Demetriades, a lawyer practising in . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Z.M. Necatigil.
The applicant alleged that the Turkish occupation of the northern part of  had deprived it of its properties.
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
By a decision of 28 May 2002 the Court declared the application admissible.
The applicant and the Government each filed observations on the merits (Rule 59 § 1). In addition, third-party comments were received from the Government of Cyprus, which had exercised its right to intervene (Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 (b)).
The applicant company, whose headquarters were in Kyrenia (northern Cyprus), is owned by Mr Agathoklis Neokleous, a Greek-Cypriot, Mrs Erato Neokleous-Goodbody, a British national of Greek-Cypriot origin, and Mrs Maria Neokleous-Deutschmann, a German national of Greek-Cypriot origin. Its directors are Mr Agathoklis Neokleous and Mrs Anastasia Neokleous, an American citizen of Greek-Cypriot origin.
In 1972 the applicant company acquired a five storey 3-star hotel called the “Rock Ruby”, located in  in Kyrenia, and the plot of land on which the hotel was built. The latter consisted of 56 rooms (each one with a private bath or shower and veranda) and 116 beds. Twenty of these rooms had been created following an expansion programme completed by late 1973. The hotel was situated on a seaside plot (plot no. 192, sheet/plan 12/12, block D, land area 1,989 m²) at a short distance west of Kyrenia harbour. The plot had a rectangular shape, flat surface at sea level, with a frontage of 60 metres on  and 30 metres on the sea. The hotel was fully air conditioned and centrally heated and had a number of facilities (reception area, cafeteria, open-air restaurant, outdoor swimming pool, garden). The applicant company alleged that the hotel was operating at an annual profit of about 66,400 Cypriot pounds (CYP – approximately 113,451 euros (EUR)).
In support of its claim to ownership, the applicant company produced a certificate of affirmation of property (registration no. 3-506934) issued on 23 December 1992 by the .
In July 1974, as the Turkish troops were advancing, the shareholders of the applicant company, the members of its board of directors and most of the hotel's guests were evacuated from Kyrenia by a British helicopter-carrier. Since then the shareholders of the applicant company had been prevented from having access to and enjoying their property. According to information available to them, after July 1974 the hotel had been used by the Turkish armed forces.