The case originated in an application (no. 6058/10) against the Republic of Poland lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Józef Kazimierz Woś (“the applicant”), on 26 January 2010.
The applicant was represented by Mr Z. Cichoń, a lawyer practising in Cracow. The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms J. Chrzanowska of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the police had used excessive force at the time of his arrest.
On 2 April 2015 the complaints concerning the use of force by the police and the quality of the investigation before the domestic authorities were communicated to the Government. The remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1966 and lives in Węglówka.
At about 5 p.m. on 26 January 2009 the applicant and his wife went by car from their home to another village. The applicant’s wife was driving. The car had been borrowed from the applicant’s friend. On a narrow section of the road they saw a police car trying to stop another car. The applicant’s wife, who apparently considered it an unsafe place to stop other cars, overtook the police vehicle and sounded the horn, though she claims to have done this by accident.
While being overtaken, the police officers noticed that the car driven by the applicant’s wife had no left rear light and that its rear registration plate was not lit. They decided to stop the car to inspect it.
They overtook the applicant and his wife, stopped the car and requested the relevant documents. They considered that the registration document of the car was partly illegible. According to the applicant, he read the contents of the registration document aloud to the officers. They tried to contact the Nowy Targ police station to confirm the identity of the driver but to no avail. The applicant and his wife spent about half an hour in the car at the side of the road. He then requested that they all drive to the police station because he wanted to speak to the officers’ supervisor. They all drove to the police station in Jabłonka, but there was no one there, so the police officers continued the inspection on the street outside.
They found that, apart from the light that did not work, the fire extinguisher in the car was too small. They wanted to fine the applicant’s wife 200 Polish zlotys (PLN). The applicant then told her: “do not sign anything for those beggars” (“Nie podpisuj nic tym dziadom”). The officers felt offended and one of them told the applicant that he would be arrested for insulting police officers.
According to the applicant, by that time the “routine” inspection had already lasted for about two hours, and he and his wife were getting nervous. His wife began to cry because the officers wanted to take her to the police station for questioning. The policemen repeated “this will cost a lot” each time they found a fault with the car. He therefore considered that they wanted him to bribe them and referred to them as “beggars”. According to the applicant, he was trying to defend his wife who, after two hours of intervention, was very anxious and upset. The officers claimed that the applicant had been disturbing their routine activities. As established by the domestic courts in the set of proceedings against the police officers, when one of the police officers had told the applicant that he would be arrested, the applicant pushed the police officer and started to run away.
As established by the domestic courts in the set of proceedings against the applicant, on the basis of the testimony of the policemen, after the comment made by the applicant the police officers tried to apprehend him, however he resisted arrest and moved a few steps back. Officer J.B. then forcefully put the applicant onto the ground and pressed down on him with his knee. The applicant continued to resist and try to get away and then kicked J.B. several times in his left leg. The other officer, D.B., then used pepper spray against him. When the applicant calmed down he was handcuffed.
The applicant was subsequently taken to the police station. His wife informed the policemen that her husband had heart problems, so they called an ambulance. The doctor who came to the police station considered that the applicant needed to be examined in a hospital so he was taken to Nowy Targ. After examination he was placed in police custody (Policyjna Izba Zatrzymań). He was released the following day. Apparently after his release he was examined again in a hospital in Myślenice.
The relevant notes from the hospitals, in so far as they were legible, contained the following information.
Notes by the Nowy Targ Hospital on 26 January 2009 read:
“Skin bruising on the right hand. Chemical burn to the right eye.”
A document dated 27 January 2009 confirming the applicant’s release from the Myślenice Hospital read:
“He claims that yesterday he was beaten up by the police officers who used pepper spray on him. Skin bruising on the right hand, chemical burn to the right eye, reddish conjunctivitis in the right eye.”
.  The applicant also submitted a copy of a medical certificate requesting that he be examined by an ophthalmologist, because of “burns from pepper spray”. The note was marked “urgent” but bore no date.
On 28 January 2009 the applicant lodged a complaint about his arrest with the Nowy Targ District Court (“the District Court”). He submitted that he had been apprehended by force and put onto the ground, that the police had used a whole container of pepper spray and that he had many scratches and bruises. He had been released from the police custody facility at about midday and let out by the back door without a jacket or any money. He had had to walk until he had found a taxi driver who had agreed to give him a lift and call his wife, who had apparently been waiting at the police station since 10 a.m. and had had no idea that he had been released and let out by the back door.
On 4 February 2009 the District Court refused to allow the applicant’s complaint. It found that in his complaint he had presented “his own version of events” and that his arrest had been lawful because “although there was no fear that he might go into hiding there was a reasonable suspicion that he might influence the testimony of a witness to the events in question”. The court also considered that at the moment of the arrest there were grounds to suspect the applicant of having committed the offence referred to in Article 226 § 1 of the Criminal Code and there were grounds to bring proceedings against him in an expedited manner.
Having examined the grounds, legality and appropriateness of the applicant’s arrest, the court found no shortcomings. It appears that the court did not hear evidence from any witnesses; it based its findings on a note made by the police and the arrest and examination records.
The court did not refer to the applicant’s allegations as regards the use of excessive force by the police.
On 22 February 2009 the police lodged an indictment against the applicant with the District Court. He was charged with offending police officers on duty and breaching the personal inviolability of a police officer by kicking him. On 8 April 2009 in his reply to the bill of indictment, when describing the “kicking” he stated that these could have been involuntary movements as he had been pushed to the ground and pressed down on with a police officer’s knee and pepper spray had been directed into his face. He submitted that he had not intended to hit anybody.
On 28 May 2009 the District Court found the applicant guilty as charged and conditionally discontinued the proceedings against him. The court held that in his statements the applicant had not actually denied kicking the police officer J.B. as he could not rule out that he had made the movements with his legs involuntarily, without the intention of hitting anybody. He was also ordered to pay PLN 200 to charity and the costs of the proceedings.
On 24 July 2009 the applicant appealed. He submitted that he did not feel guilty; on the contrary, he had been a victim. He also considered that he could not have violated anybody’s personal inviolability because he had been pressed against the ground and two officers had been sitting on his back trying to handcuff him.
On 8 September 2009 the Nowy Sącz Regional Court quashed the first-instance judgment and discontinued the proceedings, finding that the prohibited acts committed by the applicant had not constituted offences because the resulting harm to the public was insignificant (znikoma szkodliwość społeczna czynu).
On 28 January 2009 the applicant reported the two police officers who had arrested him on 26 January 2009 to the Nowy Targ District Prosecutor for abuse of power.
On 25 February 2009 the District Prosecutor opened an investigation into their alleged abuse of power.
On 11 March 2009 the applicant and his wife were questioned. On 9 April 2009 the prosecutor questioned officers D.B. and J.B.
On 16 April 2009 the District Prosecutor discontinued the investigation, finding that no offence of abuse of power had been committed. Referring to the relevant provisions of domestic law, in particular the 1990 Police Act, the prosecutor found that the police had had the right to use force because “the applicant had not obeyed their orders, had behaved nervously and had tried to run away”.
The applicant appealed. He argued, among other things, that the prosecutor had not properly examined the circumstances of the case; the officers had apprehended him for no legal reason. The applicant admitted that he had been nervous because of the inspection which had lasted for about two hours, but considered that this could not have been the basis for his arrest. He further submitted that the officers had used excessive force, inappropriate in the circumstances; they had put him onto the ground with his face down and had sat on his back and used pepper spray to incapacitate him. He had had injuries afterwards and had to take over a month’s sick leave. He also referred to the circumstances of his release from the police station and the fact that his wife, who had been waiting there for him, had not been informed that he had left by the back door.
On 12 August 2009 the District Court upheld the challenged decision discontinuing the investigation. It found that the applicant had again repeated his version of events which the prosecutor had found not to be credible. The court did not refer in any way to his submissions as regards his injuries. It found that the “circumstances of the applicant’s arrest [had already been] examined because the applicant had complained about his arrest and his complaint [had been] dismissed”. The court further held that “it had been reprehensible not to have informed the applicant’s wife of the applicant’s release but this had not constituted any offence”.
Article 244 § 1 reads:
“The police shall be authorised to arrest a suspected person if there is good reason to believe that he has committed an offence and it is feared that [he] may go into hiding or destroy evidence of his offence or if his identity cannot be established or there are grounds to carry out expedited proceedings against that person.”
Article 246 § 1 reads:
“The arrested person shall have the right to lodge an interlocutory appeal with the court. In [it he] may request an examination of the grounds, legality and appropriateness of his arrest.”
.  At the relevant time the regulations on permissible use of direct coercive measures by the police were laid down by section 16 of the Police Act, which provided that in situations in which a police order is not obeyed, such measures can be resorted to only in so far as they correspond to the requirements of a particular situation and in so far as they are necessary to obtain compliance with that order.
.  Section 5(1) of the Ordinance of 17 September 1990 on the use of coercive measures by the police provided at the relevant time that direct physical force could be used to overpower a person, to counter an attack and to ensure compliance with an order.