The case originated in an application (no. 4097/13) against the Republic of Austria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Italian national, Mr M.A. (“the applicant”), on 14 January 2013. The President of the Section acceded to the applicant’s request not to have his name disclosed (Rule 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court).
The applicant was represented by Mrs A. Mascia, a lawyer practising in Strasbourg. The Austrian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ambassador H. Tichy, Head of the International Law Department at the Federal Ministry for European and International Affairs.
The applicant alleged that the Austrian authorities had failed to ensure his daughter’s return to Italy, thus violating his right to respect for his family life.
On 18 June 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The Italian Government made use of their right to intervene under Article 36 § 1 of the Convention. They were represented by their Agent, Ms E. Spatafora.
The applicant was born in 1968 and lives in Vittorio Veneto.
The applicant entered into a relationship with D.P., an Austrian national, and lived together with her in Vittorio Veneto. Their daughter, who is an Italian and Austrian national, was born in December 2006. Under Italian law the applicant and D.P. had joint custody of her.
The relationship between the applicant and D.P. deteriorated and the latter left the family home on 31 January 2008, taking their daughter with her.
The applicant applied to the Venice Youth Court (tribunale per i minorenni di Venezia) for an award of sole custody of the child and asked the court to issue a travel ban prohibiting her from leaving Italy without his consent.
On 8 February 2008 the Venice Youth Court issued a travel ban in respect of the applicant’s daughter. On the same day the applicant learned that D.P. had left Italy with the child and had travelled to Austria, where she intended to take up residence.
On 23 May 2008 the Venice Youth Court lifted the travel ban in respect of the applicant’s daughter, granted preliminary joint custody of the child to both parents, and authorised her to reside with her mother in Austria, having regard to her young age and close relationship with her mother. It also appointed an expert who was entrusted with the task of collecting the necessary information for a final decision on custody. In addition, the court granted the applicant access rights twice a month in a neutral location, noting that the meetings should alternate between Italy and Austria and that the dates and arrangements should be agreed with the expert.
According to the applicant, D.P. brought their daughter to Italy only once. Visits took place in Austria, although D.P. did not facilitate their organisation. At a later date visits ceased, allegedly due to D.P.’s obstructive behaviour. In a report of 15 May 2009 the expert noted that she was not in a position to evaluate the applicant’s ability to take care of his daughter.
According to the Government the applicant met his daughter fifteen times in Austria, where supervised visits took place between October 2008 and June 2009. Subsequently, he refused to travel to Austria without giving any reasons.
The applicant applied for assistance to secure his daughter’s return under the Hague Convention. His application was forwarded via the respective central authorities in Italy and Austria to the Leoben District Court (Bezirksgericht), where proceedings began on 19 June 2008. Subsequently, the court appointed an expert.
On 3 July 2008, the Leoben District Court dismissed the applicant’s application for the return of the child under the Hague Convention. Referring to the expert’s opinion and having regard to the very young age of the child, the court found that her return would constitute a grave risk for her within the meaning of Article 13(b) of the Hague Convention.
On 1 September 2008, the Leoben Regional Court (Landesgericht) set aside that decision because the applicant had not been duly heard in the proceedings.
On 21 November 2008 the Leoben District Court, having heard the applicant, again dismissed his application for his daughter’s return, referring to the Venice Youth Court’s decision of 23 May 2008.
On 7 January 2009 the Leoben Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal, finding that returning the child to him and her separation from her mother would entail a grave risk of psychological harm within the meaning of Article 13(b) of the Hague Convention.
Meanwhile, in March 2009 D.P. brought proceedings before the Judenburg District Court, seeking an award of sole custody of the child.
On 26 May 2009 the Judenburg District Court held that it had jurisdiction with regard to custody, access and maintenance issues in respect of the child by virtue of Article 15(5) of EU Regulation 2201/2003 of 27 November 2003 concerning jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and the matters of parental responsibility (“the Brussels IIa Regulation”).
On 25 August 2009 the same court made a preliminary award of sole custody to D.P., referring to the child’s close links with Austria and the risk of danger to her well-being upon a possible return to Italy.
On 8 March 2010 the Judenburg District Court awarded D.P. sole custody of the child.
In the meantime, on 9 April 2009 the applicant made an application to the Venice Youth Court for his daughter’s return under Article 11(8) of the Brussels IIa Regulation.
In a judgment of 10 July 2009 the Venice Youth Court, having held a hearing, ordered the child’s return to Italy. The child would live with her mother, should the latter decide to return to Italy with her. In that event the Vittorio Veneto social services department was required to provide them with accommodation. In addition, a programme for the exercise of the applicant’s access rights would have to be established. If the child’s mother did not wish to return to Italy, the child was to reside with the applicant.
The Venice Youth Court found that it remained competent to deal with the case, as the Judenburg District Court had wrongly determined its jurisdiction under Article 15(5) of the Brussels IIa Regulation. It noted that its previous decision of 23 May 2008 had been designed as a temporary measure in order to re-establish contact between the applicant and his daughter through access rights and to obtain a basis for an expert opinion for the decision on custody of the child. However, the child’s mother had failed to co-operate with the appointed expert and had refused a programme of access rights for the applicant prepared by the expert. The latter had stated in her preliminary opinion that she was not in a position to answer all questions relating to the child’s best interests in a satisfactory manner.
On 21 July 2009 the Venice Youth Court issued a certificate of enforceability under Article 42 of the Brussels IIa Regulation.
On 22 September 2009 the applicant sought the enforcement of the Venice Youth Court’s judgment of 10 July 2009. He was represented by counsel in these and all subsequent proceedings.
On 12 November 2009 the Leoben District Court dismissed the applicant’s request for enforcement of the Venice Youth Court’s order to return the child. It noted that the child’s mother was not willing to return to Italy with her. However, the child’s return without her mother would constitute a grave risk for her within the meaning of Article 13(b) of the Hague Convention.
On 20 January 2010 the Leoben Regional Court quashed that decision and granted the applicant’s request for enforcement.
The Leoben Regional Court noted that under Article 11(8) of the Brussels IIa Regulation a judgment refusing return under Article 13 of the Hague Convention was irrelevant where the court which was competent pursuant to the Brussels IIa Regulation had ordered the child’s return in a subsequent judgment. It confirmed that the Venice Youth Court had been competent to issue the judgment of 10 July 2009, as D.P. had unlawfully removed the child from Italy and the applicant had immediately requested her return. Moreover, the applicant had submitted a certificate of enforceability under Article 42 of the Brussels IIa Regulation in respect of the judgment at issue. The Austrian courts therefore had to recognise the judgment and to enforce it. They were not to establish anew whether the child’s return would be contrary to her best interests. In any event, there was no indication that the circumstances had changed since the Venice Youth Court had given its judgment. It was for the court of first instance to order appropriate measures of enforcement.
D.P. lodged an appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court (Oberster Gerichtshof) on 16 February 2010.
On 20 April 2010 the Supreme Court requested a preliminary ruling by the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU), submitting a number of questions concerning the application of the Brussels IIa Regulation.
On 1 July 2010, the CJEU issued a preliminary ruling (C-211/10 PPU) confirming the jurisdiction of the Italian courts in the case and the enforceability of the Venice Youth Court’s judgment of 10 July 2009. It found, in particular, that:
(1) a provisional measure [such as the one issued by the Venice Youth Court in 2008] did not constitute a ‘judgment on custody that does not entail the return of the child’ within the meaning of Article 10(b) subparagraph (iv) of the Brussels IIa Regulation and could not be the basis of a transfer of jurisdiction to the courts of the Member State to which the child had been unlawfully removed;
(2) Article 11(8) of the Regulation applied to a judgment of the court with jurisdiction ordering the return of the child, even if it was not preceded by a final judgment of that court relating to custody of the child;
(3) Article 47(2) subparagraph (2) of the Regulation had to be interpreted as meaning that a judgment delivered subsequently by a court of the Member State of enforcement which made a provisional award of custody could not preclude enforcement of a certified judgment previously delivered by the court which had jurisdiction in the Member State of origin and had ordered the return of the child; and
(4) enforcement of a certified judgment [ordering the child’s return] could not be refused by the Member State of enforcement because, as a result of a subsequent change of circumstances, it might be seriously detrimental to the best interests of the child. Such a change had to be pleaded before the court which had jurisdiction in the Member State of origin, which also had to hear any application to suspend the enforcement of its judgment.
On 13 July 2010 the Supreme Court dismissed D.P.’s appeal on points of law. It noted that according to the CJEU’s ruling the Austrian courts’ only task was to take the necessary steps for the enforcement of the return order, without proceeding to conduct any review of the merits of the decision. If D.P. asserted that the circumstances had changed since the Venice Youth Court had given its judgment, she had to apply to that court, which would also be competent to grant such an application suspensive effect.
The Supreme Court noted that it was now for the first-instance court to enforce the Venice Youth Court’s judgment. In doing so, it had to take into account the fact that the Venice Youth Court had in the first place envisaged that the child should reside with her mother upon her return to Italy and had ordered the Vittorio Veneto social services department to make accommodation available for them. The first-instance court would therefore have to ask the applicant to submit appropriate evidence, in particular confirmation from the Venice Youth Court or Vittorio Veneto municipal council, that accommodation was indeed available. The first-instance court would then have to order the mother to return with the child within two weeks. Should she fail to comply within that time-limit, the first-instance court would, upon the applicant’s request, have to order coercive measures for the child’s return, while still giving the mother the opportunity to avoid such drastic measures by voluntarily returning to Italy with the child.
On 31 August 2010 the Venice Youth Court refused to grant an application by D.P. for the enforcement of its judgment of 10 July 2009 to be stayed. Referring to that decision, the applicant asked the Leoben District Court to order his daughter’s return to Italy.
The applicant claimed that he had offered to make accommodation (apparently a flat belonging to him) available to D.P. and his daughter, but that the Leoben District Court had found that this did not fulfil the conditions set by the Venice Youth Court in its judgment of 10 July 2009.
On 17 February 2011 the Leoben District Court asked the applicant to submit evidence that appropriate accommodation would be made available to his daughter and her mother by the Vittorio Veneto social services department, as required by the Venice Youth Court’s judgment of 10 July 2009.
By letter of 22 March 2011 the Austrian Federal Ministry of Justice, as Central Authority, informed its Italian counterpart accordingly and also noted that to date the condition had not been complied with. A similar letter was sent to the Italian Central Authority on 27 May 2011. Three further letters with similar content were sent to the Italian Central Authority prior to November 2011.
By a judgment of 23 November 2011 the Venice Youth Court withdrew D.P.’s custody rights and awarded the applicant sole custody of the child. It further ordered the child’s return to Italy to reside with the applicant in Vittorio Veneto. The court ordered the Vittorio Veneto social services department – if need be in co-operation with the neuropsychiatry department of the local health authority – to ensure that contact between the child and her mother was maintained and to give the child linguistic and educational support in order to assist her integration into her new family and social environment.
The Venice Youth Court referred to its decision of 23 May 2008, which had been aimed at preserving the child’s relationship with her mother while re-establishing contact with the applicant, noting that such attempts had failed owing to a lack of co-operation from the mother. It had therefore ordered the child’s return to Italy in its judgment of 10 July 2009. It further considered that D.P. had unlawfully removed the child to Austria and had subsequently deprived her of contact with the applicant without good reason. She had thus acted contrary to the child’s best interests. It therefore found that sole custody was to be awarded to the applicant. Given that to date any attempts to establish contact step by step had failed, his daughter was to reside with him immediately. The court noted that this would entail a difficult transition for her, but considered that the damage caused by growing up without her father would weigh even heavier. The court considered that the social services department would have to give the child educational and linguistic support to help her settle in her new family and social environment and to maintain contact with her mother. Finally, the court considered that the child’s return would not entail any grave risk of psychological or physical harm within the meaning of Article 11 of the Brussels IIa Regulation, which in turn referred to Article 13 of the Hague Convention.
D.P. did not appeal against this judgment.
On 19 March 2012 the applicant notified the Leoben District Court of the Venice Youth Court’s judgment of 23 November 2011. He also submitted a certificate of enforceability under Article 42 of the Brussels IIa Regulation.
On 3 May 2012 the Leoben District Court dismissed the applicant’s request for enforcement of the Venice Youth Court’s order for the child’s return. Referring to the Supreme Court’s decision of 13 July 2010, it considered that he had failed to submit proof that appropriate accommodation would be made available for the child and her mother upon their return.
The applicant appealed. He submitted, in particular, that the Venice Youth Court’s judgment of 23 November 2011 had granted him sole custody of the child and had ordered her return to Italy, where she was to reside with him.
On 15 June 2012 the Leoben Regional Court granted the applicant’s appeal and ordered D.P. to hand the child over to the applicant within fourteen days, noting that enforcement measures would be taken in case of failure to comply.
The Regional Court found that the condition that appropriate accommodation be made available to the child and the mother was no longer valid: in its judgment of 23 November 2011 the Venice Youth Court had awarded sole custody of the child to the applicant and had ordered that she return to reside with him. The applicant had submitted that judgment together with a certificate of enforceability under Article 42 of the Brussels IIa Regulation. The mother’s obligation to return the child to the applicant thus resulted directly from the Venice Youth Court’s judgment of 23 November 2011. Finally, the Leoben Regional Court noted that the award of custody made by the Judenburg District Court on 8 March 2010 could not prevent the enforcement of the Venice Youth Court’s judgment. The latter had retained its competence to rule on custody matters, as D.P. had unlawfully removed the child to Austria and the applicant had made a timely request for her return under Article 10 of the Brussels IIa Regulation.
D.P. did not comply with the return order. She lodged an extraordinary appeal on points of law with the Supreme Court.
On 13 September 2012 the Supreme Court rejected D.P.’s extraordinary appeal on points of law, as the case did not raise an important legal issue. It noted that the return order had become final and was enforceable. The first-instance court now had no other task than to define the steps to be taken to enforce the return order. The CJEU had clarified that where there was a certificate of enforceability under Article 42(1) of the Brussels IIa Regulation, the requested court had to proceed with the enforcement of the main judgment. Any questions relating to the merits of the return decision, in particular the question whether the requirements for ordering a return had been met, had to be raised before the courts of the requesting State in accordance with the laws of that State. Consequently, any change in circumstances affecting the issue of whether a return would endanger the child’s well-being had to be raised before the competent court of the requesting State. D.P.’s argument that the child’s return would lead to serious harm for her and entail a violation of Article 8 of the Convention was therefore not relevant in the proceedings before the Austrian courts, but rather had to be raised before the competent Italian courts.
On 1 October 2012 the Leoben District Court held that it was not competent to conduct the enforcement proceedings and transferred the case to the Wiener Neustadt District Court, apparently on account of a change of residence by D.P. and the child.
On 4 October 2012 the Wiener Neustadt District Court issued a decision on the next steps to be taken in the enforcement proceedings. The judge noted, in particular, that a continuation of the path chosen by both parents, namely the use of the child in the conflict between them, would lead to the child being traumatised, especially if the parents’ unbending position eventually led to an enforcement of the return order by coercive measures as a last resort. He noted that the best interests of the child required the parents to reach a workable compromise. The judge therefore proposed that a hearing in the presence of both parents be held in order to seek a constructive solution. Accordingly, he asked both parents to indicate within two weeks whether they were ready to take part in the proposed hearing. The judge further noted that if the parents were not willing to take part in the hearing, the enforced return of the child would be arranged. In this connection, the judge stated that any trauma suffered by the child because of such enforcement would then have to be laid at the door of the parents. Moreover, the applicant would be required to find a way to deal with the trauma caused to the child.
On 16 October 2012 the applicant informed the Wiener Neustadt District Court that he was not ready to take part in a hearing with the child’s mother, but wanted to arrange the return of the child with the least traumatic impact possible. He therefore suggested that he come to Austria with his parents to pick up the child or, alternatively, that D.P. travel to Italy with the child to hand her over. He therefore asked D.P. to either set a pick-up date in Austria or to inform him of a date when she would bring the child to Italy.
On 23 October 2012 D.P. informed the District Court that she was ready to take part in the proposed hearing. She also informed the court that she had appealed against the decision which had transferred the case from the Leoben District Court to the Wiener Neustadt District Court. Consequently, the decision establishing the latter court’s competence had not become final. She therefore asked the court to await the decision on her appeal before taking any further steps.
In the related case brought before the European Court of Human Rights by the mother of the child (Povse v. Austria (dec.), no. 3890/11, 18 June 2013), the Court granted a request for interim measures on 4 December 2012. It asked the Government to stay the child’s return to Italy. Having obtained information from the Austrian and Italian Governments and from the applicants, the Court lifted the interim measure on 18 February 2013.
On 4 April 2013 the applicant’s counsel requested that the enforcement proceedings be continued.
On 25 April 2013 the Wiener Neustadt District Court decided to continue the enforcement proceedings and, on 30 April 2013, requested that the parties submit their views within two weeks in order to reach a comprehensive solution for the benefit of the child. According to the Government, the applicant refused to contribute to that process.
In a decision of 20 May 2013 the Wiener Neustadt District Court ordered D.P. to hand over the child to the applicant by 7 July 2013 and stated that in case of failure to comply coercive measures would be applied. The District Court noted that it was for D.P. to choose whether she would accompany her daughter to Italy or whether she would set a date within that timeframe for the applicant to pick up the child in Austria. Furthermore, the District Court, referring to the Supreme Court’s judgment of 13 September 2012, repeated that it was for the Italian courts to examine any issues relating to the child’s well-being. It noted finally that the deadline for handing over the child had been set in such a way as to allow her to finish the school year in Austria.
As D.P. did not comply with the order to hand over the child, an attempt to enforce it by means of coercive measures was made in the early hours of 24 July 2013 without prior notice. The attempt, in which the judge, trained bailiffs and police officers participated, was unsuccessful, as D.P. and the child were not present at their place of residence. The applicant had been informed of the planned enforcement and was present.
On 9 August 2013 D.P. asked the Venice Youth Court to stay the enforcement of its judgment of 23 November 2011. Furthermore, she sought an award of sole custody in her favour. She alleged that she had not been adequately heard in the initial proceedings. Furthermore, she asserted that there had been a change of circumstances, in that her daughter was fully integrated into her living environment in Austria and had formed bonds with D.P.’s family, consisting of her mother, the latter’s partner and her younger half-brother. There had been no contact between father and child for a lengthy period and the child had no knowledge of Italian. D.P. submitted an expert opinion, according to which the child’s return to her father through the use of coercive measures would cause serious harm to the child.
On 14 August 2013 the Wiener Neustadt District Court dismissed D.P.’s application for a stay of enforcement, but decided to provisionally refrain from returning the child until the Venice Youth Court gave a decision on D.P.’s action before it.
In his observations of 18 October 2013 the applicant claimed that he had not yet been duly notified of the fresh proceedings before the Venice Youth Court. The Government, in their submissions of 18 November 2013, stated that the proceedings were pending before the Italian courts and that the parties had been notified of the dates of hearings. Moreover, the Government submitted that the applicant had not taken advantage of numerous opportunities to re-establish communication between himself and his daughter.
According to information provided by the applicant in a letter of 17 November 2014, the Venice Youth Court held hearings in January and April 2014 in the presence of both parents and fixed a series of meetings between the applicant and his daughter. A number of meetings took place between February and May at intervals of three weeks in Austria and then in June in Italy. The mother of the child was present at the meetings and on some occasions also her partner. The applicant alleges that on two occasions the mother’s partner threatened him and disrupted the meetings. According to the applicant meetings which had been scheduled for July and August 2014 did not take place as the mother refused to bring the child to Italy. The Venice Youth Court held a further hearing on 29 September 2014 and scheduled further meetings in Italy between the applicant and his daughter for December 2014 and January 2015. The proceedings before the Italian courts are still pending.
The enforcement of child custody decisions is based on section 110 of the Non-Contentious Proceedings Act (Außerstreitgesetz). This provision also applies to the enforcement of decisions under the Hague Convention and, according to the Supreme Court’s case-law, to the enforcement of return orders under Article 11(8) of the Brussels IIa Regulation.
Section 110(1), taken in conjunction with section 79(2), provides for the imposition of the following sanctions: fines to enforce actions that need not be taken in person, imprisonment for contempt of court for a duration of up to one year to enforce actions that are to be performed in person, compulsory attendance, seizure of documents and, finally, appointment of a curator ad litem. As more lenient measures, the court may also reprimand a party or threaten to take coercive measures.
Section 110(2) allows for the use of reasonable direct coercion. Direct coercion may only be applied by court organs and is in practice entrusted to specially trained bailiffs. According to the Supreme Court’s case-law, the use of direct coercion, meaning the physical taking away of the child, is possible as a measure of last resort for the implementation of a return order. However, since the use of direct coercion constitutes a massive interference with the child’s personal circumstances, a particularly careful approach should be adopted when removing a minor from his or her previous living environment (judgment of 17 February 2010, 2 Ob 8/10f).
Section 110(3) provides that the court may refrain from continuing with enforcement proceedings if and as long as they constitute a risk for the well-being of the minor.
The Government argued that in accordance with the CJEU ruling of 1 July 2010, the courts were not entitled to rely on section 110(3) of the Non-Contentious Proceedings Act to review a return order on the merits or to examine whether there were reasons for granting a stay of enforcement, even if it was alleged that there had been a change in circumstances, as it was exclusively within the competence of the courts of the State of origin to rule on an application for a stay of a return order given under Article 11(8) of the Brussels IIa Regulation. In the context of the enforcement of a return order under that Regulation, the scope of application of section 110(3) of the Non-Contentious Proceedings Act was limited to cases in which the act of enforcement in itself endangered the minor’s well-being because of an acute danger to the child arising during the removal (for instance on account of strong resistance by or acute health problems of the minor concerned).
The relevant provisions of the Hague Convention read as follows:
“The objects of the present Convention are:
(a)  to secure the prompt return of children wrongfully removed to or retained in any Contracting State; and
(b)  to ensure that rights of custody and of access under the law of one Contracting State are effectively respected in the other Contracting States.”
“The removal or the retention of a child is to be considered wrongful where:
(a)  it is in breach of rights of custody attributed to a person, an institution or any other body, either jointly or alone, under the law of the State in which the child was habitually resident immediately before the removal or retention; and
(b)  at the time of removal or retention those rights were actually exercised, either jointly or alone, or would have been so exercised but for the removal or retention.
The rights of custody mentioned in sub-paragraph (a) above may arise in particular by operation of law or by reason of a judicial or administrative decision, or by reason of an agreement having legal effect under the law of that State.”
“The Convention shall apply to any child who was habitually resident in a Contracting State immediately before any breach of custody or access rights. The Convention shall cease to apply when the child attains the age of 16 years.”
“The judicial or administrative authorities of Contracting States shall act expeditiously in proceedings for the return of children.
If the judicial or administrative authority concerned has not reached a decision within six weeks from the date of commencement of the proceedings, the applicant or the Central Authority of the requested State, on its own initiative or if asked by the Central Authority of the requesting State, shall have the right to request a statement of the reasons for the delay. ...”
“Where a child has been wrongfully removed or retained in terms of Article 3 and, at the date of the commencement of the proceedings before the judicial or administrative authority of the Contracting State where the child is, a period of less than one year has elapsed from the date of the wrongful removal or retention, the authority concerned shall order the return of the child forthwith.
The judicial or administrative authority, even where the proceedings have been commenced after the expiration of the period of one year referred to in the preceding paragraph, shall also order the return of the child, unless it is demonstrated that the child is now settled in its new environment.
Where the judicial or administrative authority in the requested State has reason to believe that the child has been taken to another State, it may stay the proceedings or dismiss the application for the return of the child.”
“Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding Article, the judicial or administrative authority of the requested State is not bound to order the return of the child if the person, institution or other body which opposes its return establishes that:
...
(b)  there is a grave risk that his or her return would expose the child to physical or psychological harm or otherwise place the child in an intolerable situation.
The judicial or administrative authority may also refuse to order the return of the child if it finds that the child objects to being returned and has attained an age and degree of maturity at which it is appropriate to take account of its views.
In considering the circumstances referred to in this Article, the judicial and administrative authorities shall take into account the information relating to the social background of the child provided by the Central Authority or other competent authority of the child’s habitual residence.”
The relevant provisions of Council Regulation (EC) No. 2201/2003 of 27 November 2003 concerning jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and the matters of parental responsibility (“Brussels IIa Regulation”)[, repealing Regulation (EC) No. 1347/2000,] read as follows:
“(17) In cases of wrongful removal or retention of a child, the return of the child should be obtained without delay, and to this end the Hague Convention of 25 October 1980 would continue to apply as complemented by the provisions of this Regulation, in particular Article 11. The courts of the Member State to or in which the child has been wrongfully removed or retained should be able to oppose his or her return in specific, duly justified cases. However, such a decision could be replaced by a subsequent decision by the court of the Member State of habitual residence of the child prior to the wrongful removal or retention. Should that judgment entail the return of the child, the return should take place without any special procedure being required for recognition and enforcement of that judgment in the Member State to or in which the child has been removed or retained.
...
(21) The recognition and enforcement of judgments given in a Member State should be based on the principle of mutual trust and the grounds for non-recognition should be kept to the minimum required.
...
(23) The Tampere European Council considered in its conclusions (point 34) that judgments in the field of family litigation should be ‘automatically recognised throughout the Union without any intermediate proceedings or grounds for refusal of enforcement’. This is why judgments on rights of access and judgments on return that have been certified in the Member State of origin in accordance with the provisions of this regulation should be recognised and enforceable in all other Member States without any further procedure being required. Arrangements for the enforcement of such judgments continue to be governed by national law.”
“1. This Regulation shall apply, whatever the nature of the court or tribunal, in civil matters relating to:
(a)  divorce, legal separation or marriage annulment;
(b)  the attribution, exercise, delegation, restriction or termination of parental responsibility.
The matters referred to in paragraph 1(b) may, in particular, deal with:
(a)  rights of custody and rights of access;
(b)  guardianship, curatorship and similar institutions;
(c)  the designation and functions of any person or body having charge of the child’s person and property, representing or assisting the child;
(d)  the placement of the child in a foster family or in institutional care;
(e)  measures for the protection of the child relating to the administration, conservation or disposal of the child’s property.
...”
“In case of wrongful removal or retention of the child, the courts of the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention shall retain their jurisdiction until the child has acquired a habitual residence in another Member State and:
(a)  each person, institution or other body having rights of custody has acquiesced in the removal or retention;
or
(b)  the child has resided in that other Member State for a period of at least one year after the person, institution or other body having rights of custody has had or should have had knowledge of the whereabouts of the child and the child is settled in his or her new environment and at least one of the following conditions is met:
(i)  within one year after the holder of rights of custody has had or should have had knowledge of the whereabouts of the child, no request for return has been lodged before the competent authorities of the Member State where the child has been removed or is being retained.
(ii)  a request for return lodged by the holder of rights of custody has been withdrawn and no new request has been lodged within the time limit set in paragraph (i);
(iii)  a case before the court in the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention has been closed pursuant to Article 11 (7);
(iv)  a judgment on custody that does not entail the return of the child has been issued by the courts of the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention.”
“1.  Where a person, institution or other body having rights of custody applies to the competent authorities in a Member State to deliver a judgment on the basis of the Hague Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction (hereinafter ‘the 1980 Hague Convention’), in order to obtain the return of a child that has been wrongfully removed or retained in a Member State other than the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention, paragraphs 2 to 8 shall apply.
When applying Articles 12 and 13 of the 1980 Hague Convention, it shall be ensured that the child is given the opportunity to be heard during the proceedings unless this appears inappropriate having regard to his or her age or degree of maturity.
A court to which an application for return of a child is made as mentioned in paragraph 1 shall act expeditiously in proceedings on the application, using the most expeditious procedures available in national law.
Without prejudice to the first subparagraph, the court shall, except where exceptional circumstances make it impossible, issue its judgment no later than six weeks after the application is lodged.
A court cannot refuse to return a child on the basis of Article 13b of the 1980 Hague Convention if it is established that adequate arrangements have been made to secure the protection of the child after his or her return.
A court cannot refuse to return a child unless the person who requested the return of the child has been given an opportunity to be heard.
If a court has issued an order on non-return pursuant to Article 13 of the 1980 Hague Convention, the court must immediately either directly or through its central authority, transmit a copy of the court order on non-return and of the relevant documents, in particular a transcript of the hearings before the court, to the court with jurisdiction or central authority of the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention, as determined by national law. The court shall receive all the mentioned documents within one month of the date of the non-return order.
Unless the courts in the Member State where the child was habitually resident immediately before the wrongful removal or retention have already been seized by one of the parties, the court or central authority that receives the information mentioned in paragraph 6 must notify it to the parties and invite them to make submission to the court, in accordance with national law, within three months of the date of notification so that the court can examine the question of custody of the child.
Without prejudice to the rules on jurisdiction contained in this Regulation, the court shall close the case if no submissions have been received by the court within the time limit.
Notwithstanding a judgment of non-return pursuant to Article 13 of the 1980 Hague Convention, any subsequent judgment which requires the return of the child issued by a court having jurisdiction under this Regulation shall be enforceable in accordance with Section 4 of Chapter III below in order to secure the return of the child.”
Pursuant to Article 40(1)(b) of the Regulation, section 4 of the Regulation applies to “the return of a child entailed by a judgment given pursuant to Article 11 (8).” Article 42, which also forms part of section 4 of the Regulation, provides as follows:
“1.  The return of a child referred to in Article 40(1)(b) entailed by an enforceable judgment given in a Member State shall be recognised and enforceable in another Member State without the need for a declaration of enforceability and without any possibility of opposing its recognition if the judgment has been certified in the Member State of origin in accordance with paragraph 2.
Even if national law does not provide for enforceability by operation of law, notwithstanding any appeal, of a judgment requiring the return of the child mentioned in Article 11(b)(8) the court of origin may declare the judgment enforceable.
The judge of origin who delivered the judgment referred to in Article 40(1)(b) shall issue the certificate referred to in paragraph 1 only if:
(a)  the child was given an opportunity to be heard, unless a hearing was considered inappropriate having regard to his or her age or degree of maturity;
(b)  the parties were given an opportunity to be heard; and
(c)  the court has taken into account in issuing its judgment the reasons for and evidence underlying the order issued pursuant to Article 13 of the 1980 Hague Convention.
In the event that the court or any other authority takes measures to ensure the protection of the child after its return to the State of habitual residence, the certificate shall contain details of such measures.
The judge of origin shall of his or her own motion issue that certificate using the standard form in Annex IV (certificate concerning the return of child(ren)).
The certificate shall be completed in the language of the judgment.”
“1.  The enforcement procedure is governed by the law of the Member State of enforcement.
Any judgment delivered by a court of another Member State and declared to be enforceable in accordance with Section 2 or certified in accordance with Article 41(1) or Article 42(1) shall be enforced in the Member State of enforcement in the same conditions as if it had been delivered in that Member State.
In particular, a judgment which has been certified according to Article 41(1) or Article 42(1) cannot be enforced if it is irreconcilable with a subsequent enforceable judgment.”
“In relations between Member States, this Regulation shall take precedence over the following Conventions in so far as they concern matters governed by the Regulation:
...
(e) the Hague Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction.”