The case originated in an application (no. 20930/06) against  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Ukrainian nationals, Mr Maksim Alekseyevich Ponomarenko and Mrs Svetlana Vitalyevna Ponomarenko (“the applicants”), on 16 May 2006.
The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Y. Zaytsev, of the Ministry of Justice.
On 16 March 2010 the Court declared the application partly inadmissible and decided to communicate the complaint about the length of the proceedings to the Government. In accordance with Protocol No. 14, the application was assigned to a Committee of three Judges.
The applicants were born in 1968 and live in .
On 7 August 1997 they instituted court proceedings against the U. bank in a dispute over a contract of pledge of a car.
On 18 February 2002 the  delivered a judgment in the case. On 27 June 2002 the Kirovograd Regional Court of Appeal upheld it. On 10 November 2004 the Supreme Court quashed the above decisions and remitted the case for fresh consideration.
On 8 November 2005 the  partially allowed the applicants' claim, declared the contract of pledge invalid and ordered the U. bank to pay the applicants certain amounts for the cost of the car, inflation losses and exemplary damages.
On 23 December 2005 the Court of Appeal quashed the above judgment in the part concerning the award and upheld its remainder.
On 16 June 2006, following the applicants' failure to lodge their appeal in cassation in accordance with the procedural requirements, the Supreme Court returned it unexamined.
According to the Government, in the course of the proceedings three hearings were adjourned due to the applicants' failure to appear and four hearings were adjourned due to both parties' failure to appear. The applicants disagreed stating that they had not attended only two hearings. Seven other hearings were adjourned upon the respondent's request, for third party's failure to appear or due to the absence of a judge.