The case concerns a ban on family visits for the entire duration of a trial and the impossibility to obtain a judicial review of the ban.
The applicant was born in 1974 and lives in Naberezhnyye Chelny. She was represented before the Court by Ms N. Sarkarova, a lawyer practising in the Tatarstan Republic.
The Government were represented by Mr M. Galperin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant is the wife of Mr Yunzel who was a defendant in criminal proceedings (see Yunzel v. Russia, no. 60627/09, 13 December 2016). In August 2009 the applicant visited Mr Yunzel in the IZ-16/3 remand prison.
On 21 October 2010 Mr Yunzel was transferred to a remand prison in Kazan and his trial opened ten days later before the Supreme Court of the Tatarstan Republic.
On 2 November 2010 the applicant came to Kazan to see her husband. She was told she would not be able to visit him.
On 20 January 2011 the applicant submitted a written application for a prison visit to the Supreme Court of Tatarstan. She enclosed their marriage certificate. On 26 January 2011 the trial judge N. sent her a oneline letter rejecting her application:
“I inform you that permission to visit the defendant Yunzel will be given after the delivery of the judgment.”
On 5 February and 18 March 2011 the applicant complained to the President of the Supreme Court of Tatarstan and the President of the Supreme Court of Russia. She submitted that Judge N. had not given any reasons for the refusal or referred to any legal acts restricting the right to family visits up until the delivery of the judgment. Her complaints were forwarded to Judge N. who replied to her, on 18 April 2011, that –
“Section 18 of the Defendants’ Detention Act («О содержании под стражей подозреваемых и обвиняемых в совершении преступлений») provides for a possibility, rather than an obligation, to authorise a short-term family visit. In the particular circumstances of the present case, such possibility does not appear to be available. Besides, neither the case-file nor your submissions contain any evidence of a close family relationship between you and the defendant Yunzel.”
On 17 May 2011 the applicant sent a new complaint to the President of the Supreme Court of Russia. She pointed out that her first complaint had been given for reply to the judge whose conduct she had impugned, that he had failed to explain what “particular circumstances of the case” outweighed her right to see her husband, that the discretion to give or refuse permission under section 18 of the Defendants’ Detention Act was unlimited and unregulated, and that the failure to consider the marriage certificate as evidence of a family relationship disclosed the judge’s bias.
On the same day she filed a new application to see her husband. Three days later Judge N. refused her application. His letter reproduced the text of the letter of 18 April 2011.
The applicant’s complaint to the Supreme Court of Russia was returned to the Supreme Court of Tatarstan. On 9 June 2011 the first deputy President of the Supreme Court of Tatarstan informed her that permission to visit could be granted after the delivery of the judgment, having regard to the “particular circumstances of the case which involved charges of armed robbery and organised crime and in the interests of ensuring the safety of parties to the proceedings”.
On 11 November 2011 the applicant made a new application to visit her husband. She stated that examination of charges against him had been finished and that Judge N. had removed him from the courtroom. On 21 November 2011 Judge N. reiterated that no visit would be allowed until after the judgment had been delivered.
On 25 November 2011 the applicant filed an appeal against Judge N.’s decision to the Criminal Chamber of the Supreme Court of Tatarstan. On 21 December 2011 Judge N. returned the statement of appeal to her and stated that “a refusal of family visit [was] not amenable to appeal”.
On 29 December 2011 the President of the Supreme Court of Tatarstan wrote to the applicant that no family visits would be authorised for her husband or his co-defendants until the delivery of the judgment.
The applicant was able to see her husband again on 29 March 2013.
Section 18 of the Defendants’ Detention Act (Federal Law no. 103FZ of 15 July 1995) provides as follows:
“Subject to written authorisation from the official or authority in charge of the criminal case, suspects and defendants may have no more than two visits per month from their family members and other persons ...”
The Constitutional Court held that the refusal of an application for a prison visit should take the form of a reasoned decision (мотивированное постановление). It could be challenged before a supervising prosecutor or a court of general jurisdiction which would be called upon to verify, in the light of factual circumstances of the case, whether or not the refusal was justified (see decisions no. 176-O of 13 June 2002, no. 351-O of 16 October 2003, and no. 807-O-O of 17 June 2010).