The case originated in an application (no. 63905/00) against the  lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) under former Article 25 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mr Adam Wasilewski, represented before the Court by Mr Marek Wasilewski, his father and legal guardian.
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Jakub Wołąsiewicz of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that his right to the respect for his correspondence, guaranteed by Article 8 of the Convention, was breached.
The application was transmitted to the Court on 1 November 1998, when Protocol No. 11 to the Convention came into force (Article 5 § 2 of Protocol No. 11).
The application was allocated to the Fourth Section of the Court (Rule 52 § 1 of the Rules of Court). Within that Section, the Chamber that would consider the case (Article 27 § 1 of the Convention) was constituted as provided in Rule 26 § 1.
By a decision of 28 September 2004, the Court declared the application partly admissible.
On 1 November 2004 the Court changed the composition of its Sections (Rule 25 § 1). This case was assigned to the newly composed Fourth Section (Rule 52 § 1).
By a further decision of 28 June 2005 the Court declared inadmissible the applicant’s complaint about the length of criminal proceedings against him.
On 15 April 1998 the applicant was arrested and charged with attempted extortion of money by threats. On 16 April the Pruszków District Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal against the detention order, finding that in the light of the evidence the arrest was justified.
On 17 April 1998 the Pruszków District Court decided to detain the applicant on remand. Subsequently, throughout the initial period of his detention, at least until 2 July 1998, the applicant remained in the detention centre Warszawa-Białołęka.
On an unspecified date after 2 July 1998 the applicant was transferred to the detention centre Warszawa-Mokotów.
On 26 July 1998 the applicant sent his first letter to the European Commission of Human Rights. A letter of 2, sent by the Commission to the applicant, was intercepted, opened and read by the prosecutor conducting the investigations in the applicant’s case.
The envelope in which the letter was delivered bears the following stamps: Detention Centre Warszawa-Białołęka, 8 September 1998; Detention Centre Warszawa 10 September 1998, Detention Centre in  12 October 1998, the Barczewo Prison 14 October 1998. It also bears a note: Censored, 15 September 1998 (“Ocenzurowano”) signed by an illegible signature.
The applicant requested that criminal proceedings be instituted in respect of the interference with his correspondence from the European Commission of Human Rights.
On 27 December 2001 the Warszawa-Ochota District Prosecutor discontinued the investigation of the applicant’s complaint about the letter of 24 August 1998 having been intercepted, opened and read, finding that no criminal offence had been committed. The applicant appealed.
By a decision of 9 May 2002 the Pruszków District Court dismissed his appeal. The court observed that the prosecutor Z.O. who had opened the letter had been authorised by law to open it, to read its contents and to decide whether to forward it to the detained person. The court further considered that Article 103 of the Code of Enforcement of Criminal Sentences, insofar as it prohibited interference with correspondence with international institutions for the protection of human rights, was applicable only to persons convicted by final judicial decisions. Hence, it was not applicable to the situation of the applicant who had at the material time been detained on remand and his situation was therefore governed by other provisions.
Article 102 (11) of the 1997 Code of Enforcement of Criminal Sentences provides that convicted persons are entitled to unhindered correspondence with the State authorities and with the Ombudsman. Article 103 of the Code further provides that convicted persons and their lawyers may lodge complaints with the international institutions established under international treaties on the protection of human rights, ratified by . Prisoners’ correspondence in such cases shall be dispatched without delay, shall not be intercepted and shall not be subject to censorship.
Pursuant to Article 214 § 1 of the Code, unless exceptions are provided for by Chapter XV governing detention on remand, the rights of persons detained on remand shall, in principle, be the same as those of persons convicted by a final judgment and serving a prison sentence under the ordinary regime in a closed prison. No restrictions shall be applied to their situation other than those which are necessary to secure the proper conduct of the criminal proceedings, to maintain order in the detention centre and to prevent demoralisation of the detainees.
Under Article 217 § 1 of the Code the correspondence of a detainee shall be censored by [the authority at whose disposal he remains], unless this authority decides otherwise.
Article 242 § 5 of the Code, contained in its Chapter XXI entitled “Definitions”, reads as follows:
“The prohibition of censorship shall also mean the prohibition of acquainting oneself with the content of the letter.”
On 1 September 1998 the Rules of Detention on Remand 1998 entered into force. § 36 of the Rules provides that the detainee’s correspondence, including the correspondence with the international institutions for the protection of human rights, established on the basis of international agreements ratified by Poland, with the Ombudsman and public and local government institutions, is mailed through the intermediary of the authority at whose disposal he remains.
§ 37 of these Rules reads as follows:
“1.  If the authority at whose disposal [a detainee] remains ceases to censor correspondence, it shall be subject to the supervision or censorship by the prison administration, except for cases referred to in Article 73 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and Articles 102 (11) and 103 of the Code [of Execution of Criminal Sentences].
The correspondence of a detainee shall be supervised by the prison administration when necessary in the interest of protecting social interest, the security of a detention centre or requirements of personal re-education.
The supervision referred to in paragraph 2 shall be executed by controlling the content of the correspondence and acquainting oneself with its wording.
The correspondence referred to in Articles (...) 102 (11) and 103 § 1 of the Code [of Execution of Criminal Sentences] may be only subjected to the control of its content, which shall take place in the presence of a detainee.”