The case originated in an application (no. 42931/10) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Maltese national, Mr John Camilleri (“the applicant”), on 26 July 2010.
The applicant was represented by Dr J. Brincat, a lawyer practising in . The Maltese Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Dr Peter Grech, Attorney General.
The applicant complained that the discretion of the public prosecutor to decide in which court an accused may be brought to trial and consequently which punishment would be applicable was contrary to the impartiality requirement of Article 6.
On 16 December 2010 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
Mr Vincent De Gaetano, the judge elected in respect of , was unable to sit in the case (Rule 28). Accordingly the President of the Chamber decided to appoint Mr Lawrence Quintano to sit as an ad hoc judge (Rule 29 § 1(b)).
The applicant was born in 1968 and lives in .
In 2003 the applicant was charged with having, in December 2001, been in possession of illegal drugs (953 pills of Ecstasy) not for his exclusive use (Chapter 31 of the Laws of Malta).
On an unspecified date the prosecutor decided to try the applicant in the Criminal Court in accordance with section 120A (2) (a) (i) of the Medical and Kindred Professions Ordinance.
By a judgment of 16 November 2005 the Criminal Court, following a trial by jury, found the applicant guilty (by a verdict of eight to one) and sentenced him to fifteen years’ imprisonment, a fine of 15,000 Maltese liras (MTL) (approximately 35,000 euros (EUR)) with twelve months’ imprisonment in default, and the payment of costs and expenses. The court also ordered the confiscation of his assets.
On 24 April 2008 the Court of Criminal Appeal confirmed the Criminal Court’s judgment.
On 18 February 2009 the applicant brought constitutional redress proceedings complaining, inter alia, that the discretion of the public prosecutor to decide in which court to try an accused ran counter to the impartiality requirement of Article 6 of the Convention.
On 14 July 2009 the  (First Hall) rejected this complaint. It referred to a previous finding by the Constitutional Court in the case of Ellul v Attorney General, in which it had held that the discretionary power exercised by the public prosecutor (in respect of section 22 of the Dangerous Drugs Ordinance – a provision similar to that of section 120 A under consideration in the present case) did not prevent an individual from being given a fair trial in accordance with Article 6 of the Convention, and it therefore adopted the same reasoning. The court further pointed out that unlike in the case of Huber v. Switzerland (23 October 1990, Series A no. 188), the Attorney General (in his role as public prosecutor) in  did not investigate the circumstances of the crime and did not have the power to issue detention orders.
On 31 July 2009 the applicant appealed to the .
By a judgment of 12 February 2010, the  confirmed the Civil Court’s judgment. It held that there was no doubt that the applicant had been tried before an impartial tribunal established by law and that the trial had been fair. The fact that the Attorney General (in his role as public prosecutor) could choose the forum in which to try the accused did not give him the powers of a judge in that instance. In essence the public prosecutor had no control over the finding of guilt or innocence of an individual. The situation would have been different had the public prosecutor been involved in the determination of an individual’s guilt. In reference to domestic jurisprudence, it added that the means by which a case was brought before a court could not impair its independence. In so far as an individual was aware of the minimum and maximum punishments established by law at the time when the crime was committed, there could be no violation of Articles 6 or 7 of the Convention. Moreover, the applicant had not shown in what way this decision had affected him. Nevertheless, noting that the Attorney General (in his role as public prosecutor) exercised his own discretion in choosing the appropriate forum also according to the seriousness of the crime, the Constitutional Court considered that it would be desirable, for the sake of fairness and transparency, that criteria to be used by the public prosecutor should be established.
Section 120A (2) of the Medical and Kindred Professions Ordinance, Chapter 31 of the Laws of Malta reads as follows:
“(2) Every person charged with an offence against this Ordinance shall be tried in the Criminal Court or before the Court of Magistrates (Malta) or the Court of Magistrates (Gozo), as the Attorney General may direct, and if he is found guilty shall, in respect of each offence, be liable –
(a) on conviction by the Criminal Court –
(i) where the offence consists in selling or dealing in a drug listed under Part A of the Third Schedule contrary to the provisions of this article, or in an offence under subarticle (1)(f), or of the offence of possession of a drug, contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance, under such circumstances that the court is satisfied that such possession was not for the exclusive use of the offender, or of the offences mentioned in subarticles (1C) or (1D) or (1E), to imprisonment for life:
Provided that:
(aa) where the Court is of the opinion that, when it takes into account the age of the offender, the previous conduct of the offender, the quantity of the drug and the nature and quantity of the equipment or materials, if any, involved in the offence and all other circumstances of the offence, the punishment of imprisonment for life would not be appropriate; or
(bb) where the verdict of the jury is not unanimous, then the Court may sentence the person convicted to the punishment of imprisonment for a term of not less than four years but not exceeding thirty years and to a fine (multa) of not less than two thousand three hundred and twenty-nine euros and thirty-seven cents (2,329.37) but not exceeding one hundred and sixteen thousand four hundred and sixty-eight euros and sixty-seven cents (116,468.67); and
(ii) for any other offence to imprisonment for a term of not less than twelve months but not exceeding ten years and to a fine (multa) of not less than four hundred and sixty-five euros and eighty-seven cents (465.87), but not exceeding twenty-three thousand two hundred and ninety-three euros and seventy-three cents (23,293.73); or
(b) on conviction by the Court of Magistrates () or the Court of Magistrates (Gozo) -
(i) where the offence consists in selling or dealing in a drug listed under Part A of the Third Schedule to this Ordinance contrary to the provisions of this article, or in an offence under subarticle (1)(f), or of the offence of possession of a drug, contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance, under such circumstances that the court is satisfied that such possession was not for the exclusive use of the offender, or of the offences mentioned in subarticles (1C) or (1D) or (1E), to imprisonment for a term of not less than six months but not exceeding ten years and to a fine (multa) of not less than four hundred and sixty-five euro and eighty-seven cents (465.87) but not exceeding eleven thousand six hundred and forty-six euros and eighty-seven cents (11,646.87); and
(ii) for any other offence, to imprisonment for a term of not less than three months but not exceeding twelve months, or to a fine (multa) of not less than four hundred and sixty-five euro and eighty-seven cents (465.87) but not exceeding two thousand three hundred and twenty-nine euros and thirty-seven cents (2,329.37) or to both such imprisonment and fine, and in every case of conviction for an offence against this Ordinance, all articles in respect of which the offence was committed shall be forfeited to the Government, and any such forfeited article shall, if the court so orders, be destroyed or otherwise disposed of as may be provided in the order: (...)”
In short, under that provision, the maximum punishment before the Criminal Court (for the offence with which the applicant was charged) may vary between four years and life imprisonment, whereas before the Court of Magistrates it may vary between six months and ten years.
Section 120A (7), in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“(7) The provisions of Articles 21 and 28A of the Criminal Code and the provisions of the Probation Act shall not be applicable in respect of any person convicted of an offence as referred to in sub-article (2)(a)(i) or (b)(i):
Provided that where, in respect of any offence mentioned in this subarticle, after considering all the circumstances of the case including the amount and nature of the drug involved, the character of the person concerned, the number and nature of any previous convictions, including convictions in respect of which an order was made under the Probation Act, the court is of the opinion that the offender intended to consume the drug on the spot with others, the court may decide not to apply the provisions of this subarticle:
Provided further that an offender may only benefit once from the provisions of the above proviso.”
Article 28 A of the Criminal Code, Chapter 9 of the Laws of Malta, contains the provision for sentences of imprisonment to be suspended and Article 21 of the same code provides for the handing down of sentences below the prescribed minimum. In so far as relevant, Article 21 reads as follows:
“... the court may, for special and exceptional reasons to be expressly stated in detail in the decision, apply in its discretion any lesser punishment which it deems adequate, notwithstanding that a minimum punishment is prescribed in the article contemplating the particular offence ...”
Article 430 of the Criminal Code provides that the Attorney General acts as the prosecutor before the Criminal Court. Section 91 (3) of the Constitution of Malta provides as follows:
“In the exercise of his powers to institute, undertake and discontinue criminal proceedings and of any other powers conferred on him by any law in terms which authorise him to exercise that power in his individual judgment the Attorney General shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority.”