The case originated in three applications (nos. 44699/13, 47040/13 and 65283/13) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Azerbaijani nationals, Mr Ramin Rasim oglu Hajili (“the first applicant”), Ms Nargiz Tofig gizi Yagublu (“the second applicant”) and Mr Agil Arif oglu Aliyev (“the third applicant”), on various dates in 2013 (see Appendix).
.  On 23 April 2015 Ms Yagublu (application no. 47040/13) passed away. Her sister, Nigar Tofig gizi Yagublu, informed the Court of her wish to pursue the application introduced by the late applicant.
The applicants were represented by Mr I. Aliyev, a lawyer practicing in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Asgarov.
On 29 August 2014 the complaints concerning Articles 5, 6 and 11 of the Convention, raised in all three applications, and Article 10 of the Convention, raised only in application no. 65283/13, were communicated to the Government. On the same date the remainder of all three applications was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
.  The Government objected to the examination of the applications by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicants’ dates of birth and places of residence are given in the Appendix.
On 12 January, 26 January and 10 March 2013 demonstrations were planned to be held in Baku. It appears that the organisers of the demonstrations gave no proper prior notice to the relevant authority, the Baku City Executive Authority (“the BCEA”). Information about the demonstrations was disseminated through Facebook or the press.
According to the applicants, the demonstrations were intended to be peaceful and were conducted in a peaceful manner. The demonstrations of 12 January and 10 March 2013 were aimed at protesting about the deaths of soldiers in the army, while the demonstration of 26 January 2013 condemned the use of force by the police against the participants of previous demonstrations.
Each applicant attended one of the demonstrations (see Appendix), but shortly after they had begun the police started to disperse those who had gathered. All three applicants were arrested during the dispersal operations and were taken to police stations.
According to the second applicant, during the demonstration she was giving an interview to the media and the moment of her arrest was recorded.
.  The applicants were questioned at the police stations they had been taken to.
On the day of each applicant’s arrest administrative-offence reports (inzibati xəta haqqında protokol) were issued, which stated that the applicants had committed an administrative offence under Article 298.2 of the Code of Administrative Offences (“the CAO”) (participation in a public assembly that was not organised in accordance with the law).
According to the first and second applicants, they were never served with copies of the administrative-offence reports or with other documents from their case files.
According to the first and third applicants, they were not given access to a lawyer after their arrest or while they were in police custody.
According to a statement (ərizə) written by the second applicant at the police station on the day of her arrest, she refused the services of a lawyer.
The first applicant was released after being kept in police custody for a few hours, subject to an undertaking to reappear at the police station two days later.
The third applicant was taken to a trial court directly from the police station on the day following his arrest. The first applicant was brought before a first-instance court on the date he returned to the police station. The second applicant was brought before a court on the day of her arrest; however, the hearing was postponed for two days to allow her to hire a lawyer of her own choosing.
A State-funded lawyer was appointed to assist the first applicant. The second and third applicants were not represented by a lawyer. According to documents from the case file of the second applicant, on the day the hearing recommenced, the lawyer she had hired failed to appear and she decided to defend herself in person.
None of the material submitted to the Court contains any records showing that the State-funded lawyer, Mr V.M., made any oral or written submissions on behalf of the first applicant.
The only witnesses questioned during the court hearing with respect to the second applicant were the police officers who, according to the official records, had arrested her or had drawn up the administrative-offence report. The police officers testified that the applicant had staged an unauthorised demonstration. No witnesses were questioned by the courts in the first and third applicants’ cases.
The first-instance courts found that the applicants had participated in unauthorised demonstrations. The applicants were convicted under Article 298.2 of the CAO and sentenced to fines of 450, 500 and 600 Azerbaijani manats (AZN) respectively (see Appendix).
On various dates the applicants lodged appeals with the Baku Court of Appeal, arguing that their convictions had been in violation of their rights because the demonstrations in which they had participated had been spontaneous and peaceful. The applicants also complained that their arrests had been unlawful and that the hearings before the first-instance courts had not been fair. They asked the Baku Court of Appeal to quash the first-instance courts’ decisions in their cases.
The applicants were not represented before the Baku Court of Appeal by a lawyer.
.  The appellate court refused to grant the applicants’ requests to hear evidence from particular witnesses in their favour, without giving any reasons for the refusal. In the case of the second applicant the court in a similar way additionally refused to examine video recordings made by the media during her arrest.
On various dates the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the applicants’ appeals and upheld the decisions of the first-instance courts (see Appendix).
On 8 August 2014 Mr I. Aliyev, who represented all three applicants before the Court, was arrested on charges of large-scale tax evasion, abuse of power and illegal entrepreneurship. On the same day he was detained pending trial. The circumstances relating to Mr Aliyev’s arrest and detention are the subject of a separate application brought by him before the Court (application no. 68762/14).
On 8 and 9 August 2014 the prosecuting authorities conducted a search of Mr Aliyev’s home and office. During the search the domestic authorities seized a large number of documents, including all the case files relating to the pending applications before the Court, which were in Mr Aliyev’s possession as a representative. The files relating to the present cases, which, it appears, included copies of all the documents and correspondence between the Court and the parties, were also seized in their entirety. No adequate inventory of the seized document files relating to the Court proceedings was made in the search and seizure records of 8 and 9 August 2014.
.  On an unspecified date Mr Aliyev lodged a complaint with the Nasimi District Court, claiming that the search had been unlawful. He further complained about the seizure of the documents and files relating to the pending court proceedings before the Court and the domestic courts.
.  On 12 September 2014 the Nasimi District Court dismissed Mr Aliyev’s claim. It held that the searches had been conducted in accordance with the relevant law. As to the seizure of the documents relating to the cases pending before the Court and the domestic courts, it found that they could not be returned to the applicants at that stage of the proceedings. Following an appeal, on 23 September 2014 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld the first-instance court’s decision of 12 September 2014.
.  On 25 October 2014 the investigating authorities returned a number of the case files concerning the applications lodged with the Court, including the files relating to the present cases, to Mr Aliyev’s lawyer. The investigator’s relevant decision specified that “since it [had] been established that among the documents seized on 8 and 9 August 2014 there [had been] files concerning applications by a number of individuals and organisations lodged with the European Court of Human Rights, which ha[d] no relation to the substance of the criminal proceedings [against Mr Intigam Aliyev], [those files] ha[d] been delivered to [Mr Aliyev’s lawyer,] Mr Javad Javadov”.
At the time of the applicants’ arrest, Article 5 § IV of the Law on Freedom of Assembly of 13 November 1998 provided that no prior written notification was required for spontaneous assemblies.
Before amendments were introduced by Law no. 462-IVQD of 2 November 2012, a breach of the rules on the organisation and holding of assemblies had been punishable under Article 298 of the Code of Administrative Offences of 2000 (“the CAO”) by a reprimand or a fine of AZN 7 to AZN 13.
Law no. 462-IVQD of 2 November 2012, which entered into force on 1 January 2013, introduced new wording to Article 298 of the CAO on breaching the rules on the organisation and holding of assemblies. Under that amendment, participation in an assembly organised in breach of such rules became explicitly punishable under Article 298.2 of the CAO and punishments in the form of administrative detention of up to fifteen days or community service were introduced for the first time. In addition, the fine for a breach of the rules on the organisation and holding of assemblies was increased and the amounts fixed as follows: between AZN 300 and 600 for participants of an assembly; AZN 1,500 to AZN 3,000 for individuals who organise an assembly; AZN 3,000 to AZN 6,000 for persons in charge (vəzifəli şəxslər) who organise an assembly; and between AZN 15,000 and AZN 30,000 for legal entities involved in the organisation of an assembly.
Pursuant to Presidential Order (sərəncam) no. 1866 of 1 December 2011, which was in force until 1 September 2013, the minimum wage in Azerbaijan was AZN 93.5.
The relevant extracts of the Resolution 1917 (2013) of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, “The honouring of obligations and commitments by Azerbaijan”, read as follows:
“... 10. Regrettably, there is no political dialogue with the opposition parties outside parliament. The Assembly is concerned by the restrictive climate for the activities of the extra-parliamentary opposition, which complains about limitations imposed on freedom of expression and freedom of assembly and the lack of access to the public media.
The establishment of an inclusive political system and a truly competitive and unrestrictive political environment requires full implementation of basic freedoms, including freedom of expression, freedom of assembly and freedom of association. The situation in Azerbaijan is preoccupying and the Assembly expresses its deep concern in this regard.
Recently adopted amendments to the Criminal Code and the Administrative Code, which have increased penalties for the organisers of, and participants in, “unauthorised” gatherings, raise concern. Considering the authorities’ ongoing blanket ban on protests in the Baku city centre, these amendments are likely to have a further negative impact on freedom of assembly and freedom of expression. The restrictive use of certain articles of the Criminal Code, in particular Articles 221 and 233, against participants in peaceful, albeit unauthorised, demonstrations, is another matter of concern. ...”
The relevant extracts of the Report (CommDH(2013)14) of 6 August 2013 by Nils Muižnieks, the Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe, following his visit to Azerbaijan from 22 to 24 May 2013, read as follows:
“... 76. The Commissioner is deeply concerned by the recent amendments to the Law on Freedom of Assembly, the Criminal Code and the Code of Administrative Offences, which further erode the right to freedom of assembly. The sanctions which can now be imposed, coupled with the fact that local authorities have not authorised a single rally in Baku city centre in recent years, clearly have a chilling effect on the organisation of or participation in demonstrations.
The Commissioner is of the view that participants in peaceful assemblies should not be sanctioned for the mere fact of being present at and actively participating in the demonstration in question, provided they do not do anything illegal, violent or obscene in the course of it. The Commissioner therefore urges the authorities to ensure that no disproportionate sanction, which would undermine the fundamental right to peaceful assembly, is imposed. ...”
For a summary of other relevant provisions concerning administrative proceedings, the relevant provisions concerning the organisation and holding of public assemblies, and the relevant extracts of international documents see the judgment in the case of Gafgaz Mammadov v. Azerbaijan (no. 60259/11, §§ 27-42, 15 October 2015).