The case originated in an application (no. 16179/14) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Sergey Georgiyevich Butrin (“the applicant”), on 28 January 2014.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Butrin, a lawyer practising in the town of Rostov-on-Don. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant argued, in particular, that the conditions of his detention in a correctional colony were unsuitable for a blind detainee such as himself, and that he had no effective remedy by which to complain in this regard.
On 3 September 2014 the complaints concerning the conditions of the applicant’s detention in a correctional colony and the lack of effective remedies were communicated to the Government, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible.
On the same day, in response to the applicant’s request, the Court granted priority to the application under Rule 41 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant was born in 1949 in the Khabarovsk Region. He is serving his prison sentence in a correctional colony in the village of Kochubeyevskoe, Stavropol Region.
On 9 March 2006 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of aggravated murder, robbery and firearms possession. He remained in detention throughout the investigation and trial.
On 28 July 2006 the Stavropol Regional Court found him guilty as charged and sentenced him to nineteen years’ imprisonment in a correctional colony.
On 10 February 2010 the applicant was sent to serve his sentence in correctional colony no. IK-17/1 in the village of Kochubeyevskoe, Stavropol Region (“the correctional colony”).
When the applicant arrived at the colony the resident doctor noted that he had a first-degree disability: he was totally blind as a result of mature cataracts in both eyes. His blindness, which had developed during his detention, meant that he was unable to move around alone. In addition, he was suffering from coronary disease, hypertension, gallstones and chronic pancreatitis. He was included on a list of detainees requiring enhanced medical attention.
The applicant was assigned to colony unit no. 10 for special-needs detainees, which comprised a separate dormitory. It housed forty-six detainees with various disabilities or serious illnesses. The unit had a dormitory measuring 149.6 square metres, a dining room, a toilet, showers, and several offices for administrative and medical personnel. A large part of the dormitory floor area was taken up by furniture such as bunk beds, bedside tables and chairs. According to a certificate issued by the correctional colony on 13 October 2014, each detainee was afforded 2.82 square metres of living space. As is apparent from the documents and photographs submitted by the Government, the premises were not adapted for visually impaired or blind persons.
The authorities assigned another inmate with cardiac problems to assist the applicant with his basic needs. The inmate did not receive any remuneration for the assistance he provided to the applicant. He helped the applicant to move around the dormitory and to take showers, and guided him in the dining room. The applicant had no prison work; he remained in the unit throughout the day.
According to the applicant, he faced particular difficulties in orientating himself in the correctional colony. He regularly stumbled over objects, slipped and fell. Such helplessness induced anguish and despair. In 2011 he was diagnosed as having an emotionally unstable personality disorder.
On 21 February 2011 and 19 November 2012 a medical commission confirmed the applicant’s disability. They recommended that the authorities provide him with a walking stick, a white cane, a player for audiobooks designed for blind people, a vocal clinical thermometer and a vocal tonometer. The recommendations were never enforced. According to two entries in his medical record, on 30 November 2011 and 23 January 2013 officials asked the applicant whether he wished to receive those items. The applicant allegedly refused, but did not agree to make a written note to that effect in the medical record.
In September 2014 the inmate who had been assisting the applicant was released from detention and the applicant was left to fend for himself. According to a certificate issued by the authorities, he refused the assistance of other inmates.
On 8 February 2013 the applicant asked for a medical examination to determine whether his state of health warranted his early release.
On 5 April 2013 a medical commission held that as blindness was one of the diseases listed in Government Decree no. 54 of 6 February 2004 that may warrant release from a correctional institution, the applicant could be relieved from serving his sentence.
Relying on the conclusion of the medical commission, the applicant lodged an application with the Kochubeevskoe District Court, Stavropol Region, for release on health grounds. On 16 April 2013 the District Court dismissed the application. Referring to Ruling no. 21 of the Supreme Court of Russia dated 20 December 2011 (see paragraph 26 below), the court noted that the fact that the applicant’s illness was included in the list provided for by Government Decree no. 54 did not automatically mean that he would be released. The court cited the gravity of the crimes committed by the applicant and the length of the prison term he had yet to serve. Taking those two factors into account, the court concluded that the applicant should remain in the correctional colony. The Stavropol Regional Court upheld that judgment on appeal.
On 10 July 2014 the Supreme Court of Russia rejected a cassation appeal lodged by the applicant without examining it on the merits. It found that the applicant had failed to lodge the appeal within the statutory timelimit.
The relevant provisions of domestic law governing conditions of detention in correctional facilities in the Russian Federation and provisions establishing the legal avenues for complaining about detention conditions are set out in the cases of Reshetnyak v. Russia (no. 56027/10, §§ 35-46, 8 January 2013) and Dirdizov v. Russia (no. 41461/10, §§ 47-62, 27 November 2012).
The Russian Code of Execution of Sentences sets out certain requirements for the detention of disabled detainees. While Article 99 § 1 of the Code provides for a minimum standard of 2 sq. m of personal space for male convicts in correctional colonies and 3 sq. m of personal space in prison health-care facilities, Article 99 § 6 indicates that inmates with a category 1 or 2 disability are entitled to “improved accommodation and living conditions”. Article 88 § 6 provides that disabled detainees have a right to buy food and articles of primary necessity without any limitations. Article 90 allows ill or disabled inmates to receive additional parcels or packages, including ones containing medication, the content and quantity of which must be determined by medical specialists. Under Article 99 §§ 6 and 7 disabled inmates must be provided with food, clothing and toiletries free of charge. They are also entitled to an enriched diet.
Under the Internal Regulations of Correctional Facilities adopted by the Russian Ministry of Justice on 3 November 2005, disabled inmates are exempted from having to participate in daily roll calls. Their presence is noted in whichever part of the facility they are at the time.
Russian law has no specific rules or requirements regulating the detention of visually impaired or blind detainees.
Article 175 § 6 of the Penitentiary Russian Code of Execution of Sentences provides as follows:
“A detainee who has acquired a serious illness [other than psychiatric] which prevents him from serving his sentence may lodge a request with a court for [early] release ... [This request] must be lodged by the detainee through the administration of the penal facility ... The said request must be accompanied by the expert opinion of a medical commission or a socio-medical expert institution and the detainee’s prison record.”
On 6 February 2004 the Government of the Russian Federation adopted Decree no. 54 on illnesses warranting release on health grounds. The list of diseases included full blindness.
In accordance with paragraph 8 of Ruling no. 21 of the Supreme Court of Russia of 20 December 2011, when deciding whether a detainee should be released on health grounds the court should check whether the detainee’s disease is listed in Government Decree no. 54 of 6 February 2004. The court must also take into account other relevant circumstances.
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol were adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 13 December 2006. Russia ratified the Convention on 25 September 2012. It did not ratify the Optional Protocol.
Article 1 of the Convention provides:
“The purpose of the present Convention is to promote, protect and ensure the full and equal enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by all persons with disabilities, and to promote respect for their inherent dignity.
Persons with disabilities include those who have long-term physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairments which in interaction with various barriers may hinder their full and effective participation in society on an equal basis with others.”
The relevant part of Article 14 provides:
“2. States Parties shall ensure that if persons with disabilities are deprived of their liberty through any process, they are, on an equal basis with others, entitled to guarantees in accordance with international human rights law and shall be treated in compliance with the objectives and principles of this Convention, including by provision of reasonable accommodation.”
The relevant part of Article 15 provides:
“2. States Parties shall take all effective legislative, administrative, judicial or other measures to prevent persons with disabilities, on an equal basis with others, from being subjected to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”
The requirements regulating personal mobility are laid down in Article 20, which reads as follows:
“States Parties shall take effective measures to ensure personal mobility with the greatest possible independence for persons with disabilities, including by:
Facilitating the personal mobility of persons with disabilities in the manner and at the time of their choice, and at affordable cost;
Facilitating access by persons with disabilities to quality mobility aids, devices, assistive technologies and forms of live assistance and intermediaries, including by making them available at affordable cost;
Providing training in mobility skills to persons with disabilities and to specialist staff working with persons with disabilities;
Encouraging entities that produce mobility aids, devices and assistive technologies to take into account all aspects of mobility for persons with disabilities.”
In his Interim Report of 28 July 2008 (A/63/175), the then UN Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, Mr Manfred Nowak, stated as follows:
“50. ... Persons with disabilities often find themselves in [situations of powerlessness], for instance when they are deprived of their liberty in prisons or other places ... In a given context, the particular disability of an individual may render him or her more likely to be in a dependant situation and make him or her an easier target of abuse ...
...
States have the further obligation to ensure that treatment or conditions in detention do not directly or indirectly discriminate against persons with disabilities. If such discriminatory treatment inflicts severe pain or suffering, it may constitute torture or other form of ill-treatment. ...
The Special Rapporteur notes that under article 14, paragraph 2, of the CRPD, States have the obligation to ensure that persons deprived of their liberty are entitled to ‘provision of reasonable accommodation’. This implies an obligation to make appropriate modifications in the procedures and physical facilities of detention centres ... to ensure that persons with disabilities enjoy the same rights and fundamental freedoms as others, when such adjustments do not impose disproportionate or undue burden. The denial or lack of reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities may create detention ... conditions that amount to ill-treatment and torture.”
The relevant extracts from the 3rd General Report (CPT/Inf (93) 12; 4 June 1993) by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (“the CPT”) read as follows:
“64. Certain specific categories of particularly vulnerable prisoners can be identified. Prison health care services should pay especial attention to their needs.”
...
iv) prisoners unsuited for continued detention
 “70. Typical examples of this kind of prisoner are those who are the subject of a shortterm fatal prognosis, who are suffering from a serious disease which cannot be properly treated in prison conditions, who are severely handicapped or of advanced age. The continued detention of such persons in a prison environment can create an intolerable situation. In cases of this type, it lies with the prison doctor to draw up a report for the responsible authority, with a view to suitable alternative arrangements being made.
...”
“76. To ensure the presence of an adequate number of staff, nurses are frequently assisted by medical orderlies, some of whom are recruited from among the prison officers. At the various levels, the necessary experience should be passed on by the qualified staff and periodically updated.
Sometimes prisoners themselves are allowed to act as medical orderlies. No doubt, such an approach can have the advantage of providing a certain number of prisoners with a useful job. Nevertheless, it should be seen as a last resort. Further, prisoners should never be involved in the distribution of medicines.
Finally, the CPT would suggest that the specific features of the provision of health care in a prison environment may justify the introduction of a recognised professional speciality, both for doctors and for nurses, on the basis of postgraduate training and regular in-service training.”
Recommendation no. R (98) 7 of the Committee of Ministers of 8 April 1998 concerning the ethical and organisational aspects of health care in prison, provides, in so far as relevant:
Persons unsuited to continued detention: serious physical handicap, advanced age, short term fatal prognosis
“50. Prisoners with serious physical handicaps and those of advanced age should be accommodated in such a way as to allow as normal a life as possible and should not be segregated from the general prison population. Structural alterations should be effected to assist the wheelchair-bound and handicapped on lines similar to those in the outside environment. ...”
Recommendation CM/Rec (2012) 5 of the Committee of Ministers of 12 April 2012 on the European Code of Ethics for Prison Staff, provides, in particular:
Care and assistance
“19. Prison staff shall be sensitive to the special needs of individuals, such as ... disabled prisoners, and any prisoner who might be vulnerable for other reasons, and make every effort to provide for their needs.
Prison staff shall ensure the full protection of the health of persons in their custody and, in particular, shall take immediate action to secure medical attention whenever required.
Prison staff shall provide for the safety, hygiene and appropriate nourishment of persons in the course of their custody. They shall make every effort to ensure that conditions in prison comply with the requirements of relevant international standards, in particular the European Prison Rules.
Prison staff shall work towards facilitating the social reintegration of prisoners through a programme of constructive activities, individual interaction and assistance.”