The case originated in an application (no. 7997/08) against the Republic of Austria lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Austrian national, Mr Franz Kuttner (“the applicant”), on 8 February 2008.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was initially represented by Mr H. Blum, a lawyer practising in Linz. After the application was communicated to the Government, Mr H. Graupner, a lawyer practising in Vienna, took over the applicant’s legal representation. The Austrian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr H. Tichy, Head of the International Law Department at the Federal Ministry for Europe, Integration and Foreign Affairs.
The applicant complained under Articles 5 § 4 and 6 § 1 of the Convention of the length of the proceedings relating to his application for release from the institution for mentally ill offenders. He further relied on Article 13 of the Convention.
On 30 April 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1950 and currently lives in Traun.
On 21 January 2005 the Linz Regional Court convicted the applicant of having deliberately caused severe bodily harm and sentenced him to six years’ imprisonment. The court found that the applicant had beaten his 80year-old mother by kicking and punching her face, head and thorax, which resulted in a severe and lasting infirmity. The applicant had been convicted on seven previous occasions, four of which involved similar offences of violence. Relying on a report by a psychiatric expert, the court found that even though the applicant was responsible for his acts, he was suffering from a grave mental disorder, was dangerous to the public and was likely to re-offend. For these reasons, the court ordered the applicant’s detention in an institution for mentally ill offenders in accordance with section 21 § 2 of the Criminal Code, in addition to the term of imprisonment. Given the time the applicant had served in detention on remand, the Court stated that the applicant’s detention pursuant to the prison sentence was likely to end on 7 May 2010.
.  On 7 June 2005 the Linz Court of Appeal (“the Court of Appeal”) dismissed the applicant’s appeal against his sentence. On the same day the applicant was placed in Garsten detention centre, an institution for mentally ill offenders.
.  On 31 March 2006, in a first set of proceedings in which the applicant requested his conditional release from the institution, the Steyr Regional Court (“the Regional Court”) ordered that the applicant remain in the institution. The Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal against this decision on 9 May 2006.
.  On 10 January 2007 the applicant applied for the lifting of the order to detain him at Garsten detention centre (under section 21 § 2 of the Criminal Code) in order to serve his sentence in an ordinary prison.
.  On 12 January 2007 the Regional Court asked the Garsten prison administration and its psychiatric and psychological service to transmit further information on the applicant, which it received on 9 March 2007. On 12 March 2007 it ordered a fresh psychiatric expert report and instructed the expert to submit the report before 11 June 2007.
.  On 23 June 2007 the applicant filed an application with the Court of Appeal for the setting of a time-limit (Fristsetzungsantrag) under section 91 of the Court Act (Gerichtsorganisationsgesetz) for the Regional Court to decide on his application, as the last determination of the continuing need to detain him had taken place on 9 May 2006, and he had not yet received a decision concerning his application of 10 January 2007.
.  On an unspecified date, the applicant was transferred to a psychiatric institution in Vienna. It appears, however, that this transfer was only temporary, and on an unspecified date, the applicant was transferred back to Garsten detention centre.
.  After having been urged by the Regional Court to deliver her report, the expert replied on 3 July 2007 that she would submit it as soon as possible. She did so on 10 July 2007 and explained that the applicant had meanwhile been transferred to an institution in Vienna, for which reason she had not been able to examine him earlier. She found that the applicant, even though he had started to respond positively to his therapy, was still suffering from a serious mental disorder and that there was still the risk that the applicant would commit dangerous acts of violence.
On 30 July 2007 the Court of Appeal granted the applicant’s application under section 91 of the Court Act and ordered the Regional Court to take a decision by 3 August 2007 at the latest. It held that in the light of the chronology of events in this case, the Regional Court had not fulfilled its duty to take a decision within a reasonable amount of time.
.  On 31 July 2007, after having held an oral hearing with the applicant present, the Regional Court ordered the continuation of his detention in an institution for mentally ill offenders. On the basis of the expert opinion obtained, the court found that the applicant was still dangerous and likely to re-offend. It dismissed the applicant’s request for the hearing of two prison officers as witnesses, since these persons could not make a relevant assessment in this respect and that therefore the applicant’s request lacked a relevant issue on which evidence should be taken (relevantes Beweisthema).
.  On 16 August 2007 the applicant appealed against this decision to the Court of Appeal maintaining his view that the placement in a psychiatric institution was no longer justified. He maintained, furthermore, that the length of the proceedings for the determination of this issue was in breach of Articles 5 and 6 of the Convention.
.  On 10 September 2007 the Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal. On the basis of the evidence obtained, the expert report of a psychiatrist, reports by the head of Garsten detention centre and its psychiatric and psychological service, it found that despite progress in the applicant’s therapy he still suffered from a grave mental disorder and was likely to commit acts of violence in the future. The Court of Appeal also considered that the Regional Court had correctly dismissed the applicant’s request for the taking of further evidence. As to the applicant’s argument that the proceedings related to his request had lasted an unreasonably long time, the Court of Appeal found that, according to the relevant caselaw, the condition under section 25 § 3 of the Penal Code for annual review of the further necessity of detention in an institution was complied with if such a review had been started by the competent court within the one-year period, whereas it was not necessary that the decision following the review be taken within that time-limit.
.  On 28 February 2008 the applicant again applied for the order for psychiatric detention to be lifted, and to be transferred to an ordinary prison. After a further application by the applicant under section 91 of the Court Act, the application was finally examined on 10 September 2009, when the Regional Court ordered the termination of the applicant’s psychiatric detention, suspended the remaining seven months of his prison sentence and released him subject to a number of conditions.
.  Section 21 of the Criminal Code (under the heading “preventive measures”) as in force at the relevant time provided as follows:
“(1)  If a person commits an offence punishable with a term of imprisonment exceeding one year, and if the person cannot be punished for the sole reason that he committed the offence under the influence of a state of mind excluding responsibility (section 11) resulting from a serious mental or emotional abnormality, the court shall order him to be placed in an institution for mentally ill offenders, if in view of his person, his condition and the nature of the offence it is to be feared that he will otherwise, under the influence of his mental or emotional abnormality, commit a criminal offence with serious consequences.
(2)  If such a fear exists, an order for placement in an institution for mentally ill offenders shall also be made in respect of a person who, while not lacking responsibility, commits an offence punishable by a term of imprisonment exceeding one year under the influence of his severe mental or emotional abnormality. In such a case the placement is to be ordered at the same time as the sentence is passed.”
Section 25 of the Criminal Code, as far as relevant, provides as follows:
“(1)  Preventive measures are to be ordered for an indefinite period. They are to be implemented for as long as is required by their purpose ...
(2)  The termination of preventive measures shall be decided by the court.
(3)  The court must of its own motion examine at least once yearly whether the placement in an institution for mentally ill offenders ... is still necessary.”
According to the case-law of the Supreme Court, section 25 § 3 is complied with if the review of the necessity of further detention has started within one year of the last decision on that matter. The law guarantees an examination at regular intervals, but does not fix a time-limit for the actual decision. It is therefore not necessary that the decisions of first and/or second instance be taken within a one-year time-limit (Supreme Court, judgment of 30 September 1980, 10 Os 79/80).
.  By virtue of section 46 of the Criminal Code, conditional release from prison is possible after half or two thirds of the sentence respectively have been served, subject to certain conditions.
.  Section 91 of the Court Act provides for interlocutory applications whereby a court is required to request a higher instance to impose an adequate time-limit for taking a procedural measure which the lower court has failed to take to date.
In its 75th plenary meeting, the United Nations General Assembly on 17 December 1991 adopted the Principles for the Protection of Persons with Mental Illness and for the Improvement of Mental Health Care, (Resolution A/RES/46/119), which read in the relevant parts as follows:
“Application
The present Principles shall be applied without discrimination on any grounds, such as disability, race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national, ethnic or social origin, legal or social status, age, property or birth.
...
Principle 17
Review body
The review body shall periodically review the cases of involuntary patients at reasonable intervals as specified by domestic law.
An involuntary patient may apply to the review body for release or voluntary status, at reasonable intervals as specified by domestic law.
At each review, the review body shall consider whether the criteria for involuntary admission set out in paragraph 1 of principle 16 above are still satisfied, and, if not, the patient shall be discharged as an involuntary patient.
If at any time the mental health practitioner responsible for the case is satisfied that the conditions for the retention of a person as an involuntary patient are no longer satisfied, he or she shall order the discharge of that person as such a patient.
A patient or his personal representative or any interested person shall have the right to appeal to a higher court against a decision that the patient be admitted to, or be retained in, a mental health facility.
...
Principle 20
Criminal offenders
The present Principle applies to persons serving sentences of imprisonment for criminal offences, or who are otherwise detained in the course of criminal proceedings or investigations against them, and who are determined to have a mental illness or who it is believed may have such an illness.”