The case originated in an application (no. 57435/09) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Mr Saulius Paulikas (“the applicant”), on 19 October 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. Kepenis, a lawyer practising in Klaipėda. The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Bubnytė.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had not received a fair trial because of media publications and comments by State officials concerning the criminal case against him, contrary to Article 6 §§ 1 and 2 of the Convention.
On 24 February 2016 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1980 and lives in Skuodas. He worked as a traffic police officer in the Skuodas Region.
On 7 November 2007, at around 2 p.m., three ten-year-old children were hit by a car in the village of Aleksandrija in the Skuodas Region. Two of the children died at the scene and the third died later that day in hospital. The car left the scene of the crash immediately. A criminal investigation was opened the same day.
The following morning, at around 7 a.m., the applicant turned himself in to the police and confessed that he had been driving the car. The applicant submitted that he had not drunk any alcohol before the accident and that he was unable to give the exact speed he had been going. He stated that he had seen a group of children walking in front of him and “had briefly lost control of the car”, the car had gone off the road and “hit something”. The applicant submitted that he did not remember hitting the children “because everything had happened very fast”. Nor did he remember anything that had happened after the accident because he “had been in shock”. He stated that the only thing he remembered was waking up in a summer house the morning after the accident, after which he had gone to the police to confess.
On the same day the applicant was served with an official notice that he was suspected of a breach of road traffic safety regulations which had resulted in the death of other persons (Article 281 § 5 of the Criminal Code) and of a failure to provide assistance to persons in a life-threatening situation (Article 144 of the Criminal Code). He was detained on remand and suspended from his post as a police officer.
The accident attracted considerable media attention. On 8 November 2007 one of the biggest national newspapers, Lietuvos rytas, published an article entitled “A police officer’s BMW crushed fourthgraders” (Policijos patrulio BMW traiškė ketvirtokus). The article stated that it was “suspected that the car was being driven by the police officer S. Paulikas” because the car belonged to his mother. It published interviews with several of the village’s residents, who described the details of the accident and alleged that the applicant may have been drunk. The article also mentioned that two years previously another police officer had caused a traffic accident in the Skuodas Region in which two children had received fatal injuries, but that the criminal proceedings against the officer had been discontinued.
On the same day the website of Lietuvos rytas carried an article headlined “After horrific accident in Skuodas Region [the Minister of the Interior] suggests [the Police Commissioner General] should resign”. It quoted a statement made by the Minister:
“Apologies will not suffice. The chief of the police must assume personal responsibility for this terrible incident. Especially as this was not the first time that police officers, who are supposed to stop traffic violations, have themselves caused terrible accidents. If I do not receive any reaction from the police chief, I believe that further efforts to improve the work of the police will be impossible and I will be ready to step down myself.”
The Police Commissioner General told journalists that he “accepted responsibility” because “the chief is responsible for what happens in the police organisation”. However, he expressed doubts whether “every such incident” should lead to the resignation of senior police officers.
The article also quoted the President’s spokesperson as questioning “how many more victims of the war on the roads will it take for politicians and State officials to finally notice and start solving the problems on the roads”. The article stated that the President was awaiting a response from the Ministry of the Interior and from the police on whether they had been making sufficient efforts to create “an atmosphere of absolute intolerance” for officers and public officials who abused intoxicating substances.
On 9 November 2007 Lietuvos rytas published a photograph of the applicant on its front page, with a caption reading “the man who caused the horrific accident (kraupios avarijos kaltininkas), S. Paulikas, turned himself in only after it was no longer possible to detect if he had been driving while drunk”. It also published an article entitled “Both [the Police Commissioner General] and [the Minister of the Interior] must resign”, providing comments from the leaders of the main political parties about who should take political responsibility for the accident and for the “ineffective road traffic safety policy”. That day and the day after Lietuvos rytas published details of over a dozen traffic accidents which had been caused by police officers since 2000, where it had been suspected that the officers had driven while being drunk and where people had been killed or seriously injured but the officers had received mild sentences or had escaped criminal liability altogether.
On 12 November 2007 the Police Commissioner General and the Minister of the Interior resigned. In an official statement issued on the same day, the President of Lithuania stated:
“Over the past few days the whole of Lithuania has shared the pain of [the three families] who lost their children in an accident caused by a police officer. The seventh of November was not only the day of their tragedy but also reflected a serious crisis within the police force. The tragedy in the Skuodas Region emphasised the problems ingrained in the system of interior affairs and further diminished public trust in the police. The loss of children’s lives, the crime committed by an officer and its circumstances require clear answers why that happened, and determined solutions. It is intolerable that crimes committed by officers are justified or punished by relatively mild sentences.
A police officer must feel a higher degree of responsibility than an ordinary citizen and he must by his actions set an example to society because he has been obliged by the State to protect public order and thus ensure the safety of society. A crime committed by an officer cannot be a simple statistical fact. It must be thoroughly examined and especially strictly evaluated (kruopščiai ištirtas ir itin griežtai įvertintas).
...”
The rest of the statement discussed problems within the police force, such as a lack of qualified personnel, inadequate training and low pay. It also urged all police officers to act in accordance with their mandate and asked the general public not to judge all officers on the basis of offences committed by a few.
Many more articles in the press reported on the accident, the suspicion that the applicant had driven while being drunk, the funerals of the three children, reactions within the village, public protests in front of Skuodas police station, previous traffic accidents caused by police officers, and the resignations of the Minister of the Interior and the Police Commissioner General.
On 29 December 2007 the applicant was charged with a breach of road traffic safety regulations while being under the influence of alcohol which resulted in the death of other persons (Article 281 § 6 of the Criminal Code) and with a failure to provide assistance to persons in a life-threatening situation (Article 144 of the Criminal Code).
According to the rules of territorial jurisdiction, the case against the applicant should have been examined by the Skuodas District Court. However, it was transferred to the Klaipėda District Court because two of the Skuodas District Court judges had participated in the pre-trial investigation and the chairperson of the court had previously worked with the applicant’s father.
On 31 January 2008 the Klaipėda District Court began its examination of the applicant’s case. The court heard testimony from the applicant, his colleague M.K., who had been in the car with the applicant at the time of the accident, and another colleague V.J., who had been driving in a different car and had helped the applicant to leave the scene of the accident. It also heard other workmates who had seen the applicant before or soon after the accident, as well as the waitress from the restaurant where the applicant and M.K. had had lunch before the accident, the parents of the three children who had died, residents of the village who had witnessed the accident, and several court-appointed experts.
The applicant admitted that he had been driving the car and that the three children had died as a result of the accident. However, he stated that he had not been drunk and had not exceeded the speed limit. He also argued that the accident had been caused by the weather and the reckless actions of some of the children.
All the hearings were held in public as none of the parties had asked for them to be closed, and several newspapers reported on the witness evidence. In a number of publications the applicant was called “a killer of children” (vaikų žudikas) and mocked for “suddenly losing his memory” (staiga sutriko atmintis) when testifying in court. The colleagues who testified in favour of the applicant were collectively called “defenders of the killer of children” (vaikų žudiko užtarėjai) who were “trying to get him off” (bando išsukti). The newspapers also expressed sympathy to the children’s families for having to “relive those cruel events”. Excerpts of the testimony of many of the witnesses, both in favour of and against the applicant, as well as the applicant’s final statement, were reprinted word-for-word.
On 17 March 2008 the Klaipėda District Court found the applicant guilty of both charges. The court established that the accident had occurred when the applicant had been under the influence of alcohol. It examined a video-recording from the restaurant where the applicant and M.K. had had lunch before the accident, showing that the two men had each drunk half a bottle of vodka. Another video-recording from the petrol station in which the applicant and M.K. had stopped after lunch showed the applicant buying two more bottles of vodka. Several witnesses – the waitress from the restaurant, some of the applicant’s colleagues, and people who had been present when the accident had happened – stated that the applicant had looked and sounded drunk. On the basis of that evidence, the court found that before the accident the applicant had consumed between 200 and 250 grams of alcohol. A court-appointed expert stated that after consuming so much alcohol the alcohol level in the applicant’s blood must definitely have been above the legally permitted threshold of 0.4 per mille (see paragraph 29 below). The court also noted that even though tests of the applicant’s blood and urine had not detected any traces of alcohol, they had not been reliable because they had been taken more than seventeen hours after the accident. The court held that since the applicant had deliberately hidden from the authorities during that period and had only given himself up the morning after the accident (see paragraph 7 above), he could not use the negative blood and urine tests to his advantage.
The Klaipėda District Court also established that at the time of the accident the applicant’s car must have been going at a speed of at least 105 km/h. A court-appointed expert examined the tyre marks at the scene of the accident, the damage done to nearby objects and the positions in which the three children had been found, and reconstructed the course of events of the accident. The applicant’s colleague V.J., who had been driving in the car behind the applicant, testified that he himself had been going at around 100 km/h but had been unable to keep up with the applicant. Several people who had been present at the accident also stated that the noise made by the applicant’s car had indicated a very high speed. The court noted that the speed limit in the village was 50 km/h and that this must have been known to the applicant, who had worked as a police officer in the area. The court concluded that the accident had been caused by the excessive speed of the applicant’s car and not by the weather or the actions of the children.
The Klaipėda District Court also found the applicant guilty of failing to provide assistance to persons in a life-threatening situation. The court noted that the applicant had not shown any interest in the condition of the three children or called an ambulance but had immediately fled the scene of the accident. The court observed that the obligation to help people in lifethreatening situations was enshrined in the Law on Police Activity, with which the applicant had had to comply. By failing to do so, he had breached Article 144 of the Criminal Code (see paragraphs 29-30 below).
The court found no mitigating circumstances in the applicant’s favour. However, the fact that the victims had been minors was considered as an aggravating circumstance. The court also took the applicant’s character and his behaviour during and after the accident into account: he had been under the influence of alcohol, three people had died as a result of his actions, he had fled from the scene of the accident, had not expressed any remorse, had attempted to mislead the court by providing contradictory testimony, and his actions had discredited the authority of the police. As a result, the Klaipėda District Court held that the applicant’s punishment should be close to the maximum provided by law (see paragraph 29 below). He was given a consolidated sentence of ten years’ imprisonment, prohibited from driving a vehicle for three years, and ordered to pay a total of 3,000,000 Lithuanian litai (LTL, approximately 870,000 euros (EUR)) in non-pecuniary damages to the families of the three children.
Reporting on the sentence, Lietuvos rytas quoted excerpts from the judgment and published a brief statement by the mother of one of the children, who expressed her overall satisfaction with the judgment but stated that criminal laws should be changed to provide for stricter punishments.
The applicant appealed against the judgment. Among other things, he argued that he had not received a fair trial because of a media campaign against him. He argued that the media had ridiculed and discouraged the witnesses who had testified in his favour and that journalists and high-level State officials had urged the court to order the strictest sentence possible. The applicant stated that this had prevented the first-instance court from examining his case objectively. The applicant also argued that he had been given a stricter punishment because he was a police officer, which had constituted discrimination on the grounds of social status.
On 5 December 2008 the Klaipėda Regional Court partly amended the first-instance judgment. It upheld the lower court’s findings concerning the applicant’s drunkenness and the speed of his car, and dismissed the applicant’s complaint concerning discrimination. However, the Klaipėda Regional Court accepted the applicant’s argument that the age of the victims should not have been considered as an aggravating circumstance because the criminal offence had not been premeditated. Accordingly, the court reduced the consolidated sentence to nine years’ imprisonment. It also considered that the amount of non-pecuniary damages awarded by the first-instance court had been excessive and not reasonably related to the applicant’s means. Instead, the court awarded a total of LTL 900,000 (approximately EUR 261,000) to the three families. The prohibition on driving a vehicle for three years was upheld.
In response to the applicant’s complaints concerning the lack of a fair trial, the Klaipėda Regional Court stated that the media interest in the case had been understandable owing to its sensitive nature and that the media could not be prevented from reporting on public hearings. However, the court held that the first-instance judgment had been well-reasoned and based on reliable evidence, so there were no grounds to find that the judges had been influenced by the media or the statements of any of the officials.
On 8 May 2009 the Supreme Court dismissed a cassation appeal by the applicant and upheld the judgment of the Klaipėda Regional Court. It stated that the appellate court had provided an adequate examination of the applicant’s complaints concerning the fairness of his trial and that there was no need to re-examine them.
In January 2015 the applicant was released on probation. According to the Government’s observations submitted to the Court on 21 June 2016, the applicant had up to that date paid a total of LTL 2,268 (approximately EUR 657) in non-pecuniary damages to the victims’ families.
The relevant provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania read:
“A person shall be presumed innocent until proved guilty according to the procedure established by law and declared guilty by an effective court judgment.
A person charged with committing a crime shall have the right to a public and fair hearing of his case by an independent and impartial court.
...
Punishment may be imposed or applied only on the grounds established by law.
...”
“In the Republic of Lithuania, justice shall be administered only by courts.
When administering justice, judges and courts shall be independent.
When considering cases, judges shall obey only the law.
...”
“Interference with the activities of a judge or court by any institutions of state power and governance, Members of the Seimas or other officials, political parties, political or public organisations or by citizens shall be prohibited and shall lead to liability provided for by law.
...”
At the material time, the relevant provisions of the Criminal Code read:
“...
When determining a punishment, a court shall take into consideration:
1)  the dangerousness of the criminal act;
2)  the form and type of guilt;
3)  the motives and objectives of the criminal act;
4)  the stage the criminal act was at;
5)  the character of the offender;
6)  the form and type of participation of the person as an accomplice in the commission of the criminal act;
7)  mitigating and aggravating circumstances.
...”
“A person who, having caused a threat or having an obligation to take care of the victim, fails to provide such assistance in a situation threatening the latter’s life, despite being able to provide the assistance, shall be punished by deprivation of the right to be employed in a certain position or to engage in a certain type of activities, or a fine, or restriction of liberty, or detention, or imprisonment for a term of up to two years.”
...
A person who, while driving a vehicle, violates the regulations governing road traffic safety or the operation of vehicles, where this results in an accident causing another person’s death, shall be punished by imprisonment for a term of up to eight years.
A person who commits the act indicated in paragraph 5 of this Article under the influence of alcohol, narcotic, psychotropic or other psychoactive substances, shall be punished by imprisonment for a term of between three and ten years.
...
A person shall be considered to be under the influence of alcohol if 0.4 per mille or more alcohol is found in his or her blood.
...”
At the material time, Article 21 § 1 (3) of the Law on Police Activity provided that a police officer had an obligation, inter alia, to immediately provide assistance to a person who had been a victim of a criminal offence or who was in a state of helplessness.
At the material time, Article 12 §§ 4 and 6 of the Law on Police Activity provided:
“4.  The Police Commissioner General is appointed by the President, at the proposal of the Minister of the Interior and the referral of the Government. The Police Commissioner General is directly subordinate to the Minister of the Interior and reports to the President.
...
The Police Commissioner General shall be removed from office:
1)  at his or her request;
2)  for health reasons, when an expert medical body has adopted a conclusion as to his or her inability to continue in service;
3)  for discrediting the title of State officer, when the Chief Official Ethics Commission has adopted a conclusion to that effect;
4)  if he or she is convicted of a criminal offence by a final court judgment;
5)  if his or her performance is assessed as unsatisfactory in line with the procedure provided by law;
6)  if he or she is transferred or elected to a different office;
7)  if he or she loses citizenship of the Republic of Lithuania;
8)  at the end of his or her term, if the term is not renewed.”
At the material time, Article 10 §§ 1-3 of the Law on the Government of the Republic of Lithuania provided:
“1.  Ministers are appointed and removed by the President, at the referral of the Prime Minister. ...
A minister has the right to resign. The minister shall inform the Prime Minister about his resignation in writing. The Prime Minister shall refer the resignation to the President within five working days. Until the referral of the resignation to the President, the minister has the right, at the suggestion of the Prime Minister, to withdraw his or her resignation.
A minister must resign when more than half of the members of the Seimas express a lack of confidence in him or her by secret ballot. ...”
In a ruling of 29 December 2004 the Constitutional Court held:
“The presumption of innocence consolidated in Paragraph 1 of Article 31 of the Constitution is one of the most important guarantees of the implementation of justice in a democratic state. It is a fundamental principle of the implementation of justice in the process of criminal cases, an important guarantee of human rights and freedoms. A person is considered as having not committed a crime until his or her guilt has been proven in accordance with a procedure established by law and he or she has been found guilty by a court judgment that has come into effect. The presumption of innocence is inseparably linked with respect for and the protection of other constitutional human rights and freedoms, as well as acquired rights. It is especially important that State institutions and officials respect the presumption of innocence. It should be noted that public persons should in general restrain from referring to a person as a criminal until the guilt of that person in committing the crime has been proven in accordance with the procedure established by law and he or she has found guilty by a court judgment that has come into effect. Otherwise, human honour and dignity may be violated and human rights and freedoms may be undermined.”
In a ruling of 18 September 2003 in criminal case no. 2A-2/2003 the Supreme Court held:
“The principle of the independence of judges and the courts not only prohibits any interference with the activities of the latter but also obliges judges who examine cases not to yield to the influence of State institutions, officials, the media, society or individuals. Thus, even when there has been an attempt to influence a judge with the aim of preventing a fair examination of a case, such an attempt in and of itself does not mean that a court’s subsequent judgment will always be unfair and unjust. In such cases courts at a higher level of jurisdiction must assess the lawfulness and reasonableness of the procedural measures and decisions taken, and only if those are found to be unlawful or unfounded shall they be annulled or changed.”
In a ruling of 20 January 2011 in criminal case no. 2K-83/2011 the Supreme Court held:
“[The appellants] based their complaint of a violation of the principle of the presumption of innocence on the fact that events related to the case had been widely publicised in the media before the handing down of the final judgment, thereby forming an opinion among the public that they were guilty.
The Chamber notes that there is no information in the case that State officials made any statements in the press about the appellants’ guilt; nor were any public statements made to that effect by the judges examining the case (see Butkevičius v. Lithuania, no. 48297/99, ECHR 2002II (extracts)).
The appellate court, examining analogous complaints by the appellants, made a well-founded conclusion that there was nothing in the case to indicate that the judges of the first-instance court had in any way been influenced by such publications. There is no indication that either the judges of the first-instance court or the judges of the appellate court had a pre-conceived opinion about the guilt of the accused, or that other participants in the proceedings may have formed such an opinion because of the judges’ behaviour during the proceedings. There is no information in the case about the content of any publications or TV broadcasts, their connection to the courts’ judgments or the individual judges examining the case. ... In its admissibility decision in the case of Daktaras v. Lithuania (no. 42095/98, 11 January 2000) the ECtHR noted that press coverage of current events is an exercise of the freedom of expression guaranteed by Article 10 of the Convention. If there is a virulent press campaign surrounding a trial, what is decisive is not the subjective apprehensions of the suspect concerning the absence of prejudice required of trial courts, however understandable, but whether, in the particular circumstances of the case, his fears can be held to be objectively justified. [The appellants] in their complaints did not indicate any objective circumstances to show how the judges at either level of jurisdiction may have been influenced. Therefore, the media campaign did not affect the fairness of the courts or the proceedings as a whole.”