The case originated in an application (no. 21980/04) against the Republic of Bulgaria lodged with the Court on 8 June 2004 under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Bulgarian nationals, Mr Lyuben Filipov Simeonov, Ms Nelly Nikola Simeonova and Mr Filip Lyubenov Simeonov.
The applicants were represented by Ms S. Margaritova-Vuchkova. The Bulgarian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their agent, Ms R. Nikola, from the Ministry of Justice.
By a decision of 23 August 2011 the application was declared partly inadmissible, the Court having dismissed all the complaints submitted by the second and third applicants and some of the complaints submitted by the first applicant, Mr. Lyuben Filipov Simeonov (“the applicant”). The applicant’s complaints under Article 3 concerning the lack of medical care in prison, his conditions of detention and his excessively strict prison regime, as well as the complaint under Article 6 § 1 in conjunction with Article 6 § 3 c) concerning the lack of assistance by counsel for the first few days of his detention, were communicated to the Government. Furthermore, as permitted by Article 29 § 1 of the Convention, it was decided that the Chamber would simultaneously adjudicate on the admissibility and the merits of the case.
The applicant was born in 1975. He is currently serving a life sentence in Sofia Prison.
On 2 July 1999 two armed individuals burst into a bureau de change in Burgas. Shots were fired and two staff members were killed. The criminals fled with a sum of money.
On the same day the Burgas investigatory department instigated criminal proceedings against X for armed robbery and homicide.
On 3 October 1999 the applicant, Mr Lyuben Simeonov, was arrested in Sofia by a team from the special unit of the Interior Ministry. He was transferred to Burgas.
At 8 p.m. on 4 October 1999, an investigator from the Burgas investigatory department placed the applicant in detention for twenty-four hours. He was suspected of having committed the armed robbery and the two murders of 2 July 1999, aided and abetted by a certain A.S. On the following day a prosecutor from the Burgas regional prosecutor’s office extended his detention by three days.
The applicant submitted that despite his express requests he had not been assisted by a lawyer for the first three days of his detention. During that time the officials responsible for the investigation had questioned him about the robbery and the two murders committed in Burgas on 2 July 1999.
On 6 October 1999 the investigator appointed an official lawyer to defend the applicant. At 12 noon on the same day, in the presence of his officially appointed lawyer, the applicant was formally charged with committing armed robbery in the Burgas bureau de change and of the murder of two persons, and placed in detention. He refused to answer the investigator’s questions.
On 12 October 1999 the applicant was questioned in the presence of two lawyers of his choice. He remained silent.
On 21 October 1999, assisted by his two lawyers, he confessed. His presumed accomplice, A.S., also confessed to the criminal offences charged.
The officers responsible for the investigation subsequently gathered a substantial body of evidence, including witness accounts and medical, scientific, material and documentary evidence.
On 4 January 2000 the applicant and A.S., assisted by their defence lawyers, took cognisance of the documents in the investigation file. They retracted their confessions, and their lawyers requested a fresh interrogation of their clients.
On 16 February 2000 the Burgas regional prosecutor referred the file to the investigator for further inquiries. He asked him in particular to conduct a number of investigative measures and once again to formally charge both suspects.
On 7 March 2000 the applicant was charged with an additional offence, namely the unlawful purchase of the firearm which had been used during the robbery of 2 July 1999. On the same day the two suspects were questioned in the presence of their lawyers. In his depositions the applicant related a version of events to the effect that the robbery and murders in question had been committed by a certain V., an Iranian national, aided and abetted by an unknown second person.
On 17 May 2000 the regional prosecutor’s office drew up the indictment and committed the applicant and his presumed accomplice for trial before the Burgas regional court.
The regional court considered the criminal case between 25 July 2000 and 14 June 2001. During the proceedings the applicant, who was assisted by a lawyer, submitted that he and his presumed accomplice had indeed been in Burgas on 1 July 1999 and that they had indeed intended to commit a robbery in the bureau de change, but that they had changed their minds and returned to Sofia the same day.
On 14 June 2001 the Burgas regional court delivered its judgment. The applicant was found guilty of armed robbery in the Burgas bureau de change, which crime had been accompanied by the murder of two persons and committed with the complicity of A.S. He was also found guilty of the unlawful purchase of a pistol and ammunition. The regional court imposed the heaviest sentence available under the Bulgarian Criminal Code, namely a whole-life sentence. In accordance with section 127b [1] of the Law on the Execution of Punishments, the regional court ordered the applicant’s placement under the so-called “special” prison regime.
Drawing on the evidence gathered during the preliminary investigation and at the hearing, the regional court established the facts as follows: the applicant’s former partner, D.K., had started work as a cashier in the bureau de change in question in 1997 when she was still living with the applicant. While working there she had met the first victim, a certain N.B., who was a close relative of the owner and an employee in the same establishment. In June 1999 D.K. had left the applicant and moved in with N.B. in Burgas. The applicant had then decided to kill N.B. and to steal the cash kept in the bureau de change. He had purchased a “Makarov” pistol, a silencer and ammunition. The applicant had persuaded a friend, A.S., to take part in the robbery. On the afternoon of 1 July 1999 the applicant and A.S. had arrived in Burgas by bus. They had then gone to the building in which the bureau de change was located, and had gone up to the top floor to spend the night. Next morning, just before 9 a.m., they had descended to the floor on which the bureau de change was located and noted that N.B. was in the premises alone. A.S., who had been carrying the pistol, had burst into the premises and fired one point-blank shot at the victim’s left temple. The young man had died instantly. The two accomplices had then placed the money which they had found in the bureau de change in a bag which they had brought with them. Meanwhile the armed security guard of the bureau de change, a certain P.I., had rushed into the premises where the first victim had been killed. A.S. had fired two shots at him, hitting him in the face. The security guard had been killed instantly. A.S. and the applicant had left the building. They had then concealed the murder weapon under a rubbish bin, thrown away the clothes they had been wearing and hidden the stolen money. Some time later the two men had ordered a certain E.E. to fetch the money for them, which he had done.
The applicant appealed against that judgment. He complained that insufficient reasons had been given for the conviction, that his guilt had not been established, that the first-instance court had reached an erroneous decision, that there had been several breaches of the procedural and substantive rules under domestic law and that the regional court had shown bias.
The applicant’s lawyer requested the withdrawal of all the judges of the Burgas Court of Appeal. He argued that the media coverage of the criminal case had created a climate of intolerance and hostility towards his client. The defence called for an additional witness to be summoned, the re-examination of one of the witnesses already questioned by the court of first instance, and several additional expert opinions. On 4 December 2001 the judge-rapporteur responsible for the criminal case rejected the requests for further evidence-gathering as irrelevant. He dismissed the challenge to the judges of the Court of Appeal for lack of evidence of bias.
The Court of Appeal considered the criminal case between February and July 2002. It questioned a new witness and received additional conclusions from psychiatric experts on the mental state of the two accused.
On 6 August 2002 the Burgas Court of Appeal upheld the judgment of the court of first instance, giving its full backing to the latter’s factual and legal findings. The evidence gathered during the preliminary investigation, presented before the court of first instance and produced for the first time before the Appeal Court had demonstrated that the two accused had planned and carried out the robbery in the bureau de change and that the two victims had been killed by A.S. Yet the applicant had been the instigator of those murders and had provided the weapon used by his accomplice. The Court of Appeal drew on the depositions of the many witnesses questioned during the assessment of the case, on the results of the ballistic, technical and accountants’ reports and the medical and psychiatric opinions, and also on the material and documentary evidence gathered.
The Court of Appeal observed that the accused’s initial depositions during the preliminary investigation had differed considerably from their submissions to the court of first instance. The initial depositions had corroborated the finding concerning their participation in committing the criminal offences in issue, whereas the subsequent ones set out a version of events to the effect that an Iranian national had committed those offences. The Court of Appeal gave credence to the accused’s initial depositions, which had been made to an investigator in their lawyers’ presence after they had been formally charged. The two individuals thus charged had been advised that their statements could be used in court with a view to establishing the facts, and their prior medical examination had revealed no sign of physical violence, which contradicted the defence lawyer’s allegation that the applicant’s initial confession had been extracted from him.
The Court of Appeal turned its attention to the applicant’s version of events stating that the two murders and the robbery had been committed by a certain V., an Iranian national, and that the applicant himself had been at his place of work in Sofia at the material time. Verifications carried out in the Interior Ministry database had shown that no Iranian national of that name was present in Bulgaria. It was true that the applicant had been at his place of work in Sofia on 2 July 1999. However, he had been working as a night watchman and the robbery and murders had been committed early in the morning, which had given him enough time to cover the distance between Burgas and Sofia and to arrive at work the same evening. The Court of Appeal deemed unconvincing the statement by the only witness who had corroborated the applicant’s version of events.
The Court of Appeal noted that the judgment of the court of first instance displayed none of the procedural defects mentioned by the defence. The factual and legal findings of the regional court had not been exclusively based on the accused’s confessions but on the whole body of consistent evidence gathered during the criminal proceedings. The applicant had participated actively in the proceedings and his lawyers had submitted several requests linked to the progress of the trial and the gathering of evidence. The regional court had responded to all those requests and had provided full reasons for its procedural decisions. There had been no sign of bias on the part of the judges who had examined the case, and the proceedings had been conducted in such a way as to safeguard the parties’ interests.
The Court of Appeal excluded a statement by one witness from the evidence for non-compliance with the procedural rules, but did not consider that statement decisive in terms of the factual and legal conclusions in the case. The problem was that the regional court had been dilatory in issuing its grounds of judgment. However, the defence had been able to submit additional observations on appeal after having secured a copy of the grounds of judgment.
The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law, reiterating his submissions to the Court of Appeal.
By a judgment of 17 December 2003 the Supreme Court of Cassation dismissed the applicant’s appeal on points of law. That court found that none of the circumstances mentioned by the defence demonstrated the existence of bias on the part of the judges who had considered the criminal case. The applicant had had an opportunity to defend himself effectively during the criminal proceedings: he had given evidence and challenged the evidence against him. Some of his requests for further evidence-gathering had been accepted by the lower-level courts, and proper reasons had been given for their rejection of other evidential requests as mentioned by the defence.
Furthermore, in adopting the appeal court’s other arguments, the Supreme Court of Cassation considered that the facts had been well established, that the substantive and procedural legislation had been appropriately applied and that the accused’s rights had been fully respected.
The applicant was held in Burgas Provisional Detention Facility from 5 October 1999 to 27 January 2000, and again from the beginning of March to 14 April 2000. He was incarcerated in Burgas Prison from 27 January 2000 to the beginning of March 2000, and again from 14 April 2000 to 25 February 2004. On the latter date he was transferred to Sofia Prison, where he is still being held.
The applicant submitted that he had been held in a cell without window, toilets or running water. The premises had had poor ventilation and lighting. He had not been allowed to exercise in the open air. Access to sanitation had been restricted and the time allowed for washing had been insufficient. The applicant emphasised that the conditions of hygiene in the detention facility had been deplorable. He had subsequently been moved to another cell with two other detainees. The three detainees had had to take turns sleeping because the cell only had one bench.
According to a rapport by the Director General of Prisons submitted by the Government, at the time the only furniture in the cells in Burgas Provisional Detention Facility had been a bench. The cells had had no windows and the only daylight had entered through holes in metal plates affixed to the doors. The facility in question had only had one shared toilet and bathroom and lacked any open-air facilities for detainees. The rapport also mentioned that between 2002 and 2009 the facility had been completely renovated and redeveloped to bring the conditions of detention into line with the detainees’ human dignity.
The applicant alleged that his cell in Burgas Prison had had a surface area of 6 m2. It had contained a bed and a metal rack. There had been neither running water nor toilets in his cell. He had used a plastic bucket for his bodily functions. Like all the prisoners he was allowed out of his cell for thirty minutes three times a day, in order to empty the bucket and fill his water bottle. The applicant submitted, in support of those allegations, a statement by his co-accused A.S., who had been detained with him under the same conditions in Burgas Prison. The applicant added that he had been forced to wear a convict’s uniform even though he should have been allowed to wear his own clothes, under the prison rules.
The applicant explained that at the beginning of his term in Burgas Prison he had been deprived of open-air exercise. According to A.S.’s statement (see paragraph 35 above), prisoners were allowed one-hour’s open-air exercise every other day. The applicant was not involved in any organised activity in Burgas Prison. He had submitted several requests to the prison authorities to allow him to join in the various vocational training and occupational programmes and had applied for a transfer to Sofia Prison in order to be closer to his family, but no action had ever been taken on his requests.
According to a report by the Director of Burgas Prison submitted by the Government, the applicant had problems adapting to the prison regulations; his attitude to the wardens and the prison authorities had been refractory and disrespectful. However, the applicant had enjoyed all the rights afforded to persons deprived of their liberty. He had board and lodging in accordance with normal prison standards. He had open-air exercise every day and free access to the prison library. He had consulted a psychologist on several occasions and had had a number of meetings with the official responsible for activities in the prison.
Following his transfer to Sofia Prison the applicant had been subject to a “special” prison regime involving virtually total isolation from the rest of the prison population.
The applicant submitted that over the period from February 2004 to summer 2006 he had been confined to a cell measuring 4 x 2 metres which he had shared with another prisoner. The two beds had taken up most of the floor area, leaving the two prisoners with a free area of only 2 m2. There had been no running water in the cell and the prisoners had used a bucket as a toilet.
The applicant stated that he had spent most of the day sitting on his bed for lack of free space in the cell. He had eaten his meals in the cell and had been allowed to walk in the prison yard for one hour every day. His access to the prison library had been limited to the few minutes it took to choose and borrow a book, after which he had been immediately taken back to his cell. He had been allowed to attend the prison chapel twice a year, at Easter and Christmas, although not during worship so that he would not meet other prisoners.
The applicant added that up until 2005, the high-security wing of the prison had been overcrowded and ill prisoners had not been held separately from other prisoners, which had fostered the transmission of infectious diseases. Material conditions had improved somewhat after the works in the high-security wing in 2005 and 2006. In December 2008, his prison regime had been relaxed. However, like all prisoners in his category, he had still been kept separate from the rest of the prison population and his cell had been kept locked during the day. In 2004 and 2005 he had occasionally worked in his cell folding envelopes. Since 2010 he has been allowed into an activities room where he can talk to other life prisoners and read books.
According to a report by the Director of Sofia Prison dated 11 October 2011, the high-security wing of Sofia Prison had been completely renovated in 2005 and 2006. On the date of the report in question the applicant had been held in an individual cell measuring 7.7 m2 and containing a bed, a table, a rack, a shower and private toilets. His cell had been heated and had running water and proper lighting.
Apart from the restrictions imposed by his prison regime, the applicant benefited from all the activities provided to other prisoners: he could work, visit the library and the prison chapel, receive visits from his relatives, write and receive letters. He was also eligible for relaxation of his prison regime under section 198 of the Prisons Act, subject to a favourable opinion from the relevant special commission, and could ultimately be accommodated with the rest of the prison population.
Furthermore, in 2010 the applicant applied for the annulment of a number of the provisions of the implementing regulations of the Prisons Act concerning the manner and method of execution of his life sentence. His application was finally dismissed by a judgment of 14 September 2011 delivered by the Supreme Administrative Court, which found that the challenged provisions of the implementing regulations were not contrary to the Prisons Act and that the adoption of the regulations had not involved any irregularities justifying their annulment.
In June 2001, while in Burgas Prison, the applicant began a hunger strike in protest against the authorities’ refusal to transfer him to Sofia Prison. He was monitored by the prison medical team while on hunger strike. In July 2001 his state of health worsened and he was transferred, on the initiative of the prison authorities, to the Sofia Prison hospital. On recovery he returned to Burgas Prison.
On 26 October 2004 the applicant was taken to the Sofia Prison hospital. Medical examinations revealed that he was suffering from tuberculosis. He received medicinal treatment at the hospital until 15 November 2004. He subsequently asked the prison authorities to allow him to take more exercise in the open air, which request was rejected. The applicant submitted that he had been unable to obtain a diet suited to his state of health either during or after his treatment in the prison hospital.
According to the 11 October 2011 report by the Director of Sofia Prison, after his stay in the prison hospital in 2004 the applicant had been given regular medical examinations and biological control analyses. The results of his latest examinations in 2011 had shown that his illness had not returned.
In August 2010 and January 2011 the applicant was taken into hospital for headaches and insomnia. He was examined and biological analyses were carried out. The doctors concluded that he was suffering from chronic headaches. No serious complications were detected. The applicant received medicinal treatment and the headaches ceased on release from hospital.
According to the same report, the applicant had several appointments with the prison dentist and another dentist chosen by his relatives.
Furthermore, according to the above-mentioned reports by the Directors of Sofia and Burgas Prisons, the prisons run a prevention and screening programme for tuberculosis comprising prophylactic examinations, medical analyses in cases of suspected infection and hospitalisation of prisoners positively diagnosed with the disease. Specific groups of prisoners such as drug addicts, HIV-positive persons, persons having previously suffered from tuberculosis and diabetics are the subject of special monitoring by the prison doctors.
The relevant domestic law and case-law concerning the regulations on the execution of life sentences and actions for damages in respect of damage caused by poor conditions of detention were summarised in Harakchiev and Tolumov v. Bulgaria, nos. 15018/11 and 61199/12, §§ 108-135 and §§ 136-146 respectively, ECHR 2014 (extracts).
Under section 70 [4] of the former Law on the Interior Ministry, which was repealed in 2006, anyone who was detained by the police on suspicion of having committed a criminal offence was entitled to legal assistance as from the beginning of his prison term.
Under Article 73 § 1 of the former Code of Criminal Procedure, defence counsel could participate in the criminal proceedings as soon as the suspect was arrested or charged.
Burgas Provisional Detention Facility was visited in 1999 by a CPT delegation. The relevant part of the report published after that visit reads as follows:
“73.  As they were generally the same as those observed in investigation detention facilities during the CPT’s 1995 visit, the report will not describe in detail the conditions observed in Burgas Regional detention facility (15 cells, forty detainees at the time of the delegation’s visit), Nessebur Investigation detention facility (5 cells, six detainees at the time of the visit) and Plovdiv Regional Investigation detention facility (32 cells, forty-eight detainees at the time of the visit). To mention only some of the most important failings, these establishments were overcrowded, poorly equipped and dirty, detainees’ access to toilet/shower facilities was problematic, there was insufficient food and drinking water and a total absence of outdoor exercise and out-of-cell activities. As such, the conditions remain of very serious concern to the CPT.”
Burgas Prison was visited by a CPT delegation in April 2002. The relevant part of the report published by the delegation reads as follows:
“93.  At the time of the visit, Burgas Prison held eleven life-sentenced prisoners (including three whose sentences had not been confirmed). Similar to other parts of the establishment, the section for life-sentenced prisoners had benefited from recent refurbishment. Due to the removal of shutters from cell windows, ventilation and access to natural light had clearly improved. New cell equipment had been delivered and each cell (measuring 6 m²) was about to be fitted with a bed, table, chair, noticeboard and cupboard. ...
... Life-sentenced prisoners’ access to the toilet facilities was restricted to three times a day. At other times, they had to use a bucket within their cells. The recommendations already made in paragraphs 82 and 87 concerning access to toilet facilities apply equally to life-sentenced prisoners.
... Life-sentenced inmates referred to recent improvements to their regime, involving, at Burgas, access to the library and recreational activities (e.g. TV, video projections) ... . Further ... the inmates concerned had been given some productive/creative work which they could carry out in their cells. Finally, they were now allowed to use the phone. These are all steps in the right direction.
However, life-sentenced prisoners complained about the lack of possibilities for associating among themselves and with other prisoners. The little time available for face-to-face interaction during daily outdoor exercise ... and recreational/sports activities did not offer adequate scope for human contact. ...
More generally, the CPT recommends that the Bulgarian authorities continue to develop the regime of life-sentenced prisoners at Burgas and Pleven prisons, as well as at other prisons throughout Bulgaria, by integrating them in the mainstream prison population, in accordance with the above-mentioned amendments to the Law on the Execution of Punishments. ...
Both Burgas and Pleven prisons held a certain number of inmates suffering from tuberculosis. Tangible efforts were being made by the respective health care services to address the issue on the basis of the updated ‘Working programme for combating tuberculosis in the prison system’, established by the Ministry of Justice in co-operation with the Ministry of Health.
At both establishments, it was standard practice for prisoners with active TB to be transferred to Lovech Prison Hospital for intensive treatment; following this, sustaining treatment was administered by the respective health care services. The CPT’s delegation was told at the two prisons that there was a sufficient supply of antituberculosis medication. However, it would appear that the taking of antituberculosis medication at both establishments was not monitored on an ongoing basis, as prescribed by the DOTS strategy for tuberculosis control. The CPT would like to receive the comments of the Bulgarian authorities on this matter.
More generally, the information received by the CPT’s delegation during the 2002 visit indicated that the prevalence of tuberculosis in the Bulgarian prison population had fallen noticeably since 1999. This is a positive development. The CPT encourages the Bulgarian authorities to ensure that vigilance is maintained in respect of tuberculosis control in all penal establishments, especially through adequate screening of the inmate population and the provision of appropriate material resources and training of health care staff. Tuberculosis control should be effected in a consistent manner across the prison system, and in accordance with standards applied in the outside community.”
Sofia Prison was visited by a CPT delegation in September 2006, December 2008 and March and April 2014. The three visit reports were published.
The relevant part of the report on the 2006 visit reads as follows:
 “101.  There were 15 lifers at Sofia Prison at the time of the visit; two were being accommodated in the mainstream prison population, while the rest were held in a separate unit in the section used for disciplinary isolation. Lifers in the separate unit were accommodated in single cells measuring 7.5 m²; the cells had a small barred window, set too high in the wall to afford a view out. There was integral sanitation which reduced the limited space in the cell; however, the cells would provide adequate sleeping accommodation for one person provided these prisoners were offered a varied programme of out-of-cell activities during the daytime.
However, in contrast to the situation observed in Pleven and Sliven, life-sentenced prisoners in Sofia Prison lacked communal activities. They were locked up in their cells except for periods of outdoor exercise (1.5 hours like the rest of the inmates at Sofia Prison), which all but four lifers took together. ... In-cell activities included watching TV and reading books from the library and a daily newspaper; further, nine lifers worked in their cells (making gift bags). ...
... As regards those life-sentenced prisoners currently held in special units, the CPT recommends that the Bulgarian authorities continue to develop their regime of activities, in particular by providing more communal activities (including access to work and education) and revising the policy on long-distance learning and computerbased courses. ...
Medical examination on admission generally took place on the day of arrival or the following day, but there were a few isolated cases of delays of several days, undoubtedly a reflection of the meagre staff resources. Further, during the month spent in the reception unit, newly arrived prisoners underwent a number of examinations (including of suicidal risk).
As regards screening for transmissible diseases, it varied from one prison to another. ... At Sofia Prison, screening for HIV was carried out by an NGO on a voluntary basis. As regards screening for tuberculosis, a mobile X-ray unit visited the prisons once a year and all prisoners were screened. ...”
The relevant part of the report on the 2008 visit reads as follows:
“74.  As noted in paragraph 68, at the time of the visit, there were 18 life-sentenced prisoners at Sofia Prison. Three of them had been integrated into the mainstream prisoner population, while the remainder were being held in a separate unit (Group 1).
Material conditions of detention in the lifer unit had remained basically unchanged since the 2006 visit. The installation of integral sanitation in the cells, with a shower head over the toilet and access to hot water all day, was a positive feature; however, as a result, prisoners had less occasions to leave their cells and interact with staff.
Some of the lifers had their own television sets and playstations in their cells...
As regards activities, one notable change since the 2006 visit was the entry into operation of a social room (“club”) in the lifer unit. This good facility was decorated in pleasant light colours and furnished with bookcases, a chess table with two chairs, a larger table with five chairs, a cupboard with games including a backgammon board, a television set with DVD player and a sink. Lifers were divided into three subgroups on the basis of common interests (playing cards, chess, discussing legal matters, etc.) and each group was allowed to use the social room for one hour each weekday. At weekends, there were only the two officers present, which made it difficult to organise activities.
Lifers who were willing to work (12 of the 15 in the lifers unit) worked in their cells on the same kinds of piece work as was observed on the 2006 visit (e.g. putting strings on boutique bags).
Further, outdoor exercise for one and a half hours per day was offered to all lifers. The delegation noted that a shelter had been provided at one end of the exercise yard.
Despite the above-mentioned welcome introduction of a social room, which increased the amount of time spent out of the cells and in association with other prisoners, the daily regime in the lifer unit remained monotonous. The CPT recommends that the Bulgarian authorities strive to enhance the programme of activities provided to life-sentenced prisoners at Sofia Prison, if necessary, by increasing staffing.
Staff on the lifer unit indicated that two of the inmates were in their first 5 years of a life sentence and were therefore subject to particular security restrictions. The two lifers were escorted in handcuffs and were not allowed television. It was up to the Director to review the use of handcuffs, but there was no time limit on their use and no regular review period.
As already stated in the report on the 2006 visit, the CPT considers that there can be no justification for routinely handcuffing a prisoner within a secure environment, provided there is proper staff supervision. The Committee recommends that the Bulgarian authorities review the policy of handcuffing life-sentenced prisoners when outside their cells.
The CPT has in the past expressed its serious misgivings about the current legal provisions whereby lifers are systematically subjected to a strict and segregated regime for an initial period ordered by the sentencing court (i.e. 5 years). This approach runs counter to the generally accepted principle that offenders are sent to prison as a punishment, not to receive punishment.
The Committee does not question that it may be necessary for some prisoners to be subject, for a certain period of time, to a special security regime. However, the decision whether or not to impose such a measure should lie with the prison authorities, be based on an individual risk assessment and be applied only for the shortest period of time. A special security regime should be seen as a tool of prison management, and not be made part of the catalogue of criminal sanctions to be imposed by courts.
In many countries, lifers are not viewed as necessarily more dangerous than other prisoners; many of them have a longterm interest in a stable and conflict free environment. Therefore, the approach to the lifer management should proceed from individual risk and needs assessment to allow decisions concerning security, including the degree of contact with others, to be made on a case-by-case basis.
Whereas lifers should not be systematically segregated from other prisoners, special provision should be made to assist lifers and other longterm prisoners to deal with the prospect of many years in prison. In this respect, reference should be made to Rule 103.8 of the European Prison Rules which states that ‘particular attention shall be paid to providing appropriate sentence plans and regimes for life-sentenced prisoners’, taking into consideration the principles and norms laid down in the Council of Europe Recommendation on the ‘management by prison administrations of life-sentence and other long term prisoners’.
Pursuant to Bulgarian law, after the initial 5 years of their sentence, lifers are eligible for allocation within the mainstream prisoner population if they have behaved well and have had no disciplinary punishments. However, in practice, only a minority of lifers (3 out of 18 at Sofia Prison) had found their way into the mainstream, some after many years served in the lifer unit. The CPT invites the Bulgarian authorities to build on the success of the ‘experiment’ of integrating some life-sentenced prisoners into the mainstream prison population, which should be considered as an appropriate part of the management of this category of prisoner and reinforced by legislative measures.
More generally, the CPT recommends that the Bulgarian authorities review the legal provisions and practice concerning the treatment of life-sentenced prisoners, in the light of the above remarks.”
The 2008 report contained no particular comments on care and treatment for infectious diseases, including tuberculosis, in Sofia Prison.
The relevant part of the report on the 2014 visit reads as follows:
 “84.  The review of the situation of life-sentenced prisoners in Bulgaria, carried out by the CPT’s delegation in the course of the 2014 visit, demonstrated that little – if anything at all – had been done to improve their condition in the light of the Committee’s long-standing recommendations...
All the prisons visited had a high-security unit in which the vast majority of life-sentenced prisoners were accommodated, the remaining small minority having been allowed to integrate into the mainstream prison population. At the time of the visit, there were ... 21 [life-sentenced prisoners] at Sofia Prison (15 in the highsecurity unit – Group 1) ... . At the time of the visit, there were ... nine [“real lifers”] at Sofia Prison ... .
In the absence of any change in the legislation governing the criteria for changing the regime of a lifer (despite repeated recommendations from the CPT to this effect), the very small proportion of life-sentenced prisoners allowed to associate with other sentenced prisoners (non-lifers) is hardly surprising. The CPT calls upon the Bulgarian authorities to review the current legal provisions in order to ensure that the segregation of lifers is based on an individual risk assessment and is applied for no longer than strictly necessary.
... The lifers’ cells seen at Sofia and Vratsa were larger (measuring between 8 and 9 m²) and many of them were used for double occupancy.
The material conditions varied from one lifers’ cell to another in each prison, but they were generally characterised by a more or less advanced state of dilapidation and insalubrity (mould on the walls, water on the floor, etc.). Cells at Sofia Prison had very poor access to natural light but the artificial lighting was adequate. ...
Life-sentenced prisoners could take a shower twice a week in the four prisons visited. Apart from Burgas Prison, all cells for lifers were equipped with (partially screened) sanitary annexes, comprising a toilet and a washbasin. ... With the positive exception of Vratsa Prison, the in-cell sanitary annexes, as well as the communal showers, toilets and washing facilities, were generally as dilapidated and dirty as elsewhere in the prisons visited. Further, the situation with respect to personal hygiene items and cleaning products was the same as for the rest of the respective prison populations.
In the light of the observations in paragraphs 86 and 87, the CPT calls upon the Bulgarian authorities to take the following steps in respect of material conditions in the units for lifers in the prisons visited:
- take out of service any single cells in which the living space is less than 6 m², in-cell sanitary annexe excluded; ...
- refurbish the lifers’ cells in all the prisons concerned, paying particular attention to access to natural light at Sofia Prison; in the course of the refurbishment works, all cells should be fitted with fully screened sanitary annexes (i.e. with a partition up to the ceiling); ...
These recommendations apply mutatis mutandis to all the cells located in the high-security units of Belene, Burgas, Sofia and Vratsa prisons, including the disciplinary and segregation cells.
As regards the in-cell sanitary annexes, communal toilets, washing and shower facilities at Belene, Burgas and Sofia prisons, and the provision of basic hygiene products as well as materials for cleaning cells, reference is made to the recommendation in paragraph 74 above.
Turning to activities, two [lifers had work] at Sofia Prison ...
As regards other activities, lifers at all the prisons visited could have TV and/or radio sets in their cells, as well as books, newspapers and (sometimes) DVD players and playstations. Life-sentenced inmates at Sofia Prison were entitled to an hour and a half of association in a common room per day, which was often not taken as the room was only equipped with a table and chairs and there was nothing to do there. ...
Outdoor exercise was available for ... an hour and a half per day at Sofia Prison ... . In addition, at Sofia and Vratsa prisons the lifers had access to a gym for one hour, five days a week.
The CPT remains of the view that the regime for life-sentenced prisoners in Bulgaria should be fundamentally reviewed, so as to include a structured programme of constructive and preferably out-of-cell activities; educators and psychologists should be proactive in working with life-sentenced prisoners to encourage them to take part in that programme and attempt to engage them safely with other prisoners for at least a part of each day.
Consequently, the Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Bulgarian authorities continue to develop the regime for life-sentenced prisoners, in particular by providing more communal activities (including access to work and education). ...
Overall, the delegation noted in the prisons visited that the security measures with respect to life-sentenced prisoners were being applied on the basis of an individual risk assessment; further, they were regularly reviewed and the aim was to reduce gradually the level of restraints imposed on the inmates. The delegation was positively impressed by the practice observed at Vratsa Prison, where (by decision of the director) life-sentenced prisoners were no longer handcuffed while outside their cells, except when being escorted outside the secure detention areas of the prison; further, custodial officers working with the lifers did not carry truncheons. Also in ... Sofia, most lifers were no longer handcuffed while moving within their units. ...
Many times in the past, the Committee has stressed the importance of medical screening of newly-arrived prisoners, in particular in the interests of preventing the spread of transmissible diseases, suicide prevention, and ensuring the timely recording of any injuries.
In all the penitentiary establishments visited, newly-arrived prisoners were in principle seen by health-care staff within 24 hours from their arrival. That said, there were some exceptions: inmates who arrived on a Friday were usually not seen before the following Monday; further, delays of up to seven days were found at ... Sofia prison.
The medical screening process was of a superficial character (if not a mere formality) in most of the establishments visited, and consisted of an interview and taking an inmate’s pulse and blood pressure. That said, the procedure at Belene and Vratsa prisons also included the screening for tuberculosis, whereas in the other prisons such a screening was only performed once a year and not on admission; as for Boychinovtsi Correctional Home, TB screening upon arrival was not performed systematically. Other tests (e.g. for HIV, hepatitis B/C) could be performed on a voluntary basis, but none of the establishments did that as a routine measure. ...
The CPT reiterates its recommendation that steps be taken to ensure strict adherence to the rule that all prisoners must be seen by a health-care staff member immediately upon arrival, as specified in the law. The medical examination on admission should be comprehensive, including a physical examination.”