The case originated in an application (no. 11435/07) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Turkish national, Ms Eylem Baş (“the applicant”), on 12 March 2007.
The applicant was represented by Mr Hakverdi, a lawyer practising in . The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 7 December 2010 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The applicant, who was born in 1980, is currently serving her prison sentence in the Gebze Prison.
On 8 June 2004 the applicant was arrested together with B.K. by policemen from the Anti-Terrorism Branch of the Kırıkkale Security Directorate. It transpires from the documents in the case file that B.K. was carrying a hidden Kalashnikov rifle which he proceeded to use against the police officers who had approached them to check their identity papers and that, in the ensuing struggle, the applicant and one police officer were injured by gunshot wounds.
On the same day at 9.15 p.m., the applicant was examined at the  by a doctor who noted two gunshot wounds on the applicant’s left leg. Superficial grazes on her left shoulder blade and back were also indicated in the report. It was concluded that her injuries were not life-threatening. The applicant was subsequently placed in custody at the Kırıkkale Security Directorate, where she was allegedly ill-treated.
On 9 June 2004 the applicant was examined by a doctor at the . The report indicated that there was a bullet entry hole and an exit hole in her left leg. It was also indicated that there were two or three grazes on the applicant’s back, measuring 3-4 cm.
On 10 June 2004 the applicant was once again examined at the . According to the report issued at the end of the medical examination, there was a bullet entry hole and an exit hole in the applicant’s left leg, superficial grazes on her back and an old hyperemia, measuring 2 to 3 cm, on her left arm.
On the same day, the applicant was transferred to Tokat Gendarmerie Command for further investigation.
On 11 June 2004 at 00.35 a.m. the applicant was examined at the Tokat Cevdet Aykan State Hospital by a doctor, who noted a bruise of 0,5 x 1 cm on the applicant’s nose dating back a couple of days, a number of scabbed scratches or bruises on her left shoulder blade, upper left arm and left wrist (dating back a couple of days), a couple of scratches on her lumbar vertebrae (dating back a couple of days), redness corresponding to an old burn wound on her left foot and fingers and two gunshot wounds in her lower left leg. The report indicated that the injuries were not life-threatening.
On 12 June 2004 the applicant was once again examined at the . No new physical marks other than those indicated above were observed on her body.
On the same day, the applicant was interrogated at the Tokat Gendarme Command, in the presence of her lawyer, and she used her right to remain silent. She was subsequently brought before the Tokat public prosecutor and the Tokat Magistrates’ Court in Criminal Matters respectively. In the presence of her lawyer, she denied the accusations against her. Before the public prosecutor, the applicant further complained that she had been subjected to various forms of ill-treatment while she was held in custody at the Kırıkkale Security Directorate. In this connection, she maintained that she had been forced to walk bare-footed, deprived of sleep, sexually harassed, dragged by her hair, kicked, and that her head had been hit against the wall. The applicant requested the prosecution of those responsible. The court ordered her detention in remand.
On 9 June 2004 the Ankara public prosecutor filed an indictment against the applicant and accused her of being a member of the TKP/ML-TİKKO (Turkish Communist Party-Marxist Leninist, Turkish Workers and Peasants’ Liberation Army), an armed illegal organisation, and of undermining the constitutional order of the State in breach of Article 146 of the Criminal Code.
On 2 March 2006 the , after having examined the evidence in the case file, convicted her as charged and sentenced her to life imprisonment.
The applicant appealed, challenging various documentary and testimony evidence in the case file. In her appeal petition, she referred to her submissions before the investigating judge and the public prosecutor, maintaining that she had been ill-treated at the Kırıkkale Security Directorate.
On 26 September 2006 the Court of Cassation upheld the judgment of the first-instance court. This decision was served on the applicant on 5 December 2006.
Upon the applicant’s submissions made before the Tokat Magistrates’ Court on 12 June 2004, on an unspecified date, the Tokat public prosecutor initiated an investigation into her allegations of ill-treatment. The public prosecutor subsequently declared lack of jurisdiction and transferred the case file to the Kırıkkale public prosecutor’s office, as the applicant alleged that she had been ill-treated during her custody in Kırıkkale. During his investigation, the Kırıkkale public prosecutor took statements from three police officers, who denied the accusations against them. On 14 July 2004 the public prosecutor issued a decision of non-prosecution. In his decision, the prosecutor referred to the applicant as a member of the armed illegal organisation, the TKP/ML - TİKKO, and stated that she had made this allegation to debase the police officers. The public prosecutor concluded by stating that a copy of the non-prosecution decision should be served on the applicant.
The non-prosecution decision of the Kırıkkale public prosecutor was served on the applicant on 18 April 2011. Subsequently, on 29 April 2011 the applicant filed an objection with the . In her petition, she pointed out that the public prosecutor had acted with a preconceived idea that she was a member of an illegal organisation. In this connection, she drew the ’s attention to the fact that, at that time, the trial against her had been pending and that she had not yet been convicted of being a member of an illegal organisation. The applicant further repeated her allegations of ill-treatment and maintained that during her police custody she had been sexually harassed and beaten by police officers at the Kırıkkale Security Directorate.
After examining the merits of the case, on 18 May 2011 the  dismissed the applicant’s appeal.