The case originated in an application (no. 45554/08) against Georgia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Georgian national, Mr Izet Ashlarba (“the applicant”), on 22 April 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr G. Zirakishvili and Ms M. Pkhaladze, lawyers practising in Tbilisi. The Georgian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Meskhoradze, of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that Article 223(1) § 1 of the Criminal Code of Georgia, under which he was convicted of the offence of being a member of the “thieves’ underworld”, had not been precise and foreseeable enough for him to regulate his conduct accordingly.
On 3 January 2012 the application was communicated to the Government under Article 7 of the Convention.
The applicant was born in 1956 and lives in the village of Angisa, Ajarian Autonomous Republic (“the AAR”), Georgia.
On 15 February 2006 a criminal investigation was launched by the Ministry of the Interior of the AAR into the activities of a Mr A.K., on account of his alleged association with the criminal underworld, under Article 223(1) of the Criminal Code. Notably, he was suspected of being a “thief in law” (for an exact definition of this term, see paragraphs 1820 below) who ran criminal syndicates and participated in the settlement of various private disputes through criminal actions. In the course of the investigation, a number of relevant witnesses were questioned – the officers of the prisons where Mr A.K. had served his previous prison terms, his family members and other close persons, all of whom confirmed that Mr A.K. had indeed obtained, through the criminal ritual of “baptism”, the title of a “thief in law” in 1999. Since then he had participated in management of the “thieves’ underworld” (a well-organised network of criminal syndicates; for more details see paragraphs 21-22 below), in accordance with the special rules regulating the conduct of members of the criminal underworld.
On 5 March 2006 a search warrant was issued in respect of Mr A.K., who was living at that time in either Ukraine or Russia. According to the findings of that investigation, the fugitive suspect had been in regular telephone contact with other purported criminal leaders in the AAR, instructing them on how to settle various private disputes in the region. The subsequent judicially authorised tapping of Mr A.K.’s telephone conversation showed that one of the persons who had been receiving regular instructions from the “thief in law” was the applicant. Consequently, the criminal probe was expanded to include the latter’s activities.
On 31 July 2006 the applicant and another person, Mr Y.A., were arrested on suspicion of being members of the “thieves’ underworld”, an offence punishable under Article 223(1) § 1 of the Criminal Code. When questioned on the same day, the applicant confirmed that he had already known Mr A.K. for thirty years and was aware that he possessed the criminal title of a “thief in law”. The applicant added that a thief in law was, in his opinion, “a righteous man (კაი კაცობა)”.
On 29 September 2006 the criminal investigation against Mr A.K., the applicant and Mr Y.A., was terminated, and the case was transmitted by the prosecution service to a trial court.
By a judgment of 27 March 2007, the Batumi City Court convicted the applicant and Mr Y.A. of being members of the “thieves’ underworld” (Article 223(1) § 1 of the Criminal Code), sentencing them to seven and five years’ imprisonment respectively, whilst Mr A.K. was convicted of being a “thief in law” (Article 223(1) § 2 of the Criminal Code) and sentenced to ten years in prison.
The activities imputed to the applicant were described by the court, in general terms, as follows:
“Acknowledging and giving recognition to the thieves’ underworld, [the applicant] has publicly expressed his support for it through his own lifestyle, and has been actively involved in achieving the goals of this underworld... by obtaining profits for its members and for other persons, and by terrorising and exercising coercion with respect to ordinary individuals; [the applicant] has disseminated the special rules of the thieves’ underworld through his own actions, and by assisting the thief in law in running this underworld.”
More specifically, the finding of the applicant’s guilt was based on the following three episodes, the reality of which had been confirmed by statements from numerous pertinent witnesses, examined during both the investigation stage and the trial, and evidence obtained by tapping the telephone lines of the applicant, the other convicts and other relevant persons.
Firstly, the City Court established that Mr A.K., generally acknowledged to be one of the most authoritative criminal bosses in the region, had requested the applicant to settle a dispute over an apartment between his mother-in-law and another individual. The court accused the applicant of accepting that task and becoming involved, between 24 June and July 2006, in unofficial adjudication of the dispute, using Mr A.K.’s criminal authority. In reply, the applicant unsuccessfully argued that he had merely wished to help the woman, who was his close acquaintance, to have the dispute settled by friendly agreement, as indeed the parties had been invited to do during a civil court hearing of their case at the relevant time; he had been unaware that such ordinary conduct was a criminal offence. He did not contest that he had indeed been asked by Mr A.K., his old friend, to look into the dispute.
Secondly, the City Court established that the same co-accused “thief in law”, Mr A.K., had requested the applicant, on 24 July 2006, to establish the whereabouts in Batumi of two young men, aged 20-25 years, who had refused to pay a fare to a private taxi driver. The applicant was asked to persuade the young men, using his own authority as a senior member of the criminal world, and the authority of the more influential Mr A.K., to settle the debt towards the driver. Implicitly acknowledging that he had indeed been requested to look into this second private dispute by Mr A.K., the applicant unsuccessfully argued that he had not taken any action in practice and thus could not understand why he should be held responsible for something which had not occurred.
Lastly, the City Court relied on the fact that on 8 July 2006 the applicant, when visiting an imprisoned acquaintance who was considered by members of the “thieves’ underworld” to be a promising young man, that is, a future “thief in law”, the applicant, in addition to discussing financial issues relating to the kitty (obshyak), the common fund belonging to the “thieves’ underworld”, had also informed him that the Minister of the Interior might soon lose his post, which would then naturally lead to reinforcement of the authority of “thieves’ in law” and of the relevant rules of conduct in the criminal world. With respect to this third episode, the applicant unsuccessfully argued before the court that he had merely expressed his opinion about the personality of the Minister of the Interior and that he should not be punished for that.
On 10 July 2007 the Kutaisi Court of Appeal, dismissing the applicant’s appeal in which he reiterated all of his previous arguments, fully upheld his conviction of 27 March 2007.
By a decision of 29 February 2008, the Supreme Court of Georgia rejected the applicant’s cassation appeal as inadmissible, thus terminating the criminal proceedings against him.
Article 223(1) of the Criminal Code, a provision which was introduced to the Code by an Amendment of 20 December 2005, reads as follows:
“Article 223(1): Being a member of the thieves’ underworld. Being a thief in law”
“1. Being a member of the thieves’ underworld is punishable by 5 to 8 years’ imprisonment, with or without a fine.
Being a thief in law is punishable by 7 to 10 years’ imprisonment, with or without a fine.”
The Amendment of 20 December 2005, which was initiated by the President of Georgia, was accompanied by an official explanatory memorandum which described the rationale behind the criminalisation of the above-mentioned two offences in the following terms:
Apart from Article 223(1) of the Criminal Code, another related legislative novelty was approved by Georgian Parliament on 20 December 2005. Notably, a Law on Organised Crime and Racketeering was adopted, section 3 of which explained several major notions relating to the institution of “thieves in law” and “thieves’ underworld”:
Section 3 – Thieves’ underworld – A member of the thieves’ underworld – A thief in law.
Thieves’ underworld (ქურდული სამყარო) – any type of group of people who act in accordance with the special set of rules adopted or cherished by them and whose aim is to gain profit either for themselves or others by means of intimidation, threat, coercion, the rule of silence, “settlement of disputes using the authority of a thief in law” (ქურდული გარჩევა), inducing young people into illicit activities, committing or encouraging others to commit offences.
A member of the thieves’ underworld (ქურდული სამყაროს წევრი) – any person who recognises the special rules of the thieves’ underworld and is actively engaged in furtherance of the goals of that underworld.
Settlement of disputes using the authority of a thief in law (ქურდული გარჩევა) – resolution of a private dispute between two or more ordinary individuals by a member of the thieves’ underworld which is accompanied by threat, coercion, intimidation or other illicit conduct.
Thief in law (კანონიერი ქურდი) – a member of the thieves’ underworld who, using any type of methods, directly runs or coordinates the running of the thieves’ underworld according to the [above-mentioned] special set of rules.”
There exist a number of socio-legal studies of the phenomena of “thieves in law” and “thieves’ underworld”, a number of which were referred to by the Government in their submissions. An aggregate summary of the most relevant findings from those studies presents the following picture.
The so-called “thieves’ underworld” (“ქურდული სამყარო” in Georgia, and “воровской мир” in Russian) is considered to be the backbone of the contemporary organised crime structure across the entire post-Soviet territory, including Georgia. This professional criminal underworld has its own recognised leaders, elaborate initiation rituals and a code of conduct. It has a particularly well-organised power structure, a strict system of subordination and control over its (criminal) members, but sometimes also over various different sectors of society. The history of the Sovietera institution of “thieves’ underworld” dates back to Imperial Russia. The traditional structure of a Soviet criminal syndicate, beginning from the time of the 1917 Revolution, was built upon the ideas of hierarchy and strict obedience to the “Thieves’ Code” (“ქურდული კანონი” in Georgian, and “Воровской Закон” in Russian – the special set of rules regulating the conduct of members of the underworld). Members of those criminal organisations were at that time fervently anti-communist, and for the most part were required to lead modest, non-materialistic lives. However, as the Soviet era progressed, new types of criminals and criminal structures began to emerge, which were in reality concerned only with accumulating wealth and power. These individuals broke with the traditional visions of the “thieves’ underworld” and formed new gangs based on purely materialistic interests. It has also been argued that the Soviet State contributed to the dismantlement of the traditional structure of the criminal underworld which in its turn resulted in the elevation of the “thieves in law” to mythical status (bibliography: L.D. Newman, Rico and the Russian Mafia: Toward a New Universal Principle Under International Law, 9 Ind. Int’l & Comp. L. Rev. 225, 1998-199, at p. 231, with further relevant bibliography cited therein; Y. Glazov, “Thieves” in the USSR – A Social Phenomenon, Survey, in M. Galeotti (Ed.), Russian and Post-Soviet Organised Crime (2002); F. Varese, The Society of the Vory-v-Zakone, 1930s-1950s, Cahiers du monde russe, in M. Galeotti (Ed.), Russian and Post-Soviet Organised Crime (2002), at p. 515).
“Thieves in law” (“კანონიერი ქურდები” in Georgian, and “воры в законе” in Russian) are the most powerful criminals, who are obeyed by other fellow criminals, and enjoy unchallenged authority and high-ranking status within the criminal underworld in the countries previously forming the Soviet Union. They are the elite of the organised crime underworld, equivalent to the rank of “Godfather” in the Italian Mafia. The title of “thief in law” is usually conferred upon the criminal by a more senior “thief in law”, through a criminal ritual known as “baptism”. Holders of this title are considered to be guardians of the “Thieves’ Code”. A “thief in law” would rarely commit a crime himself. One of the most notable features of the control exerted by “thieves in law” is their reputation-based authority in criminal circles. Thus, physical presence is by no means a determining factor in the power and authority of those criminal bosses. Instead, a welldeveloped network of communications and a positive public perception of the criminal bosses ensure their influence in the criminal world. In general terms, “thieves in law” have to fulfil four basic functions in order to maintain effective leadership in the criminal underworld: (1) an informational function (that is, the collection, analysis and evaluation of information on a wide range of topics, including those regarding specific individuals and events); (2) an organisational function (that is, planning of various specific activities and delegation of responsibilities to other members of the criminal underworld); (3) a normative-regulatory function (that is, dissemination of criminal ideology, romanticising of criminal life, recruitment of youth, maintenance of the Thieves’ Code within the criminal community); and (4) a decision-making function (directing and coordinating the activities of other affiliated organised criminal group, such as housebreakers, racketeers, robbers, pickpockets, vehicle hijackers, kidnappers). Furthermore, one of the most important tasks assumed by a “thief in law” was that of administering the common monetary fund of the criminal underworld, or the “kitty” (obshyak). It should also be stressed that “thieves in law” had control and authority not only over criminals, but also over sectors of society in general. In the past, they were considered to be respectable social authorities, and were frequently used as dispute resolution facilitators. They were held up as models for young people, due to their enormous wealth and authority. Indeed, the significance of the affiliations and overlaps between the social and criminal elites has often been noted as one of the most vivid features of the institution of “thieves in law” (bibliography: Joseph D. Serio and V. S. Razinkin, Thieves Professing the Code: The Traditional Role of “Vory v Zakone” in Russia’s Criminal World and Adaptations to a New Social Reality, Low Intensity Conflict & Law Enforcement; L. Shelley, Post-Soviet Organised Crime and the Rule of Law, 28 J. Marshall L. Rev. 827 1994-1995, at p. 827; Sharon A. Melzer, Russian and Post-Soviet Organised Crime, by Mark Galeotti (Ed.), Book Review, International Criminal Justice Review).
All these developments deeply influenced the formation of criminal power structures in Georgian civic society and the prison world, starting in Soviet times. Furthermore, Georgian “thieves in law” were considered to be one of the most powerful and influential ethnic groups among their peers in the criminal elite throughout the Soviet Union (in terms of statistics, Georgian “thieves in law” made up 31.6% of the overall number of criminal bosses, and were the second largest ethnic group after the Russian “thieves in law”, who made up 33.1% of that population). Decisions by Georgian “thieves in law” traditionally carried particular weight for criminals of similar or lower ranks. In 1985 the Central Committee of the Georgian Communist Party ordered the law-enforcement bodies to crack down on the country’s “thieves in law”. To emphasise the importance of this mission, the Central Committee made it clear that officials failing to carry out the assignment would be treated as lawbreakers themselves and be dealt with accordingly. By 1986, 52 Georgian “thieves in law” had been arrested. However, the domestic courts imposed the lightest possible sentences. This was partly explained by the absence of a relevant legislative basis for effective prosecution of organised crime (there was no law at the relevant time proscribing the fact of being a criminal boss). Thus, four “thieves in law” were imprisoned for violating rules on probation, nine for being vagrants and leading other forms of “parasitic lifestyles”, fourteen for illegal possession or storage of firearms and ammunition, and nineteen for drug dealing, and the remaining six “thieves in law” were imprisoned for various illegal activities of a minor nature. In any event, it remained difficult to prevent in any effective way the imprisoned “thieves in law” from plying their trade, since they could easily continue to run the criminal underworld from their prison cells (bibliography: V. Davis Nordin and G. Glonti, Thieves of the Law and the Rule of Law in Georgia, Caucasian Review of International Affaires, Vol. 1 (1) – Winter 2006; L. I. Shelley, PostSoviet Organised Crime, Problem and Response, European Journal on Criminal Policy and Research, Vol. 3-4, at p. 8).