The case originated in an application (no. 1065/06) against the Republic of Turkey lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a British national, Mr Robert Mackenzie Ellis (“the applicant”), on 7 December 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr M. An, a lawyer practising in Ankara. The Turkish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
On 10 September 2015 the complaints raised under Articles 6, 13 and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention concerning the applicant’s inability to secure the enforcement of the judgment in his favour were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
Further to notification under Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 (a), the British Government did not wish to exercise their right to intervene in the present case.
The applicant was born in 1941 and lives in Birkerod, Denmark.
On 11 April 1995 the applicant formed a limited company, N.R. Group Ltd. (“the company”) together with a Turkish partner, N.K., to provide tourist services in Alanya, Turkey.
On 19 March 1997 the applicant applied to the Alanya Civil Court of First Instance to cancel N.K.’s management authority. On 2 October 1997 the court ordered the cancellation and on 18 May 1998 it appointed a trustee for the company. Meanwhile, it was discovered that the applicant’s partner N.K. had fraudulently transferred the company’s assets to a new company.
On 8 July 1997, the applicant brought two civil cases against N.K. before the Alanya Civil Court of First Instance and sought compensation for his loss incurred due to the fraudulent acts of N.K. The court decided to join the compensation cases and to examine them together.
On 7 June 2005 the Alanya Civil Court of First Instance accepted the applicant’s compensation claim and granted him the equivalent of 203,000 deutschmarks (DEM) (103,792 euros (EUR) at the time) with statutory interest for his loss, to be paid in Euros, and DEM 10,000 (EUR 7,158 at the time) in compensation without interest of 40% (inkar tazminatı), to be paid in Turkish Lira (TRY). The court further ruled that the legal costs and expenses of the proceedings were to be borne by N.K.
On an unspecified day the applicant requested that the judgment be served on him in order to commence enforcement proceedings. The court rejected the request, stating that it was not possible to provide the judgment unless the charge required by section 28(1) (a) of Law no. 492 (Code of Charges) had been paid.
The applicant was therefore unable to lodge enforcement proceedings in order to have the above-mentioned judgment executed.
At the time of the events, section 28(1) (a) of the Law on Fees read:
“Section 28(1) – Time-limit for the payment of fees
The proportional fees set out in scale no. 1 shall be paid within the following periods:
(a) One quarter of the fees for the judgment and the writ shall be paid beforehand and the rest shall be paid within two months of the judgment’s delivery ... The writ shall not be served on the party concerned unless the [court] fees for the judgment and the writ of execution are paid ...”
Decision of the Constitutional Court and the subsequent change in section 28(1) (a) of the Law on Fees.
In a decision dated 14 January 2010, the Constitutional Court repealed the provision in the second sentence of section 28(1) (a). The court indicated that to put the burden of paying the court fees on the party whose case had been accepted and who had been held exempt from those very fees by the first-instance court’s judgment was incompatible with the right of access to court and, in particular, with the right to have a judgment executed. In this respect, the higher court pointed out that the repealed provision referred to proportional fees, which were calculated on the basis of the main amount at issue.
Subsequently, in July 2010 section 28(1) (a) was amended. Following that change, the second sentence reads as follows:
“... Failure to pay the court fees for the judgment and the writ of execution would not prevent the execution of the judgment, its service on the parties or the parties’ right to have recourse to appeal proceedings.”