The case originated in an application (no. 28403/05) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian national, Mr Yevgeniy Moiseyevich Vintman (“the applicant”), on 29 June 2005.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr A.A. Kristenko, a lawyer practising in Kharkiv. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their then Agent, Mr N. Kulchytskyy.
The applicant complained, under Article 8 of the Convention, that his rights to family life and to respect for his correspondence had been violated. He also raised a complaint regarding the medical care available to him in detention in respect of his pathological condition of ingrowing eyelashes.
On 2 January 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1968 and is currently serving a prison sentence in Sokal Prison no. 47 in the Lviv region.
In February 2000 the applicant was detained on suspicion of several counts of robbery and a murder. He claimed that he had been beaten by the police.
On 13 September 2000 the Zaporizhzhya Regional Court (“the Zaporizhzhya Court”), sitting as a court of first instance, found the applicant guilty as charged. It sentenced him to life imprisonment for murder and considered that the prison terms for the other crimes were absorbed by the life sentence. The court dismissed the applicant’s allegation of ill-treatment as unsubstantiated.
On 21 December 2000 the Supreme Court of Ukraine upheld the judgment.
On 30 October 2009 the Supreme Court reviewed the applicant’s case under an extraordinary procedure and commuted his sentence to fifteen years’ imprisonment. It reasoned that life imprisonment had not been listed as a possible penalty in the Criminal Code on the date when the murder for which the applicant had been sentenced had been committed.
On 6 December 2001 the applicant was transferred to Vinnytsya Prison no. 1, which had a section for life prisoners, to serve his sentence. That prison is located some 700 kilometres from Zaporizhzhya, where the applicant had been living before his detention and where his mother lived. The train journey from Zaporizhzhya to Vinnytsya takes from twelve to sixteen hours.
On numerous occasions the applicant and his mother, Mrs Kapiton, who acted on his behalf as his representative under a power of attorney, asked the State Department of Ukraine for the Enforcement of Sentences (“the Prison Department”) to transfer the applicant to a prison closer to his home to make it easier for her to visit him. They drew attention, in particular, to the long travel time from Zaporizhzhya to Vinnytsya by public transport, which was very burdensome for Mrs Kapiton given her advanced age (born in 1938) and poor health (she had been officially certified “second-degree” (medium) disabled).
On 10 June and 15 September 2004 the Prison Department replied to the applicant’s mother that her request had been rejected, since “in accordance with the legislation in force, convicted prisoners must serve their entire sentence in the same prison”.
On 29 October 2004 Mrs Kapiton arrived at Vinnytsya Prison to visit the applicant. During the visit she fainted and was provided with medical assistance for low blood pressure. Her meeting with the applicant was not resumed once she had recovered, on the recommendation of a medical professional.
On many subsequent occasions Mrs Kapiton continued to contact various authorities on her own and the applicant’s behalf, requesting his transfer to a prison closer to his home to enable her to visit him. She always enclosed with her requests the medical certificate confirming her disability and her doctor’s advice not to travel outside the Zaporizhzhya region.
All Mrs Kapiton’s requests were rejected. On numerous occasions (on 2, 12 and 18 November 2004, and on 12 February, 21 and 24 March 2005) the Prison Department repeated its previous reasoning, referring to the legal requirement that prisoners must serve their entire prison term in the same establishment.
On 17 March 2006 the Prison Department informed the applicant’s mother that her request could not be granted because no places were available for life prisoners in establishments closer to Zaporizhzhya.
On 3 May 2006 the Prison Department wrote to the applicant’s mother again, informing her that the applicant was supposed to serve his entire sentence in the same prison and that, in any event, there were no places available in prisons closer to his home.
On 7 August 2006 the Prison Department further notified the applicant that, in accordance with unspecified regulations, persons convicted of aggravated murder were usually detained in prisons located outside the region in which the crime had been committed.
On 16 November 2006, 8 August 2007 and 24 March 2009 the Prison Department reiterated, in reply to the repeated requests of the applicant’s mother for his transfer, that “under the legislation in force, convicted prisoners must serve their entire sentence in the same prison”.
On 1 December 2009, following a review of the applicant’s sentence (see paragraph 9 above), the Prison Department’s regional commission on prisoner distribution, allocation and transfers examined his case. It decided that he would be held in a maximum-security prison, in ordinary accommodation. Pursuant to that decision, on 10 December 2009 he was transferred to Sokal Prison no. 47 (a maximum-security prison) located in the Lviv region, around 1,000 kilometres from Zaporizhzhya. The train journey from Zaporizhzhya to Lviv takes from nineteen to twenty-three hours.
On an unspecified date Mrs Kapiton complained to the Prison Department that that transfer was unfair, as Sokal Prison was even further away from the applicant’s home address.
On 17 February 2010 the administrative commission of Sokal Prison examined the applicant’s request that the level of security of his prison regime be reduced from high to medium security. It was noted that, under the Code on the Enforcement of Sentences, a prisoner could be transferred from a high to a medium-security prison if he had already served more than half of his sentence and if he had been manifesting good behaviour as an indication of his willingness to improve. However, the applicant had been disciplined eleven times and was not therefore eligible for such a transfer. Accordingly, his request was rejected. It remained open for him to challenge that decision before the regional commission of the Prison Department.
On 17 April 2010 the Prison Department’s regional commission on prisoner distribution, allocation and transfers rejected the applicant’s request for transfer to a prison in the Zaporizhzhya region. As noted in the minutes of its meeting, the applicant had been disciplined twelve times.
On 26 April 2010 the Prison Department further informed Mrs Kapiton that its appeal board had rejected the applicant’s request for transfer to a medium-security prison in the Zaporizhzhya region, and that decision would be reviewed only if his conduct improved.
The applicant’s mother then requested the applicant’s transfer to a prison in the Donetsk or Lugansk region (neighbouring the Zaporizhzhya region).
On 17 November 2010 the Prison Department appeal board rejected her request. As noted in its meeting report, the applicant had been disciplined fifteen times and had received no incentives.
The applicant suffers from ingrowing eyelashes of the left eye, which have to be removed periodically. His mother made a general allegation, without providing any factual details, that he had been hit in his left eye following his arrival at Vinnytsya Prison. No further information is available as to the duration and origin of the above-mentioned condition.
As regards the medical treatment for the ingrowing eyelashes, the applicant’s submissions to the Court were limited to his mother’s general statement, which she had made on two occasions, in November 2005 and April 2010, that the responsibility for the condition lay with the authorities and that, although the ingrowing eyelashes were regularly removed, the applicant felt pain and discomfort in his left eye.
On an unspecified date in 2005 the applicant’s mother complained to the prosecutor’s office that the applicant’s eye problem was connected to his alleged beating by prison guards following his arrival at the prison in 2001.
On 5 and 25 April 2005 the Vinnytsya Prosecutor’s Office responded that there was no basis for launching a criminal inquiry into that complaint. In particular, the applicant had not requested a medical examination or assistance on account of any injuries inflicted on him. Furthermore, according to the testimony of other prisoners who had arrived at the prison together with the applicant, they had not experienced or witnessed any beatings. The prosecutor also noted that the applicant’s condition was under constant medical supervision. In particular, he had his ingrowing eyelashes removed by a qualified ophthalmologist on a regular basis. No other health-related complaints had been recorded.
According to extracts from the applicant’s medical file provided by the Government, the applicant had had his ingrowing eyelashes removed on 21 January, 26 March, 9 July and 13 December 2004, as well as on 1 August 2005 and 4 January 2008. Furthermore, on 30 June 2010 and 6 April 2012 he had refused medical examinations and treatment.
The applicant and his mother, acting on his behalf, complained to the prosecution authorities and the Prison Department about the routine monitoring of his correspondence by the prison administration.
The prosecutor’s response was that the applicant’s correspondence was subject to monitoring under the legislation in force; however, there had been no instances of withholding letters or seizing objects which the prisoners were allowed to keep.
On 7 July 2003 the Vinnytsya Regional Prison Department wrote to the applicant’s mother, in reply to her complaint regarding, in particular, the interference with his correspondence, that on 11, 16 and 23 April 2003 the prison administration had “withheld some letters written by [the applicant], because their content did not comply with the requirements of the Instruction on Review of Prisoners’ Correspondence”.
On 3 October 2006 the Prison Department informed the applicant’s mother that no correspondence had been withheld from the applicant and that since the beginning of the year he had sent fifty-one letters and had received twenty-four recommended letters and thirty-eight standard letters. There had been no complaints from the applicant himself regarding his correspondence.
On 14 November 2006 the applicant made a written statement that he had no complaints against the prison administration.
On 21 November 2006 the Vinnytsya Regional Prosecutor’s Office wrote to the applicant’s mother informing her that the applicant had sent fifty-six letters, had received seventy-two letters, and that he had had fifteen paid telephone conversations.
On 12 May 2008 the applicant made a written statement that he had no complaints concerning the work of the prison official in charge of the monitoring of prisoners’ correspondence.
On 19 June 2008 the applicant asked the prison administration to allow him to make a telephone call on 24 June 2008 instead of a short-term private meeting to which he was entitled. According to a hand-written note on the request, apparently added by a prison official, the applicant’s last private meeting had been on 26 December 2007.
On 27 July 2009 the applicant asked the prison administration to allow him to make a telephone call on 3 August 2009. As noted on the request, he had last made a telephone call on 3 May 2009.
According to the official records, during the period from 16 August 2002 to 30 September 2009 the Vinnytsya prison administration dispatched sixty-nine letters from the applicant.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Ukraine on the Enforcement of Sentences (Кримінально-виконавчий кодекс України) of 2003 read as follows:
“1.  A [person] sentenced to deprivation of liberty shall serve the entire term of the sentence in one and the same correctional or educational colony, as a rule, within the boundaries of an administrative territorial unit corresponding to the place of his [“permanent” – deleted as of 16 April 2009] residence before conviction.
The transfer of a sentenced [person] from one correctional or educational colony to another for further service of the sentence shall be permitted under exceptional circumstances that prevent the continued stay of the sentenced [person] in that correctional or educational colony. The procedure for transferring the sentenced person shall be determined by the normative legal acts of the Ministry of Justice of Ukraine [before the amendments of 16 April 2009 – “the Prison Department”].”
“1.  Depending on the conduct of a prisoner and his attitude towards work and studies, his conditions of detention may be changed within the same colony or by his transfer to a colony of a different type.
...
A prisoner may be transferred to a prison with a different level of security following a decision by the central executive authority implementing the state policy on the enforcement of sentences [“the central executive authority for the enforcement of sentences” – before the amendments of 16 October 2012] ...”
Pursuant to the Instruction on the Procedure for Prisoner Distribution and Transfer (Інструкція про порядок розподілу, направлення та переведення для відбування покарання осіб, засуджених до позбавлення волі) approved by Order of the Prison Department no. 261 of 16 December 2003 (repealed on 8 February 2012 and replaced by a similar Order of the Ministry of Justice), the distribution and transfer of prisoners was the responsibility of the respective regional commissions of the Prison Department (the State Prisons Service following the organisational reform in the prison system of December 2010). Its decisions could be challenged before the appeal board of the Prison Department (the State Prisons Service). Further challenges to appeal board decisions could be lodged with the Head of the Prison Department (the State Prisons Service), who could quash them and remit the matter to the appeal board for a fresh examination, subject to newly discovered circumstances.
In its Information Letter No. 1619/10/13-09 of 30 November 2009, which was addressed to all administrative courts, the Higher Administrative Court clarified the judicial practice, in particular, regarding the choice of jurisdiction in disputes on prisoner distribution and transfers. It specified that contestations by prisoners of related decisions of the Prison Department’s regional commissions fell to be examined by ordinary (general jurisdiction) courts under the criminal procedural legislation as related to execution of a sentence, but not by administrative courts under the administrative procedure.
Article 113 of the Code on the Enforcement of Sentences (2003) stipulates that prisoners are allowed to correspond with relatives, other persons and organisations. All such correspondence, with some exceptions, is subject to automatic monitoring and censorship by the prison administration. Prior to the amendments of 1 December 2005, those exceptions had been limited to correspondence with the Ombudsman and prosecution authorities. As of 1 December 2005 prisoners’ correspondence with the Court or other international organisations of which Ukraine is a member was also exempted from monitoring. As of 21 January 2010 prisoners’ correspondence with their lawyers was added to the list of exceptions.
Further details of the above provisions were provided in the Instruction on Review of Correspondence of Persons Held in Prisons and Pre-trial Detention Facilities (Інструкція з організації перегляду кореспонденції осіб, які тримаються в установах виконання покарань та слідчих ізоляторах), approved by Order no. 13 of the Prison Department of 25 January 2006 (repealed on 2 July 2013).
Furthermore, paragraph 4.1 of the aforementioned Instruction stipulated as follows:
“4.1.  Letters written with the use of cryptography, codes or cyphers, as well as those containing confidential information, shall not be dispatched to their addressees or handed to prisoners/detainees. They shall be withheld and destroyed.”
On 2 July 2013 the Instruction referred to above was replaced by a similar Instruction approved by Order no. 1304/5 of the Ministry of Justice. It generally reiterated the provisions quoted above. The novelties included a clause that prison authorities were to provide prisoners with free envelopes and postage stamps if they did not have sufficient funds to purchase them and wished to send letters to the Ombudsman, the Court or the prosecution authorities. Another new clause added letters written in illegible handwriting to the list of correspondence subject to being withheld and destroyed.
The relevant provisions of the Internal Prison Regulations (Правила внутрішнього розпорядку установ виконання покарань), approved by Order no. 275 of the Prison Department dated 25 December 2003, read as follows:
“43.  Procedure for dispatching correspondence from prisoners
Prisoners may only dispatch letters and applications via the prison administration. There are mail boxes on the premises of the prison for that purpose, which are checked by the responsible prison officers on a daily basis. Prisoners in confinement hand letters for dispatching to the administration. ...
Letters shall be posted in mail boxes or handed to representatives of the administration unsealed. ...
Letters written with the use of cryptography, codes or cyphers, as well as those containing [“cynical statements or” – deleted on 9 August 2006] confidential information, shall not be dispatched to their addressees or shall not be handed to prisoners. They shall be withheld and destroyed.
Correspondence received or dispatched by prisoners shall be subject to screening.
Proposals, applications and complaints addressed to the Ombudsman of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, to a prosecutor or to the European Court of Human Rights [“as well as other international organisations of which Ukraine is a member or participant, or their authorised representatives” – added on 6 May 2006] shall not be subject to screening and shall be dispatched within twenty-four hours.”
In its ruling of 26 September 2007 the Rivne Regional Administrative Court declined jurisdiction over a claim lodged by a convicted prisoner, V., seeking a transfer from one prison to another. In particular, the claimant requested the court to oblige the Prison Department to take a decision on his transfer. The court noted that the case did not fall to be examined in administrative proceedings, since it did not concern any decision, action or omission of a public authority.
On 10 January 2008 the Rivne Regional Administrative Court rejected a claim lodged by a life prisoner, M., who had sought to be transferred to a prison closer to his home address given the poor health of his mother. The court’s reasoning was as follows: at the time when the verdict in respect of the claimant had become final (15 December 2003), the Correctional Labour Code of 1970 was still in force (it was replaced by the Code on the Enforcement of Sentences of 11 July 2003, which took effect on 1 January 2004). The 1970 Code provided that prisoners should as a rule serve the entire period of their sentences in the same prison. It made no mention of the location of that prison. As the claimant had been serving his sentence in one prison, there were no legal grounds for his transfer to a different prison.
On 13 February 2008 the Kharkiv Regional Administrative Court declined jurisdiction over a claim lodged by a prisoner, T., who had challenged the sanctions imposed on him by the prison administration from 2005 to 2008. The court considered that the defendant was not a public authority within the meaning of the Code of Administrative Justice. On 27 May 2008 the Kharkiv Administrative Court of Appeal upheld the ruling of the first-instance court.
On 22 July 2009 the Kyiv Regional Administrative Court also declined jurisdiction over a similar claim lodged by a prisoner, A., who considered unlawful the sanctions imposed on him in prison.
On 30 March 2010 the Dnipropetrovsk Regional Administrative Court, likewise, refused to institute proceedings in respect of a claim lodged by a prisoner, L., against the prison administration (concerning allegedly unlawful sanctions, restrictions on his communication with his lawyer and numerous other issues) on the grounds that the prison administration was not a public authority under the Code of Administrative Justice.
On 20 May 2011 the Vinnytsya Regional Administrative Court rejected a claim lodged by a prisoner, R., against the State Prisons Service regarding the latter’s refusals to transfer him to a prison closer to his home address. The court’s reasoning was as follows: a prisoner could be transferred to a prison with a lower level of security if, in particular, he had improved his conduct; and his transfer to another prison of the same level of security was possible only under exceptional circumstances that prevented his remaining in the prison. None of the aforementioned preconditions was considered to have been met. The remote location of the prison from the applicant’s family was not considered an exceptional circumstance justifying his transfer.
The European Prison Rules are recommendations of the Committee of Ministers to member States of the Council of Europe as to the minimum standards to be applied in prisons. They were introduced in 1987 (Recommendation No. R (87) 3) and were subsequently amended and supplemented on a number of occasions. States are encouraged to be guided by the Rules in their legislation and policies, and to ensure wide dissemination of the Rules to their judicial authorities and to prison staff and inmates.
The relevant extract from Recommendation Rec(2003)23 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe to member States on the management by prison administrations of life and other long-term prisoners, adopted on 9 October 2003, reads as follows:
“The Committee of Ministers ...:
[Recommends those governments of member states:
– be guided in their legislation, policies and practice on the management of life sentence and other long-term prisoners by the principles contained in the appendix to this recommendation;
– ensure that this recommendation and the accompanying report are disseminated as widely as possible.
Appendix to Recommendation Rec(2003)23
Counteracting the damaging effects of life and other long-term sentences
... 22.  Special efforts should be made to prevent the breakdown of family ties. To this end:
– prisoners should be allocated, to the greatest extent possible, to prisons situated in proximity to their families or close relatives;
– letters, telephone calls and visits should be allowed with the maximum possible frequency and privacy. If such provision endangers safety or security, or if justified by risk assessment, these contacts may be accompanied by reasonable security measures, such as monitoring of correspondence and searches before and after visits.”
The relevant parts of Recommendation Rec(2006)2 of the Committee of Ministers to member States on the European Prison Rules, adopted on 11 January 2006, reads as follows:
“17.1  Prisoners shall be allocated, as far as possible, to prisons close to their homes or places of social rehabilitation.
2  Allocation shall also take into account the requirements of continuing criminal investigations, safety and security and the need to provide appropriate regimes for all prisoners.
3  As far as possible, prisoners shall be consulted about their initial allocation and any subsequent transfer from one prison to another.
...
1  Prisoners shall be allowed to communicate as often as possible by letter, telephone or other forms of communication with their families, other persons and representatives of outside organisations and to receive visits from these persons.
2  Communication and visits may be subject to restrictions and monitoring necessary for the requirements of continuing criminal investigations, maintenance of good order, safety and security, prevention of criminal offences and protection of victims of crime, but such restrictions, including specific restrictions ordered by a judicial authority, shall nevertheless allow an acceptable minimum level of contact.
3  National law shall specify national and international bodies and officials with whom communication by prisoners shall not be restricted.
4  The arrangements for visits shall be such as to allow prisoners to maintain and develop family relationships in as normal a manner as possible.
5  Prison authorities shall assist prisoners in maintaining adequate contact with the outside world and provide them with the appropriate welfare support to do so.”
The relevant extract reads as follows:
“51.  It is ... very important for prisoners to maintain reasonably good contact with the outside world. Above all, a prisoner must be given the means of safeguarding his relationships with his family and close friends. The guiding principle should be the promotion of contact with the outside world; any limitations upon such contact should be based exclusively on security concerns of an appreciable nature or resource considerations.
The CPT wishes to emphasise in this context the need for some flexibility as regards the application of rules on visits and telephone contacts vis-à-vis prisoners whose families live far away (thereby rendering regular visits impracticable). For example, such prisoners could be allowed to accumulate visiting time and/or be offered improved possibilities for telephone contacts with their families.”