The case originated in an application (no. 3333/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Vladimir Aminovich Tatuyev (“the applicant”), on 13 December 2007.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 31 January 2017 notice of the complaints concerning the nonenforcement of a final judgment in the applicant’s favour, the quashing of that judgment on account of newly discovered circumstances, and the failure to publicly pronounce the judgments of 3 December 2008 and 11 March 2009 was given to the Government, and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
On 11 April 2019 the applicant died. In October 2019 the applicant’s son, Mr Aslan Vladimirovich Tatuyev, born in 1974, expressed the wish to pursue the proceedings in the applicant’s stead.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1938 and lived in Nalchik.
In 2000 the applicant inherited a house in Aushiger, in the Republic of Kabardino-Balkaria, from his mother. He moved from Nalchik and started living in the house. However, he remained formally registered as living in Nalchik.
In June 2002 the applicant’s house in Aushiger was damaged by a flood, and on 29 July 2002 it was declared unsuitable for habitation.
On 1 July 2002, by Decree No. 492 on Priority Measures for Erasing the Consequences of the Flood of June 2002, the Government of the Russian Federation ordered the executive authorities of the regions affected by the flood, together with the Ministry of the Interior, to compile lists of families who had been deprived of housing as a result of the flood. The authorities had two weeks to compile and approve the lists and have them approved (согласовать) by the State Committee for Construction and Housing and Communal Complexes (Госстрой, subsequently “the State Construction Agency”), in so far as housing was concerned. The State Construction Agency had to determine how to allocate the funds granted to individuals who had lost their housing (§§ 7 and 10 of the decree).
On 9 July 2002, by Order no. 130, the State Construction Agency set out: the procedure for allocating the housing subsidies; the method by which the subsidies should be calculated; which were the relevant competent authorities; the procedure by which budgetary funds should be allocated; and templates of the relevant documents, including lists of residents entitled to the subsidies. The order referred to “citizens who [had] suffered as a result of the flood of June 2002 in the Southern Federal Circuit and [had been] deprived of housing, and had been duly registered [with the relevant authorities] and included on the relevant lists in accordance with the [annexes to the order]”, with no further clarifications.
On 13 July 2002, by Decision No. 299, the Government of Kabardino-Balkaria approved the list of residents who were entitled to receive housing subsidies as flood victims. The applicant’s name was included on the list.
On 12 September 2002 the State Construction Agency sent letter no. HM-5279/8 to the Government of the Republic of Kabardino-Balkaria and other regional executive authorities, specifying in particular that individuals who had inherited housing in the areas affected by the flood but had not registered their residence there were not to be included on the lists of those who were to receive subsidies. That letter was not published, and the applicant learned of its existence in 2008 (see paragraphs 20 and 22 below).
By a letter of 29 November 2002 the head of the State Construction Agency advised the regional executive authorities that the subsidies were only to be paid to citizens registered as living at residential addresses which had been damaged as a result of the flood.
On 19 March 2003 the Cherkesskiy District Court of the Republic of Kabardino-Balkaria (“the District Court”) established that the applicant had been permanently residing in Aushiger at the time of the flood.
At some point the Government of Kabardino-Balkaria transferred the amounts for the payment of housing subsidies to district administrations, for further distribution among the flood victims. The applicant did not receive a subsidy, and he brought a court action against various administrative authorities, claiming the amount due to him.
On 21 December 2005 the District Court ordered the administration of the Cherkesskiy District of Kabardino-Balkaria to pay the applicant 162,690 Russian roubles (RUB) as a housing subsidy and RUB 50,000 in interest. The judgment was not appealed against. It became enforceable on 12 January 2006.
The defendant authority twice attempted to bring proceedings for supervisory review of the judgment, referring in particular to a typographical error in the applicant’s name in the judgment and a lack of funds. On 1 August 2006 and 16 January 2007 the Supreme Court of Kabardino-Balkaria rejected those applications.
The judgment in the applicant’s favour was not enforced.
On 3 March 2008, by a separate decision, the Government of Kabardino-Balkaria introduced amendments to the 2002 list. In particular, the applicant’s name was excluded from the list of people who were to receive subsidies. The decision was not published.
On 17 April 2008 the Government of Kabardino-Balkaria advised the applicant that the decision to exclude his name from the 2002 list had been taken in accordance with the instructions in the State Construction Agency letters of 2002 (see above).
On 11 March 2008 the head of the Cherkesskiy District administration asked the District Court to reopen the proceedings which had ended with the judgment of 21 December 2005, on account of newly discovered circumstances, that is the decision of the Government of KabardinoBalkariya of 3 March 2008. On 2 April 2008 the District Court informed the applicant of its decision to reopen the proceedings.
The applicant objected, arguing, inter alia, that the decision of 3 March 2008 could not be taken into account, as in accordance with the law, any governmental acts concerning human rights and liberties were to be published, and the disputed decision had not been.
On 23 April 2008 the District Court reviewed the case on account of the newly discovered circumstances. The court dismissed the applicant’s objection as unfounded, observed that on 3 March 2008 his name had been excluded from the 2002 list, and quashed the judgment of 21 December 2005 in part in respect of the obligation that the authorities pay him the subsidy. The decision specified that it could not be appealed against.
According to the transcript of the hearing on 23 April 2008, the presiding judge asked the defendant authority’s representative why the defendant had not brought the issue to the attention of the court since 2002. In reply, the representative explained that on several occasions the authority had attempted to challenge the judgment of 21 December 2005 by way of supervisory-review proceedings, which had generated the delay.
The applicant challenged the decision of 3 March 2008 (see paragraph 19 above) before the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Kabardino-Balkaria. On 12 August 2008 the Constitutional Court discontinued the examination of the case and specified that the matter should be dealt with by courts of general jurisdiction. In line with that instruction, the applicant asked the Nalchik Town Court to annul the decision of 3 March 2008 as unlawful.
On 10 October 2008 the Nalchik Town Court granted the applicant’s application. It observed that the decision of 3 March 2008 by which he had been excluded from the list of people who were to receive subsidies had been based on the instructions contained in the letters of 12 September and 29 November 2002 from the State Construction Agency (see above). Even though those letters, which the court assessed as “normative acts”, had had an impact on individual rights, namely the right to [respect for one’s] home, they had not been registered with the Ministry of Justice or published, as provided for by law. Furthermore, they had been circulated several months after the list of persons who were entitled to housing subsidies had been compiled. Moreover, the court observed that at the time of the events the applicant had been in possession of a valid court decision establishing the fact that he had been residing in the flood-hit area in June 2002. The court found that, in accordance with the Protection from Emergencies Act (see paragraph 34 below), the procedure for allocating subsidies had had to be established by a decree of the federal or regional governments. However, no such procedure had existed at the material time, and the relevant decree had not been issued. Accordingly, the court directly applied the Constitution of the Russian Federation and the Liberty of Movement Act (cited in paragraphs 33 and 35 below) and found that the applicant’s exercise of his rights could not be conditional on his being registered at his place of residence, and could not be restricted on that account. The court therefore annulled the decision of the Government of Kabardino-Balkaria of 3 March 2008.
On 12 November 2008 the Supreme Court of Kabardino-Balkaria quashed the judgment of 10 October 2008 on appeal and remitted the case for fresh examination.
On 3 December 2008 the Nalchik Town Court rejected the applicant’s claim. The court established: that in 2002 the applicant had owned the damaged house and had resided in it, but had not been formally registered as living there; that the fact that he had actually been residing in the damaged house had been established by the domestic courts in 2003; that the lists of the people who were to receive subsidies had been compiled in July 2002; and that the decision of 3 March 2008 had been made in accordance with the letters from the State Construction Agency sent late in 2002 to the effect that individuals who had not registered their place of residence in the areas affected by the flood were not entitled to the allowance. The court concluded that, as stated in those letters, the allocation of the subsidy had been conditional on the applicant’s being formally registered as living in the affected area. Accordingly, the applicant had been lawfully excluded from the list.
At the close of the hearing the court read out the operative part of its judgment.
On 5 December 2008 the applicant’s representative received a copy of the reasoned judgment.
On 11 March 2009 the Supreme Court of Kabardino-Balkaria examined an appeal by the applicant in a public hearing and upheld the judgment of 3 December 2008. The court endorsed the lower court’s reasoning and noted that the Government of Kabardino-Balkaria were competent to amend the list of people who were to receive subsidies, and that they had acted in accordance with law.
At the close of the hearing the court read out the operative part of its judgment. On 19 March 2009 a copy of the reasoned judgment was sent to the parties, including the applicant.
Article 55 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation provides that no laws denying or denigrating human and civil rights and freedoms may be enacted in the Russian Federation.
Section 18(2) of the Federal Law of 21 December 1994 no. 68-FZ on the Protection of Civilians and Land from Natural and Industrial Emergencies (“the Protection from Emergencies Act”), provides that the criteria and procedures for the allocation of social benefits and allowances, as well as specific amounts of compensation and types of compensation for damage caused to the health and assets of persons as a result of emergencies, are to be established by federal and regional legislation.
Section 3 of the Federal Act on the Right of Russian Citizens to Liberty of Movement and Freedom to Choose their Place of Temporary and Permanent Residence within the Russian Federation (Law no. 5242-I of 25 June 1993, as in force at the material time) provided that the exercise of individual rights and liberties guaranteed by the Constitution and Federal Acts could not be conditional on one’s place of residence being registered.
For a summary of the domestic provisions on registration of one’s place of residence see, in so far as relevant, Tatishvili v. Russia, no. 1509/02, §§ 29-31, ECHR 2007I.
Article 392 §§ 1 and 2 (4) of the Code of Civil Procedure (“Reconsideration of judgments on the grounds of newly discovered circumstances”), as in force at the material time, provided as follows:
“1.  [Judgments] which have come into force may be reconsidered on the basis of newly discovered circumstances.
The grounds for reconsideration ... shall be:
1)  essential circumstances that were unknown and could not have been known to the applicant;
4)  the annulment of ... a decision of the State or municipal authority ... that was the basis of the judgment or decision of the court ...”
For a summary of other relevant provisions on the reconsideration of cases, see Igor Vasilchenko v. Russia, no. 6571/04, § 33, 3 February 2011.
Article 199 of the Code of Civil Procedure, as in force at the material time, provided that a judgment was to be delivered immediately after the examination of a case. The preparation of a reasoned judgment could be adjourned for no more than five days from the date on which the examination of the case ended, provided that the court had pronounced the operative part of the judgment at the same hearing in which the examination of the case had ended. The pronounced operative part of the judgment was to be signed by all judges and included in the case file. For a summary of other provisions concerning the public pronouncement of judgments, see Malmberg and Others v. Russia, nos. 23045/05 and 3 others, §§ 30-41, 15 January 2015.