The case originated in an application (no. 51933/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Russian nationals on 14 October 2008. Their personal details appear in the appended tables.
The applicants were represented by lawyers from a non-governmental organisation (NGO), Stichting Russian Justice Initiative, in partnership with another NGO, Astreya. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr M. Galperin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights.
On 9 January 2018 the Government were given notice of the complaints concerning (i) the abduction, torture and subsequent disappearance of the applicants’ relative and (ii) the authorities’ failure to carry out an effective investigation into the matter and the lack of an effective domestic remedy against the alleged violations. The remainder of the application was declared inadmissible, pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The first and second applicants are the father and mother of Mr Zelimkhan Murdalov, who was born in 1975, and the third applicant is his sister.
According to the applicants, at 11 a.m. on 2 January 2001 Mr Murdalov was walking along Musorov Street in Grozny, next to the Oktyabrskiy District temporary department of the interior (“the VOVD”) when six police officers surrounded him, searched him under the pretext of suspicion of his unlawfully using drugs, and then beat him. Then the officers put a coat over his head and forced him into the VOVD. Subsequently, an investigator, Zh., formally arrested Mr Murdalov and opened criminal case no. 15201/03 against him under Article 228 of the Criminal Code (illegal possession of drugs). It appears that subsequently the criminal case was terminated owing to the absence of corpus delicti.
At the VOVD a police officer, L. – also known by the nickname of “Cadet” (Кадет) – subjected Mr Murdalov to beatings with fists, boots and a baton with the aim of forcing him to become an informant for the police. At about 7 p.m. on 2 January 2001 Mr Murdalov was transferred to the VOVD’s temporary detention unit (“the IVS”) with visible injuries, which were recorded by a doctor. Those injuries included head trauma with loss of consciousness, disruption to breathing, an open fracture of the left arm, and a torn ear (see also paragraph 30 below). Then Mr Murdalov was placed in a cell, where he suffered several strokes. The doctor was called to the cell and administered some injections.
On 3 January 2001 Zh., the investigator, handed an order for Mr Murdalov’s release to officer L. The latter, apparently having falsified the signature of Mr Murdalov, returned the release order to the investigator in order to deceive the investigator into believing that Mr Murdalov had been released. Later on the same day, Mr Murdalov was taken from his cell by several police officers, including officer L. (who had beaten him). He has not been seen since.
The Government did not dispute the facts, as submitted by the applicants.
The investigation into Mr Murdalov’s disappearance, death and illtreatment was undertaken within the framework of five criminal cases. The first investigation, no. 15004, was opened into his disappearance and death (see paragraph 11 below). The second investigation, number 90003, was opened into his ill-treatment by three police officers and their alleged malfeasance and abuse of power (see paragraph 15 below). The third investigation, number 61883, was opened into his ill-treatment by two police officers and their alleged malfeasance and abuse of power (see paragraph 16 below) (both criminal cases into Mr Murdalov’s ill-treatment were subsequently merged – see paragraph 19 below). The fourth investigation, under an unknown number, (which was opened into the murder of Mr Murdalov) and the fifth investigation (under the number 252/404523-15) were merged into one criminal investigation concerning his murder and disappearance (see paragraph 34 below).
On 5 January 2001 the applicants lodged a complaint with the Chechnya prosecutor’s office regarding the disappearance of Mr Murdalov, asking for assistance in the search for him.
On 7 January 2001 the Chechnya prosecutor’s office opened criminal case no. 15004 (also referred to as case no. 15005 in the documents submitted) under Article 126 of the Criminal Code (abduction).
On 13 April 2001 Mr Kh.Kh., who had been detained in the IVS on 2 January 2001, was questioned. He stated that he had seen Mr Murdalov being brought to the detention unit bearing multiple injuries. After receiving several injections administered by Doctor M., Mr Murdalov had been taken away by the police officers and, most probably, had died shortly afterwards as he had not been able to walk or move unassisted; the guards of the detention unit must have hidden his body.
On 25 September 2003, at the request of the first applicant, the Leninskiy District Court declared Mr Murdalov a missing person.
On 17 June and then on 17 October 2005 the first applicant lodged a request with the Chechnya prosecutor’s office for criminal proceedings to be instituted against officers P., M., K. and Zh. (the investigator), who (the first applicant believed) could have been the perpetrators of a crime (abduction) committed against Mr Murdalov. It appears that no reply was given to that request.
On 10 February 2003 the investigators severed the part of criminal case no. 15004 relating to officers P., M. and L. under Articles 111 § 3 (a) and 286 § 3 (a, b, and c) of the Criminal Code (infliction of serious bodily injuries and abuse of power); they created from it a new criminal case under the number 90003.
On 18 November 2005 the investigators severed the part of criminal case no. 90003 against officers M. and P. and created from it a new criminal case under the number 61883; the part of criminal case no. 90003 (against Officer L.) relating to abuse of power, the infliction of serious bodily injuries on Mr Murdalov and malfeasance remained within criminal case no. 90003 (see paragraph 29 below).
On 15 May 2006 Officers P. and M. were charged with abuse of power and the infliction of serious injuries on Mr Murdalov. It appears that by the time of their indictment both officers had left Russia for Kazakhstan. Their names were placed on the wanted list.
On 17 May 2006 the Zavodskoy District Court ordered officers P. and M.’s arrest in absentia.
On 1 April 2010 criminal case no. 90003 and criminal case no. 61883 opened against officers P. and M. were merged under the number 90003.
Between 2010 and 2015 the investigation in respect of officers P. and M. was suspended (and subsequently resumed) on several occasions for failure to establish their whereabouts.
On 15 December 2015 officer M. was arrested in Omsk, Russia, and taken to a detention centre in Grozny, Chechnya.
On 17 December 2015, following officer M.’s arrest, a number of military veterans’ organisations wrote to the President of the Russian Federation, requesting the release of officer M. and the termination of the criminal case against him.
On 25 December 2015 the investigation in respect of criminal case no. 90003 was resumed. The first applicant was informed of that development.
On 26 December 2015 the investigators changed the measure of restraint in respect of officer M. from that of arrest to that of an undertaking given by him not to leave his place of residence (подписка о невыезде).
On 15 January 2016 the first applicant, referring to the fact that only officer L. had been indicted (see paragraph 30 below), whereas officer P. was still wanted by the authorities, lodged a request that the investigators inform him about progress in the investigation.
On 25 January 2016 officer P. was arrested and taken to a temporary detention centre in Dzerzhinsk in the Nizhniy Novgorod region. Subsequently, the investigators changed the measure of restraint in respect of officer P. from that of arrest to that of an undertaking given by him not to leave his place of residence.
By decisions dated 18 and 26 January 2016 the criminal proceedings against officers P. and M. respectively were terminated for lack of corpus delicti in their actions. In the wording of those decisions, the investigators stated that the investigation had found no evidence indicating that either officer M. or officer P. had abused their power or inflicted injuries on Mr Murdalov. The decisions also stated that of seven eyewitnesses interviewed in the course of the investigation, only officer L. – when questioned in the absence of his lawyer – had given a statement incriminating officers M. and P; however, he had subsequently – in the presence of his lawyer – retracted his earlier statement in respect of both officers as having allegedly been given under duress. Furthermore, during a subsequent confrontation held with officers M. and P., officer L. had not reaffirmed his allegation that M. and P. had been involved in Mr Murdalov’s ill-treatment.
On 22 March 2016 the first applicant wrote to the Deputy Prosecutor General requesting that officers P. and M. be prosecuted for their alleged involvement in his son’s ill-treatment and possible murder. In reply, he was informed that an inquiry into Mr Murdalov’s murder had been opened.
On an unspecified date between 2003 and 2004 the investigators in criminal case no. 90003 charged officer L. with abuse of power, the infliction of serious injuries on Mr Murdalov, and malfeasance (see paragraph 16 above).
On 29 March 2005 the Oktyabrskiy District Court in Grozny found officer L. guilty of offences under Articles 111 (serious damage to health), 286 (abuse of power) and 292 (official malfeasance) of the Criminal Code and sentenced him to eleven years’ imprisonment and banned his employment in the sphere of law enforcement for three years. The court found it established that officer L. had subjected Mr Murdalov to illtreatment by punching, kicking and hitting him with batons with the aim of forcing him to become an informant for the police. The relevant parts of wording of the decision read as follows:
“... In his testimony before the court, officer L. stated that on the day of the incident ... when walking down the stairs in the IVS, Mr Murdalov had fallen and sustained several bruises. ... At the request of the head of the IVS he had written a statement explaining how Mr Murdalov had sustained the injuries. Mr Murdalov had personally signed the document ... The next day, on 3 January 2001, he had met investigator Zh., who had given him the documents [authorising] Mr Murdalov’s release. On his way to the IVS, he had met officer T., who had taken the documents from him and told him that he would release Mr Murdalov ...
...
During the investigation, the accused [officer L.] changed his statements every time that he became aware of a new piece of evidence. For example, he gave a statement concerning officer T.’s involvement in Mr Murdalov’s release only when he had learned that officer T. had died.
...
From the witnesses’ statements, it can be seen that when Mr Murdalov was taken to the cell by officer L., Mr Murdalov’s head was swollen, bleeding and wrapped in a bandage. This fact proves that the statement of officer L. regarding Mr Murdalov’s fall from the stairs is false. Moreover, the forensic examination of 12 April 2002 [which was carried out on the basis of documents contained in the criminal case file] revealed that Mr Murdalov [was suffering from] head trauma, as well as a loss of consciousness, disruption to his breathing, an open fracture of the left arm and a torn ear.
...
The aforementioned bodily injuries are the results of a beating with hard objects. The forensic evaluation found that it was highly improbable that Mr Murdalov could have sustained those injuries by falling downstairs.
...
According to the conclusions of graphological examination no. 238 of 15 May 2002, Mr Murdalov’s signature on ... the record of his bodily search and on the decision to release him from detention were, most probably, forged by officer L.”
According to the court’s conclusions, the investigators took a number of steps in order to collect evidence proving officer L.’s responsibility for the beating of Mr Murdalov. In particular, they questioned the investigator (Zh.), Dr M., Mr Kh.Kh., the first applicant, officer L., two eyewitnesses who had been detained in the IVS and had seen Mr Murdalov, and two police officers who had been at the VOVD that day. The investigators ordered four expert examinations aimed at establishing the cause of Mr Murdalov’s bodily injuries, as recorded in the documents contained in the investigative file and at clarifying whether Mr Murdalov’s signature had been falsified.
On 30 March 2005 officer L. lodged his first appeal against his sentence. After several rounds of appeals at different levels of jurisdiction, on 26 July 2011 the Supreme Court of Russia reduced his imprisonment from eleven to ten years.
On an unspecified date in 2014 officer L. was released after serving his sentence.
On an unspecified date before 25 May 2016 the Department for the Investigation of Particularly Serious Crimes of the Investigative Committee of the Russian Federation (Управление по расследованию особо важных дел Следственного комитета) opened a criminal investigation into the murder of Mr Murdalov. The case number is unknown; it was subsequently merged with the criminal case instituted in respect of his abduction – that is to say case no. 15004 (see paragraph 11 above) – under the joint number 252/40452315. On 28 May 2016 the investigation in respect of the joint case was suspended for failure to identify the perpetrators. The first applicant was informed thereof. There is no information regarding any further developments in those proceedings.
On 24 February 2009 the first applicant lodged a claim with the Leninskiy District Court in Grozny asking to be granted the status of civil plaintiff within criminal case no. 15004 (the case concerning Mr Murdalov’s disappearance). Referring to the prosecution of officer L., he sought compensation in the amount of 10,000,000 Russian roubles (RUB) (216,000 euros (EUR)) for pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage caused by the ill-treatment and disappearance of Mr Murdalov, as well as costs and expenses.
On 11 June 2009 the Leninskiy District Court in Grozny, referring to the prosecution of officer L., awarded the first applicant RUB 500,000 (about EUR 11,500) as compensation for non-pecuniary damage in respect of the ill-treatment of Mr Murdalov and dismissed the remainder of the complaint. The relevant part of the judgment reads as follows:
“...the applicant did not submit any evidence with regard to the costs and expenses he had sustained (a contract signed with a lawyer, tickets, invoices, etc.). Likewise, the court does not see any causal link ... between the illness of the applicant and the disappearance of his son. Therefore, the court makes no award in respect of pecuniary damage.”
That judgment was upheld on appeal by the Chechnya Supreme Court on 15 September 2009.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law and other materials on disappearances in the region, see Aslakhanova and Others v. Russia (nos. 2944/06 and 4 others, §§ 43-59 and §§ 69-84, 18 December 2012), and Turluyeva v. Russia (no. 63638/09, §§ 65-74, 20 June 2013).
Article 111 § 3 (a) of the Criminal Code, as in force between 2003 and 2006, stipulated  that the premeditated infliction of severe damage to health is punishable by up to twelve years’ imprisonment.
Article 286 § 3 (a), (b), (c) of the Criminal Code, as in force between 2003 and 2006, stipulated that actions undertaken by a public official (i) that clearly exceeded his or her authority and entailed a substantial violation of an individual’s rights and lawful interests, (ii) were committed with violence or the threat of violence or with the use of a weapon or (iii) had grave consequences, were punishable by three to ten years’ imprisonment, with a ban on occupying certain posts or engaging in certain activities for a period of up to three years.
Article 292 of the Criminal Code, as in force between 2003 and 2006, stipulated that (i) official forgery (malfeasance) – that is to say the insertion of false information into official documents by a functionary, civil servant or local self-government employee who was not a functionary, and (ii) the implementation of changes to such documents distorting their actual content, if such acts were committed for mercenary or any other personal interests, was punishable by a fine in the amount of up to RUB 80,000, or in the amount of the wage/salary or any other income of the convicted person for a period of up to six months, or by 80 hours of obligatory labour (обязательными работами), or by up to two years’ correctional labour, (принудительными работами), or by up to six months’ detention (арест), or by up to two years’ imprisonment.