The case originated in an application (no. 34085/09) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Mr Antanas Paliutis (“the applicant”), on 12 June 2009.
The applicant was represented by Mr K. Paliutis, a lawyer practising in Vilnius. The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms K. Bubnytė.
The applicant alleged that he had been denied a fair trial on account of the domestic courts’ failure to examine his claim, in breach of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 4 December 2014 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1957 and lives in Vilnius.
The applicant owned a 0.53 hectare plot of land in the village of Tarailiai (Tauragė region). In 2005 he submitted a request to the local authorities to change the classification of the land from agricultural to residential use. In accordance with the domestic law, such a request had first to be granted by the municipal council and then approved by the county administration.
Tauragė District Municipal Council granted the applicant’s request and prepared a detailed area plan (detalusis planas) (hereinafter “the plan”). The plan was subsequently submitted for approval to the Tauragė County Administration (hereinafter “the TCA”). However, on 25 November 2005 the TCA refused to approve the plan on the ground that it had not been prepared in accordance with the domestic laws governing the planning process.
The applicant submitted a complaint to the State Inspectorate for Planning and Construction (hereinafter “the Inspectorate”), which was the competent institution for out-of-court settlement of disputes arising from the planning process. On 10 August 2006 the Inspectorate held that the TCA’s refusal to approve the plan had been unfounded.
After the Inspectorate’s decision, Tauragė District Municipal Council re-submitted the plan to the TCA. However, on 13 November 2006 the TCA informed the council and the applicant that it would not review its previous decision to refuse approval.
On 22 December 2006 the Inspectorate notified the TCA that its refusal to approve the plan had been unfounded and urged it to review that decision. It appears that the TCA did not take any action in that respect.
In January 2007 the applicant lodged a claim with the Klaipėda Regional Administrative Court. He asked the court to order the TCA to approve the plan. Following the court’s suggestion, in April 2007 the applicant added a request to annul the TCA’s decision of 25 November 2005.
On 4 May 2007 the Klaipėda Regional Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s claims. The court held that county administration’s decisions on approval of detailed area plans were valid for one year after their adoption. If the plan had not been adopted within that time, the decision became invalid and the plan had to be re-submitted for approval. Therefore, the court found that the TCA’s decision of 25 November 2005 was no longer valid and could not have any effect on the applicant’s situation. The court stated that it had no competence to examine the lawfulness of an invalid act and dismissed the claim. It also held that, as a result, there was no need to examine the applicant’s remaining claims.
The applicant appealed against that judgment. He complained, inter alia, that the first instance court had not examined his original request – to order the TCA to approve the plan.
On 15 February 2008 the Supreme Administrative Court upheld the applicant’s appeal and returned the case for re-examination by the firstinstance court. The Supreme Administrative Court noted that when a county administration refused to approve a detailed area plan, that plan could be re-submitted only after the errors indicated in the refusal had been corrected. However, if the author of the plan disagreed with the indicated errors, he or she would effectively be denied access to court if the proceedings lasted longer than a year. The court also noted that the applicant’s original request had been to order the TCA to approve the plan and that the first-instance court had not made any findings in that respect.
On 16 October 2008 the Klaipėda Regional Administrative Court, after re-examining the case, again decided to dismiss the applicant’s claims. The court held that decisions of the Inspectorate, taken during the out-of-court settlement procedure, were mandatory for county administrations (see paragraph 20 below). Accordingly, the Inspectorate’s decisions of 10 August 2006 and 22 December 2006 had repealed the TCA’s decision of 25 November 2005. As a result, the TCA’s refusal to approve the plan was no longer valid and the court had no competence to examine its lawfulness. The court also held that, as a result, there was no need to examine the applicant’s remaining claims.
The applicant appealed against that judgment, again complaining that the first-instance court had not examined his request to order the TCA to approve the plan, and that it had not followed the Supreme Administrative Court’s judgment of 15 February 2008 (see paragraph 14 above).
On 12 December 2008 the Supreme Administrative Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal. It upheld the lower court’s findings that the TCA’s decision had been repealed by the Inspectorate and that courts had no competence to examine invalid acts. The Supreme Administrative Court then held that the applicant’s request to order the TCA to approve the plan was “derived” (išvestinis) from the request to annul the TCA’s decision; having dismissed the latter, there was therefore no need to examine the former request either. Lastly the court noted that the applicant had not requested that the court order the TCA to comply with the Inspectorate’s decisions, so it would make no findings in that respect.
In 2010, following a national administrative reform, all county administrations were abolished and their planning powers were transferred to the Inspectorate. The applicant then submitted a new request to change the classification of his land and it was approved by all the relevant authorities. The classification of the land was changed to residential use in February 2012.
At the material time, the Instruction on the Procedure for the Verification of Planning Documents, adopted by the Ministry of the Environment, provided that decisions on the approval of planning documents were valid for one year after their adoption. If a planning document had not been adopted within that time, the decision became invalid and the document had to be re-submitted for approval. If the approval was refused, the planning document could be re-submitted only after the errors indicated in the refusal had been corrected (paragraphs 19 and 20).
At the material time, the Regulations on the State Supervision of Planning, Construction and Use of Buildings, adopted by the Government, provided that the State Inspectorate for Planning and Construction was responsible for the supervision of construction on the national level and that its decisions were binding for all individuals and legal entities involved in the planning process and in construction (paragraphs 4.2 and 11).
Article 15 § 1 of the Law on Administrative Proceedings provides that administrative courts have the competence to examine the lawfulness of decisions and actions of public administration authorities, as well as the refusal by those authorities to perform actions within their competence, or delays in performing them.
Article 10 of the Law on Administrative Proceedings provides that the court must explain to the parties their procedural rights and obligations, warn them about the consequences of procedural actions or inaction, and assist them in implementing their procedural rights.
Article 52 of the Law on Administrative Proceedings provides that the claimant has the right to clarify or change the subject of the claim at any stage of the proceedings until the court adjourns for deliberation.
Article 86 § 3 of the Law on Administrative Proceedings provides that a court’s judgment must respond to all the principal claims submitted by the claimant.
The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Lithuania in its ruling of 16 January 2006 stated the following:
“The constitutional imperatives – that justice can only be administered by courts, that law must be publicly accessible, and that examination of cases must be fair – imply that every judgment (or another final decision of a court) must be based on legal arguments. The reasoning must be rational – the judgment must contain sufficient arguments to justify its conclusion. In this context it is also noted that the principle of legal certainty ... means, inter alia, that a judgment cannot omit arguments or circumstances which are relevant for reaching a fair conclusion in the case. Judgments must be clear for parties and participants in the case. If this requirement is not fulfilled, that is not the administration of justice as enshrined in the Constitution.”
.  The Supreme Administrative Court of Lithuania in its judgment of 27 January 2004 in case no. A7-121/2004 stated that a person can submit complaints to administrative courts only in respect of such legal acts which have an effect on his or her rights or legal interests.
The Supreme Administrative Court of Lithuania in its judgment of 14 March 2008 in case no. A575-155/2008 stated that courts cannot take over the functions of public administration unless explicitly provided by law.