The present case concerns the failure of the domestic authorities to enforce the final judgment of 29 June 2016 given by the Suceava County Court in the applicant’s favour.
The applicant was born in 1970 and lives in Straja.
The Government were represented by their Agent, most recently Ms O. Ezer, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On the night of 8 August 2013 the police raided the applicant’s home and found 5,450 packets of cigarettes in an outbuilding (the applicant used the word beci (“cellar”)) on the applicant’s property, which was located close to the Ukrainian border. The packets were stamped with Ukrainian tax stamps exclusively; the applicant and her husband could not provide any proof as to their provenance or of payment of the corresponding customs duties to the Romanian authorities. They declared that they were completely unaware of the very existence of the impugned goods, indicating that the respective outbuilding had been abandoned for a long time.
On 12 August 2013 the prosecutor initiated criminal proceedings against the applicant and her husband, accusing them of having committed aggravated smuggling of cigarettes.
On 24 September 2013 the prosecutor asked the Regional Excise and Customs Operations Department (hereinafter “the customs authority”) to calculate the corresponding customs duties, VAT and penalties due for the presumably smuggled goods.
On 23 December 2013 the customs authority issued a decision according to which the applicant had to pay a total amount of 61,780 Romanian lei (RON – approximately 13,730 euros (EUR)), which represented the material damage of the evasion of customs checks in respect of the smuggled goods. The customs authority requested that a seizure (sechestru) be enforced in respect of the applicant’s property until the payment of the due amount had been made.
The decision also indicated that under Articles 205-07 of the Tax Procedure Code (hereinafter “the TPC”, see paragraph 37 below), the applicant could challenge the measures taken by the customs authority within thirty days of notification of the decision.
The applicant was notified of that decision on 10 January 2014; she did not challenge it, allegedly in view of the fact that she was awaiting the outcome in the criminal proceedings which were pending against her for the act of smuggling (see also paragraphs 13 and 17 below).
On 31 January 2014 the prosecutor decided to terminate criminal proceedings against the applicant and her husband for lack of sufficient evidence to rebut the presumption of innocence operating in their favour. The proceedings continued in respect of “U.P.” (“unknown perpetrator”) instead.
In the same decision, the prosecutor ordered the confiscation of the cigarettes.
On 15 March 2014 the applicant was notified of the prosecutor’s decision.
This decision was confirmed by the higher prosecutor on 18 July 2014, following an appeal lodged by the customs authority. No further appeal was lodged against this latter decision.
On 2 July 2014 the applicant allegedly wrote to the customs authority and requested that they stop any proceedings against her owing to the prosecutor’s decision which had absolved her of any criminal liability in relation to the confiscated goods.
The customs authority allegedly confirmed orally that the case would be examined based on the new information submitted. However, no written reply was ever given to the applicant’s request.
On 25 July 2014 the tax authority issued a warrant of execution in respect of the decision of 23 December 2013 (see paragraph 7 above), and notified the applicant of that. The warrant was received by the applicant on 11 August 2014, as indicated by her signature on the notification slip appended to the documents.
On 10 February 2015 the applicant lodged an application with the Rădăuţi First-Instance Court, seeking to annul the decision of 23 December 2013 (see paragraph 7 above); at the same time, she lodged an application for an extension of the time-limit set to challenge the impugned decision. She relied on Articles 205-18 of the TPC (see paragraph 37 below).
The applicant argued that when she had been notified of the decision – in January 2014 (see paragraph 9 above) – the criminal proceedings against her had still been ongoing and their outcome had been uncertain; she asserted therefore that the said decision had breached the presumption of innocence, which had operated in her favour. In any event, pending the said outcome, it was unreasonable to presume that she was able to formulate any articulated defence against the decision issued by the customs authority.
She also argued that as soon as she had been notified of the prosecutor’s decision to terminate the criminal proceedings against her, she had forwarded a copy of that decision to the customs authority, asking that her tax situation be clarified (see paragraph 13 above). The applicant submitted that she had sent that request by fax, appending proof that on that date she had faxed some documents to the customs authority. At that moment and in view of the outcome of the criminal proceedings against her, she had presumed that all further actions seeking to annul the tax decision against her had become unnecessary. In any event, she considered it to be self-evident that she could not be held liable for damage that she had not caused.
On 11 June 2015 the Suceava County Court rejected as ill-founded the applicant’s request for an extension of the time-limit and rejected as inadmissible her request for the annulment of the decision of 23 December 2013.
The court firstly held that once the applicant was notified of the decision, she had the possibility to challenge it and to then ask for the suspension of the challenge procedure pending the outcome of the criminal proceedings against her.
The County Court also held that even if the applicant had sent to the customs authority a copy of the prosecutor’s decision which had exonerated her from criminal liability (see paragraph 14 above), such notification could not be considered as a valid request to annul the tax decision as set out in Article 205 of the TPC. Moreover, even assuming the request was valid, the court noted that the applicant had only submitted proof that she had sent some pages by fax on 2 July 2014 (see paragraph 18 above), without being able to prove what exactly she had sent; in any event, the customs authority had not given any reply to the applicant’s request (see paragraph 13 above). In that context, the court reiterated that it had jurisdiction only to examine any decision that the customs authority gave in reply to the applicant’s request to have the decision annulled. Hence, the courts could not directly order the annulment of the impugned decision before the authorities had themselves decided on the annulment request. The applicant’s claims were therefore inadmissible.
An appeal by the applicant against this judgment was dismissed on 24 November 2015 by the Suceava Court of Appeal. The appellate court held that the applicant had not sufficiently substantiated her assertion that she had lodged a valid request challenging the decision of 23 December 2013 before the customs authority.
On 20 November 2014 the Land Registry allowed the request submitted by the tax authority on 18 November 2014 to place a mortgage (ipotecă) on the applicant’s immovable property, namely on three plots of land surrounding the applicant’s home, and to record the change in the land register.
On 19 December 2014 the applicant requested that the Land Registry provide her with the documents which justified the decision to place a mortgage on her property. Upon receipt, she lodged an application with the tax authority to have the measure lifted.
On 12 February 2015 the local tax office replied to the applicant that her request had been forwarded to the customs authority for comments. On 27 February 2015 the applicant was informed that the lifting of the mortgage was possible only if the decision setting out the applicant’s debts to the State, namely that of 23 December 2013 (see paragraph 7 above), was annulled.
On 5 January 2015 the applicant lodged an application with the Rădăuţi First-Instance Court, seeking to annul all the enforcement measures against her including the placement of a mortgage on her immovable property (see paragraph 23 above). She relied on Article 711 et seq. of the Code of Civil Procedure (see paragraph 40 below).
On 11 December 2015 the First-Instance Court allowed the applicant’s claims and annulled all the enforcement measures against her. It found that in so far as the prosecutor’s decision of 31 January 2014 (see paragraph 10 above) held that the applicant had not committed the acts which had caused the damage claimed by the State, she could not be held responsible for someone else’s deed and thus she was not liable to pay any amount thereto.
The court furthermore found that the outstanding tax decision against the applicant, namely that of 23 December 2013 (see paragraph 7 above), was not a final judgment and therefore could not be considered to be a warrant of execution (titlu executoriu).
The tax authority challenged this judgment.
On 29 June 2016 the Suceava County Court allowed the appeal and partly changed the lower court’s judgment, specifically in respect of the annulment of the enforcement measures taken on 25 July 2014 (see paragraph 15 above).
The court found that the challenge lodged on 5 January 2015 (see paragraph 26 above) in respect of the enforcement measures taken on 25 July 2014 was inadmissible as being lodged out of time, in view of the fact that the applicant had been notified of the decision to enforce on 11 August 2014, as shown by her signature on the notification slip (see paragraph 15 above).
The county court also held that the decision of 23 December 2013 had become a warrant of execution, as it had not been challenged, thus becoming final; it could be challenged in accordance with the provisions of Article 205 of the TPC (see paragraph 37 below).
However, the court indicated that, even if it could no longer assess the lawfulness of the said warrant, according to Article 148 of the TPC (see paragraph 38 below), direct enforcement ended essentially when the tax debt could be considered as extinguished. In the applicant’s case, the warrant of execution had been issued as a result of the initiation of criminal proceedings against her for smuggling. It followed that once the criminal proceedings had been terminated on 31 January 2014, the applicant having been exonerated of any criminal liability (see paragraph 10 above), the tax debt had been extinguished and the applicant had been discharged of any obligation to pay damages caused by the alleged criminal act. It followed that the applicant could no longer be considered a “tax debtor”, given the lack of any tax-law relationship between her and the tax authority.
It appears that at the date of the latest information available to the Court (19 February 2018), this judgment had not been enforced, in spite of the applicant’s efforts thereto, which included written requests sent to the tax authority, the last one dating 10 October 2016.
On 9 February 2017 the tax authority issued a new decision for the seizure (sechestru) of the applicant’s property, with the aim of securing payment of a total of RON 61,780 (approximately EUR 13,730). The parties have not submitted any further information in relation to this measure taken by the tax authority.
In their observations, the Government indicated that the total amount owed by the applicant on 27 December 2017 was RON 83,228 (approximately EUR 18,495), in view of the penalties which had continued to accrue as a result of the debt not having been paid.
Articles 205-18 of the TPC as in force at the relevant time set out the procedure to challenge a decision issued by the tax authority; the time-limit was set for thirty days from the moment of notification and the request for annulment should be lodged with the authority which had issued the contested decision. The response given by the tax authority could in its turn be challenged before the domestic courts in accordance with the rules of administrative procedure, specifically within thirty days of notification, or, if there was no response, within six months of the initial challenge having been lodged.
Article 148 of TPC set out the circumstances in which direct enforcement could cease as follows:
Article 148
“Direct enforcement ceases if:
a) the tax obligation stipulated in the warrant of enforcement, including the obligations of payment of the accessories, the costs for enforcement and any other amounts settled by the debtor, according to the law, have been extinguished in full;
b) the enforceable title was annulled;
c) any other circumstances prescribed by law.”
The principle of res judicata and the binding character of judgments under Romanian civil-procedure law are set out in Articles 430-35 of the Code of Civil Procedure as follows: judgments of the civil courts are binding on the parties and their successors. An issue determined in the court’s holding on the merits is res judicata. In addition, certain decisive findings on elements directly determinative of the disputed right or obligation may also be seen as res judicata, whether they appear in the operative part of the judgment or are reflected only in the reasoning part.
Articles 711 et seq. set out the conditions in which certain enforcement measures may be challenged before the courts; the time-limit set for such challenges is fifteen days after the notification of the impugned enforcement decision.