The case originated in an application (no. 68946/10) against Ukraine lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Ukrainian company, Fortetsya, MPP (“the applicant company”), on 17 November 2010.
The applicant was represented by Ms Y. Khmaruk, a lawyer practising in Ostrog. The Ukrainian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr I. Lishchyna.
The applicant company complained under Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention that following a mistake on the part of the State bailiffs it had been deprived of its property and had not been compensated for it.
On 14 November 2018 the Government were given notice of the above complaint and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant company, MPP Fortetsya, is a private company registered in Ostrog.
On 23 November 2004 the applicant company bought, for 55,455 Ukrainian hryvnias (UAH – at the time equivalent to about 8,000 euros (EUR)), a crane lorry at a public auction organised by the Bailiffs Service as part of enforcement proceedings against third persons. The applicant company transferred the lorry’s value to the Bailiffs Service’s account on 3 December 2004.
Given that it was not able to get the lorry from the previous owner (a company called N.Z.), the applicant company initiated commercial proceedings against the latter claiming the transfer of the lorry into its possession. N.Z. lodged a counter-claim seeking invalidation of the public auction. That counter-claim was subsequently pursued by five individuals, former shareholders of N.Z., who claimed the title to the lorry in question in place of their shares’ value.
On 21 December 2005 the Ostrog Town Court declared the public auction null and void, and recognised the five individuals’ title to the lorry. It was established that the head of the Bailiffs Service had conducted the auction in breach of a judicial ruling of 15 November 2004 which had stayed the enforcement proceedings.
On 16 April 2009 the applicant company lodged a claim against the local Bailiffs Service seeking the recovery of the amount paid for the lorry. It relied on Articles 661 and 1212 of the Civil Code, as well as Article 11 of the Enforcement Proceedings Act (see paragraphs 15 and 16 below).
On 16 July 2009 the Rivne Regional Commercial Court found against the applicant company. It held that at the time of the payment, the public auction had not yet been invalidated. Furthermore, the Bailiffs Service had not kept the money for itself, but had transferred it to the creditors in the enforcement proceedings.
The applicant company appealed. It maintained that it had fully complied with its obligations under the sales contract of 23 November 2004 and that it was entitled to get back what it had paid at the public auction after that auction had been declared null and void.
On 19 January 2010 the Lviv Commercial Court of Appeal upheld the judgment of 16 July 2009. It stated that, indeed, damage caused by the State Bailiffs to a physical person or legal entity in the course of enforcement proceedings had to be compensated by the State in accordance with Article 1174 of the Civil Code (see paragraph 15 below). It observed, however, that the applicant company had not relied on that provision. Furthermore, it was noted that Article 11 of the Enforcement Proceedings Act relied on by the applicant company did not concern the issue of compensation for damage caused by State Bailiffs. The appellate court therefore rejected the appeal.
The applicant company appealed on points of law. It argued, in particular, that it was for the courts to provide legal classification of the impugned facts and that, if it omitted certain legal provisions that should not prevent the courts from adjudicating on the merits of its claim.
On 25 May 2010 the Higher Commercial Court upheld the lower courts’ decisions. It noted that the applicant company had wrongly relied on Articles 661 and 1212 of the Civil Code alleging the failure of the Bailiffs Service to comply with its contractual obligations, whereas the damage caused had stemmed from non-contractual obligations. It was noted in the ruling that that issue was regulated by Article 11 of the State Bailiffs Service Act and Article 1173 of the Civil Code (see paragraphs 15 and 17 below).
The relevant provisions of the Civil Code 2003 (as worded at the material time) read as follows:
Article 216. Legal consequences of invalidation of a transaction
“1. ... In the event of a transaction being declared null and void, each party shall return to the other party the proceeds received for the transaction in question. If that is impossible ..., each party must pay the other party the current value of what it received under the contract.
If a party or a third party has suffered pecuniary or non-pecuniary damage as a result of a transaction being declared null and void, the liable party shall pay compensation ...”
Article 229. Legal consequences of a transaction resulting from an error
“1. If the author of a transaction erred in respect of essential circumstances, a court may invalidate the transaction. ...
In the case of invalidation of a transaction, its author who committed a negligent error, must compensate the damage to the other party. ...”
Article 661. The seller’s responsibility in the event of alienation of property from the buyer
“1. In the event of alienation pursuant to a judicial order of the sold property from the buyer in favour of a third person on grounds that emerged prior to the sale, the seller shall reimburse the damage to the buyer if the latter did not or could not know about the existence of those grounds. ...”
Article 1166. General grounds for liability for causing pecuniary damage
“1. Pecuniary damage caused by unlawful decisions, actions or omissions to personal non-pecuniary rights of an individual or a legal entity, or damage caused to property of an individual or a legal entity, shall be fully compensated by the person who caused it. ...”
Article 1173. Compensation for damage caused by a State authority ...
“1. Damage caused to a private person or legal entity as a result of an unlawful decision, action or omission of a State authority ... shall be indemnified by the State ... irrespective of the guilt of that authority.”
Article 1174. Compensation for damage caused by a State official ...
“1. Damage caused to a private person or legal entity as a result of an unlawful decision, action or omission of a State official ... shall be indemnified by the State irrespective of the guilt of that official.”
Article 1212. General provisions on the obligations stemming from acquisition and retention of property without valid legal grounds
“1. A person who has acquired or retained property at the expense of another person (victim) without valid legal grounds shall return that property to the victim.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply regardless of whether the ungrounded acquisition or retention of property resulted from the conduct of the acquirer, the victim or other persons, or were consequences of certain events.
The provisions of this chapter shall also apply to the requirements regarding:
1) recovery of what was [done or paid] under a transaction [eventually] declared null and void;
2) recovery of property by the owner from unlawful possession;
3) recovery of what was done by one of the parties under an obligation; and
4) reimbursement of damage by a person, who acquired or retained property unlawfully at expense of another person.”
Article 11 of the Enforcement Proceedings Act 1999 (as worded at the material time) listed the parties in enforcement proceedings. Article 86 provided that damage caused by a State bailiff to individuals or legal entities was to be compensated in accordance with the procedure established by law.
Article 11 of the State Bailiffs Service Act 1998 (as worded at the material time) concerned the liability of bailiffs. It stated that damage caused by a State bailiff to individuals or legal entities during enforcement proceedings was to be compensated in the manner established by law at the expense of the State.
A private person bought a flat at a public auction organised by the Bailiffs Service as part of enforcement proceedings against third persons. Subsequently that public auction was declared null and void owing to a number of errors committed by the bailiff. The purchaser brought proceedings against the Bailiffs Service seeking recovery of the money paid for the flat, as well as compensation for non-pecuniary damage. It is not known on which legal provisions the claimant relied on. On 10 June 2015 the Vinnytsia City Court allowed that claim in part and ordered the Bailiffs Service to reimburse the claimant the amount he had paid for the flat, in compliance with Article 216 of the Civil Code. It held as follows:
“The court takes note of the submission by the [Bailiffs Service] that, under ... Article 1173 of the Civil Code, damage caused to the claimant in the present case should be compensated if the unlawfulness of the bailiff’s actions were established by a judicial decision. However, this submission is not relevant to the present dispute in so far as it concerns recovery of the money for the property acquired by the claimant. The claimant is not asking for compensation in respect of pecuniary damage from the [Bailiffs Service], but is seeking restitution following a legal transaction’s invalidity.
... The transaction in question was declared null and void ab initio ... The [defendant] must therefore return to the claimant [the amount] received under that transaction.”
The court rejected the claim in the part pertaining to non-pecuniary damage on the grounds that the claimant should bring a separate claim in that regard under Articles 1166 and 1174 of the Civil Code (see paragraph 15 above).
An individual bought non-residential premises at a public auction organised by the Bailiffs Service as part of enforcement proceedings against third persons. Subsequently that public auction was declared null and void on the grounds of numerous violations committed by the bailiff. The purchaser brought a claim for damages against the Bailiffs Service. On 25 September 2017 the Kyiv Shevchenkivskyy District Court allowed that claim and awarded the claimant compensation in respect of pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage to be paid by the Bailiffs Service. The court relied, in particular, on Articles 1166, 1173 and 1174 of the Civil Code.
A private company bought non-residential premises at a public auction organised by the tax authorities. Subsequently that sales contract was declared null and void on the grounds that the tax authority had had no right to sell those premises. The purchaser brought a claim against that authority, relying on Article 1212 of the Civil Code. On 15 August 2006 the Kharkiv Regional Commercial Court allowed that claim. It held that the failure of the tax authority to return to the claimant the money paid under the sales contract, which had eventually been invalidated, had been contrary to Articles 216, 229 and 661 of the Civil Code. Accordingly, the court ordered the tax authority to return the above-mentioned amount to the claimant. Furthermore, relying on Article 1174 of the Civil Code, it adjusted that amount to take account of inflation and the interest rate.