The case originated in an application (no. 41416/06) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Slovenian national, Mr Marijan Mežnarič (“the applicant”), on 21 September 2006.
The Slovenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent.
The applicant alleged under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention that the length of the proceedings before the domestic courts to which he was a party was excessive. In substance, he also complained that there was no effective domestic remedy in respect of the excessive length of the proceedings (Article 13 of the Convention).
On 14 March 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1950 and lives in Šmarje pri Jelšah.
On 13 June 1995 the  instituted enforcement proceedings against the company KODA SPAAR d.o.o. before the .
On 28 June 1995 the writ of execution was issued. The company lodged an objection.
On 5 September 1995 the first-instance court issued a decision annulling the writ of execution.
On 6 November 1995 the case was referred to the Kranj District Court and was to be decided in the framework of contentious proceedings.
On 21 November 1999 the court issued a decision that it had no jurisdiction and the case was referred to Škofja .
On 25 November 1999 the Škofja  initiated a jurisdictional dispute.
On 30 August 2000 the  assigned the case to the Kranj District Court.
On 17 October 2000 the first-instance court received an extract from the Register of Companies stating that the company KODA SPAAR d.o.o. had been struck out from the Register pursuant to Article 580 § 5 and 6 of the Companies Act.
On 8 January 2001 the creditor requested the continuation of the proceedings against the applicant, since he had been the founder and owner of the company.
On 27 August 2001 the first-instance court issued a decision on continuation of proceedings against the applicant.
On 10 September 2001 the applicant lodged an appeal and a request for an exemption from court fees.
On 24 October 2001 the  rejected the appeal.
On 20 December 2001 the applicant lodged a request for protection of legality, which was rejected.
On 27 August 2002 the Kranj District Court issued a decision staying the proceeding pending the decision of the  concerning the suspension of implementation of a chapter of the Financial Operations of Companies Act.
On 17 January 2003 the proceedings resumed.
On 17 December 2003 a hearing concerning the possibility of a settlement was held. The applicant lodged a request for legal aid, an exemption from court fees and a counterclaim seeking compensation for damages.
On 11 February 2004 a hearing was held and the first-instance court rendered a judgment annulling the writ of execution of 28 June 1995. An appeal was lodged.
On 16 February 2005 the  remitted the case for re-examination.
On 31 August 2005 a hearing was held and the first-instance court issued a judgment upholding the writ of execution. The applicant appealed.
On 21 June 2006 the  upheld the appeal and annulled the writ of execution.
On 4 September 2006 the applicant lodged a request claiming reimbursement of legal costs. His request was rejected on 10 October 2006.
The Act on the Protection of the Right to a Trial without Undue Delay (Zakon o varstvu pravice do sojenja brez nepotrebnega odlašanja, Official Journal, No. 49/2006 – “the 2006 Act”) became operational on 1 January 2007.
Section 25 lays down the following transitional rules in relation to applications already pending before the Court:
Section 25 - Just satisfaction for damage sustained prior to implementation of this Act
“(1)  In cases where a violation of the right to a trial without undue delay has already ceased and the party had filed a claim for just satisfaction with the international court before the date of implementation of this Act, the State Attorney’s Office shall offer the party a settlement on the amount of just satisfaction within four months of the date of receipt of the case referred by the international court for the settlement procedure. The party shall submit a settlement proposal to the State Attorney’s Office within two months of the date of receipt of the proposal of the State Attorney’s Office. The State Attorney’s Office shall decide on the proposal as soon as possible and within four months at the latest...
(2)  If the proposal for settlement referred to in paragraph 1 of this section is not acceded to or the State Attorney’s Office and the party fail to negotiate an agreement within four months of the date on which the party filed its proposal, the party may bring an action before the court with jurisdiction under this Act. The party may bring an action within six months of receipt of the State Attorney’s Office reply that the party’s proposal referred to in the previous paragraph was not acceded to, or after the expiry of the period fixed in the previous paragraph for the State Attorney’s Office to decide to proceed with settlement. Irrespective of the type or amount of the claim, the provisions of the Civil Procedure Act concerning small claims shall apply in proceedings before a court.”
The relevant provision of the Companies Act (Zakon o gospodarskih družbah, Official Gazette no. 30/93, 29/94, 20/98, 84/98, 6/99 and 45/01) as in force at the relevant time reads as follows:
Article 580 § 5 and 6
“...
(5)  The existing companies and other organisational forms of undertakings that fail to bring their operation in line with this Act within the deadlines set in the first, second and fourth paragraph of this Article shall be liquidated and struck out from the Register of Companies; the liquidation will be conducted by the courts ex officio.
(6)  Notwithstanding the provision of the above paragraph, privately owned companies with share capital that fail to bring their operation in line with this Act within the deadlines set in the first, second and fourth paragraph of this Article shall be held liable for the obligations towards the creditors in the same way as shareholders of unlimited companies or as company owners.
...”
The Financial Operations of Companies Act provided that companies which had been inactive for a certain period of time, had not had any assets or had not aligned their operations with the then new legislation were to be struck out from the Register of Companies, and thus their shareholders would become personally liable for any outstanding debts of the company. The regulation was challenged before the  which, inter alia, decided that the former shareholders who assumed unlimited joint liability for the companies’ obligations were to be considered as universal successors to the dissolved companies.