The application concerns the registration of the third applicant’s forename in the birth record. In particular, her forename was entered into the birth record with the addition, contained in brackets, of an abbreviation of the word “naming” (ονοματοδοσία). The applicants argued that the law did not require registry offices to specify whether a child was named by a civil or Christian act, and that their doing so had constituted a violation of their right to freedom of religion. They also argued that it revealed sensitive personal data, in breach of Article 8 of the Convention.
The first and second applicants were born in 1961, and the third applicant was born in 2007. The applicants live in Oxford, United Kingdom. They were represented by the first applicant and by Mr S. Skliris, lawyers practising in Oxford and Athens respectively.
The Government were represented by their Agent’s delegate, Ms O. Patsopoulou, Senior Advisor at the State Legal Council.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
On 17 August 2007 the first applicant, in his capacity as father of the third applicant and having been authorised by the second applicant, in her capacity as mother of the third applicant, went to the Amarousio registry office to register the birth of their daughter, the third applicant.
The registry office employee entered the third applicant’s name in the birth register. Next to her name he included a note in parentheses indicating “naming” in abbreviation.
On 19 October 2007, the applicants applied to the Supreme Administrative Court for the annulment of the third applicant’s birth registration, in so far as it concerned the note “naming”. They argued that it constituted a reference to the fact that their child had not been christened and thereby revealed their religious beliefs. On 6 March 2018 the Supreme Administrative Court, after citing Articles 25 and 26 of Law no. 344/1976 (see paragraph 8 below), rejected the application as inadmissible, holding that the applicants lacked legal interest to act. In particular, Law no. 344/1976 provided that the first name of a child could be registered only by naming, that is to say by the parents or the child’s official guardians declaring the name of the child before the competent registry office, irrespective of whether the child would later be christened. Therefore, the note “naming” next to the third applicant’s name merely repeated the title of Article 25 of Law no. 344/1976, and was the only legal way of acquiring a name. It could not therefore be claimed that it constituted grounds for discrimination and caused the applicants the alleged harm.
The relevant provisions of Law no. 344/1976, as applicable at the time, read as follows:
Article 8
Registers-and certificates
“1. In order to certify the civil situation of an individual, each registry office has registers of births, weddings, civil unions (of heterosexual couples), deaths, and births of children of unknown parents.
Registers are public.
The acts certifying the birth, wedding, or death of an individual, the validity of civil unions, as well as modifications of the content or corrections of such acts, shall be recorded in the registers.
The registration or correction or modification of the content of certificates shall be made by declaration of the person authorised under the present law ...”
Article 8A
Information Management System for Certificates
“1. The Ministry of the Interior shall create an Information Management System for Certificates and shall keep a central record of it. Only certified users shall have access to it ...
...
Certificates shall be printed solely from the Information Management System for Certificates and shall carry a security mark generated automatically by the system”.
Article 13
Correction of certificates
“1. In order for a registration to be corrected, a final judicial decision is required.
Errors that have been recorded in a register by manifest inadvertence, which do not concern the place, day, month, year and time that the registered event took place, can also be corrected by permission of the Public Prosecutor, or, where there is no Public Prosecutor, of the Magistrate. Permission shall be given following investigation and verification of the real data, at the request of anyone who has legitimate interest ...”
Article 25
Naming
“The name of a newborn child shall be recorded in the register of births following a declaration by his/her parents who exercise parental responsibility, or by one of them provided that he/she has written authorisation from the other parent, whose signature has been certified by a public, municipal or communal authority. If one of the parents does not exist or does not have parental authority, the name shall be registered by the other parent. If neither parent exists or has parental authority, the name shall be registered by the person who has been assigned as guardian of the child. Registration of a name in accordance with the above-mentioned procedure shall not be reversible.”
Article 26
Registration of christening in the birth registers
“1. Christening shall be recorded to the side section of the birth registration act within ninety days from its performance by adducing a declaration of the priest who has performed or cooperated to the ceremony.
After the expiry of this deadline, the declaration shall be accepted by the registrar, but shall entail the sanctions provided for by Article 49 of the present law.
The persons obliged to file the registration of the christening are:
a) the christened person, if he/she has completed the 14th year of age;
b) the father or the mother or any other who has the custody of that person;
c) the godparent; and
d) the blood relatives of the christened person up to the third degree of relation, in accordance with Article 21 § 2.
The recorded christening to the side section of the birth registration act shall include the date of the christening, the name that might have been given to the newborn [and] the names and surnames of the declaring person, the godparent, the priest and any witnesses in accordance with Article 10”.
The relevant parts of ministerial decision F 1/2013 read as follows:
“A. Initial registration
Registers of births, weddings, civil unions and deaths shall be kept in volumes of 250 pages. Each volume shall consist of printed sheets of certificates of births, weddings, civil unions and deaths respectively, that are printed from the Information Management System for Certificates in A4 format and signed by the individual declaring the event and the registrar.
The printed sheet shall certify the birth, wedding, or death of a person, the validity of the civil union between two individuals, modification of the content, or correction of the respective registration...
Copies
Copies and extracts of certificates that are generated from the Information Management System for Certificates shall be signed by the registrar and shall have the same validity as the printed certificates that are signed by the individuals who make the declaration and the registrar.”
The relevant Article of the Code of Civil Procedure reads as follows:
Article 782
“1. When the law requires a judicial decision to certify an event in order to draw up a registration act, that decision shall be issued at the request of anyone who has legal interest or of the Prosecutor of the region in which the registrar drawing up the registration act is seated.
 2. The decision shall certify any other data required by law to be included in the registration act, unless it is impossible to do so.
The provisions of paragraph 1 shall apply also to the correction of registration.”
Following interventions by the Greek Ombudsman (see paragraph 14 below), the State Legal Council issued opinion no. 431/2006, the relevant parts of which read as follows:
“... in cases where a [newborn child’s] name is not declared simultaneously with, or at an earlier stage than, a christening declaration, parents have an obligation to make a special declaration, as the mere noting of the name when registering the christening does not suffice for the acquisition of a name ... if the parents do not declare a name, the newborn child, even if the christening has been registered, does not acquire a first name and therefore cannot have the name listed in the extracts of the registry issued until the naming process has taken place”.
Pursuant to Article 7 § 4 of Law no. 3086/2002, opinions issued by the State Legal Council are not mandatory for the public administration, unless they are endorsed by the president of the Hellenic Parliament, the competent minister, the board or other competent organ of a legal person governed by public law, an independent administrative authority, or the general secretary of the prefecture.
In a circular dated 24 October 2006, the Ministry of the Interior stated the following:
“... a christening declaration cannot be interpreted as a naming declaration, unless it is done under the conditions of Law no. 344/1976, that is, unless it is done by both parents or by one parent with the authorisation of the absent parent”.
In an intervention of December 2006, following complaints lodged in December 2005 and January 2006, the Greek Ombudsman stated, inter alia:
 “... the view that only those who are not christened are named, or that there is no need to name those who have been christened ...not only does not comply with the above provisions, but it also results in forcing citizens to inadvertently register a religion”.
In his 2006 annual report, the Greek Ombudsman stated, inter alia:
“... A large number of issues related to religious freedom in Greece are mainly due to inflexibility and misunderstandings demonstrated by public administration as to the religious neutrality of the State. Although the legislator has, for several decades, decided on total secularisation of the State, public administration, trapped either by inertia or by other obstacles, or simply following societal prejudice, still maintains some active remnants of the power of the Church”.