The case originated in an application (no. 26739/16) against the Republic of Serbia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Serbian national, Mr Njegoš Ilić (“the applicant”), on 20 April 2016.
The Serbian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms N. Plavšić.
On 5 October 2017 the complaint concerning the length of the proceedings was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. After having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1960 and lives in Kragujevac.
On 14 December 2006 the applicant instituted civil proceedings against the Kragujevac Clinical Centre requesting damages. In the course of the proceedings eleven hearings were held, whereas five hearings were scheduled, but were not held.
On 20 May 2011 the applicant’s claim was rejected as unfounded by the Kragujevac Court of First Instance.
On 26 December 2011 the Kragujevac Appellate Court (“the Appellate Court”) quashed the decision of 20 May 2011 and remitted the case to the first instance court.
In the resumed proceedings the applicant sought recusal of the acting judge twice, but both of his motions were rejected.
On 4 October 2012, after three held hearings and two hearings which were not held, expert examination and the increase of the applicants claim, the case was transferred to the Kragujevac High Court (“the High Court”).
On 20 March 2013, following the applicant’s two other recusal requests, one of which was adopted, the High Court rejected the applicant’s damages claim as unfounded. The applicant appealed.
On 21 August 2014 the Appellate Court rejected the applicant’s appeal and upheld the decision of 20 March 2013. Thereafter, the applicant filed an appeal on points of law, which was rejected by the Supreme Court of Cassation only on 21 December 2016.
In the meantime, on 7 February 2013, the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court complaining about the length of the pending civil proceedings, seeking non-pecuniary damages in the amount of 3,000 euros and publication of the decision of the Constitutional Court. The Constitutional Court transferred the case-file to the Appellate Court, as a competent court to deal with the length complaints of the pending cases, pursuant to Article 8a of the Law on the Organization of the Courts. However, on 23 September 2014 the Appellate Court established that it no longer had jurisdiction to deal with the applicant’s complaint since it found that the civil proceedings had been finished. The applicant’s case-file was thus returned to the Constitutional Court.
On 6 November 2014 the Constitutional Court returned the case-file to the Appellate Court, which on 28 November 2014 again found that it had no jurisdiction to deal with the case. The Appellate Court then transferred the case-file further to the Supreme Court of Cassation, as the competent court. The applicant appealed.
On 22 January 2015 the Supreme Court of Cassation rejected the applicant’s appeal and upheld the decision of 28 November 2014. It also partially adopted the applicant’s complaint concerning the length of the proceedings and awarded him 200 euros for non-pecuniary damage, whereas the rest of claim rejected.
On 21 October 2015 the Constitutional Court rejected the applicant’s appeal in regards to the length of the proceedings. The Constitutional Court established that even though the impugned proceedings had lasted seven years and eight months, they were very complex and the applicant largely contributed to its length, whereas the competent courts acted efficiently.