The case originated in an application (no. 61978/08) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by three Russian nationals, Mr Aleksandr Mikhaylovich Kazantsev (“the first applicant”), Ms Nataliya Vladimirovna Kazantseva (“the second applicant”), Ms Olga Dmitriyevna Tsepilova (“the third applicant”).
The applicants were represented by lawyers of the EHRAC/Memorial Human Rights Centre, NGOs with offices in Moscow and London. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 11 March 2011 the Government were given notice of the application.
The Government did not object to the examination of the application by the Committee.
The applicants were born in 1955, 1954 and 1958, respectively. They live in St Petersburg. The first and the second applicants are spouses.
On 15 April 2007 in St Petersburg a coalition of opposition groups organised an anti-government rally to campaign before the forthcoming parliamentary elections (as a part of a series of protest demonstrations called a “March of Dissenters”). The city administration authorised the rally in the form of a meeting to be held between noon and 2 p.m. at Pionerskaya Square.
The site of the rally was cordoned off by metal railings and several rows of police officers. The Government submitted that 6,100 police officers were deployed, including 400 officers from the Special Purpose Squad (ОМОН, hereinafter – “the riot police”).
The applicants attended the rally. According to them, when the rally ended the police directed all the protesters to the nearby Pushkinskaya metro station, having closed all neighbouring quarters to traffic and pedestrians. The applicants saw the riot police running towards them and indiscriminately hitting all those around them. The metro station was closed. They tried to escape via Zagorodnyy Prospect, but were blocked in between the police cordons. The police pushed the civilians into a small park. Some persons entered it via the gate while others had to climb over the fence.
As submitted by the Government, at the end of the rally a group of approximately 60 persons under the flags of the National Bolshevik Party attempted to break through the police cordon and to lead an unauthorised march via Zagorodnyy Prospect towards Moskovskiy Prospect. According to the Government, persons in that group shouted slogans and threw bottles and other objects at the police officers.
According to the Government’s version of events, the riot police had to use force in order to disperse that particular group of protesters and restore public order.
During these events, the first applicant was approached and severely beaten by a riot police officer. The officer hit him on the chest, ribs and shoulders and left him lying unconscious. Other protesters and the second applicant carried the first applicant to the ambulance van. He was later taken to the Mariinskiy Hospital. At the hospital the first applicant was diagnosed with “a closed fracture of the seventh rib, traumatic pneumothorax, a closed craniocerebral injury, brain concussion”.
During the same period, the third applicant was hit by a riot police officer with a rubber truncheon to the face. She started falling unconscious, but she was helped by other protesters. The third applicant was subsequently diagnosed with “a craniocerebral injury [sustained] on 15 April 2007, concussion, closed fractures of the nose bones and the right cheek bone”. The first and the third applicants remained in the hospital for several days before being released for outpatient treatment.
On 15 April 2007 the emergency doctors and the hospital informed the prosecution authorities that the first and the third applicants had applied for medical assistance.
In April 2007 the applicants submitted their complaints to the St Petersburg prosecution authorities about the police brutality. They submitted additional complaints in May 2007.
On 21 June 2007 a criminal case was opened.
On 27 August 2007 the third applicant was granted the status of a victim in the criminal case.
On 8 October 2007 the third applicant submitted, inter alia, that the police officer who had attacked her wore a helmet and had no identification markings.
On 15 June 2007 and 15 November 2007 the domestic courts found that the prosecution authorities had failed to comply with the time-limits established for examination of individual complaints, had unlawfully denied the applicants access to the case-file of the enquiry and had failed to ensure their procedural rights during the criminal investigation.
On 30 November 2007 the first and the second applicants were granted the status of victims in the criminal case.
On 4 December 2007 the first applicant gave to the investigator the photographs from newspapers depicting the officer who looked like the police officer who had attacked him. The officer had a number indicated on his helmet. It was later established that the photo was made in another city one day before the rally. The investigator attempted to identify the officer by the available number. He got a reply from the police that the helmet with that number had not been used on the day of the events.
Between December 2007 and June 2009 the criminal investigation was suspended seven times due to failure to identify the police officers who had attacked the applicants.
On 25 June 2009 the criminal proceedings were stayed as the perpetrators could not be identified. The first applicant challenged the decision to stay the proceedings arguing that the investigator had not taken all the necessary steps to identify the police officers involved in the attacks.
On 29 April 2011 the Oktyabrskiy District Court of St Petersburg found the decision of 25 June 2009 lawful. The court noted that during the investigation it was established that on 15 April 2007 some unidentified police officers had exceeded their official powers and beaten a number of protesters. The court further noted that the victims and witnesses could not identify the police officers due to the fact that the officers were wearing helmets and had no identification markings. The photographs provided by one of the witnesses did not reveal any relevant information for the investigation. The court acknowledged that in the first applicant’s case there had been an attempt to identify the police officer concerned by the number on his helmet (seen on the photos provided by the applicant himself). The court finally observed that during the criminal investigation some police officers deployed during the rally had been questioned and video and photo materials had been analysed. However, none of the above measures allowed to identify the perpetrators. The court, therefore, rejected the applicant’s complaint.
On 21 June 2011 the St Petersburg City Court upheld the decision of 29 April 2011.
It appears that the criminal proceedings are still pending.
For a summary of the relevant domestic law provisions governing use of force by the police see Annenkov and Others v. Russia (no. 31475/10, §§ 68 and 69, 25 July 2017).