The case originated in an application (no. 17895/14) against the Federal Republic of Germany lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a German national, Mr Jörg Evers (“the applicant”), on 25 February 2014.
The applicant was initially represented by Mr T. Schneider, a lawyer practising in Munich, and subsequently by Mr M. Kaiser, a lawyer practising in Landshut. The German Government (“the Government”) were represented by one of their Agents, Mrs K. Behr, of the Federal Ministry of Justice and Costumer Protection.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the domestic court’s decision, adopted in the context of guardianship proceedings, prohibiting him from having contact with a woman with a mental disability, had infringed his rights under Articles 6 and 8 of the Convention.
On 21 March 2016 the Government were given notice of the application.
The applicant was born in 1939 and lives in Baden-Baden.
In 2009 he was living in a common household with his partner, P.B., and her daughter, V. The latter was born in 1987, was then 22 years old, and suffers from a mental disability. P.B. had been appointed V.’s guardian in 2007.
On an unspecified date in 2009, the public prosecutor initiated criminal proceedings against the applicant in respect of his alleged sexual abuse of a person who had been incapable of resistance. P.B. had reported sexual contact between the applicant and V. She had initially claimed to have caught the applicant and V. naked in bed and touching one another. She had also reported that the applicant had admitted to engaging in sexual contact with V. and that the applicant had attributed the incident to the fact that P.B. had refused the applicant sexual intercourse in the past. P.B. had moreover claimed that the applicant, owing to her financial dependency, had “taken liberties” in respect of V. Later on in the criminal proceedings, P.B. withdrew her allegations, stating that V. had a right to sexual selfdetermination and that she had consented to the planned marriage of V. and the applicant.
On 10 December 2009 the public prosecutor discontinued the criminal proceedings. On the basis of a statement by V.’s general practitioner dated 10 November 2009, according to which V. had been perfectly capable of physical resistance if she had not consented to sexual relations with the applicant, the public prosecutor considered that it would not be possible to establish that V. was incapable of resistance to sexual acts.
On 20 September 2010 the Erding District Court, by means of an interim injunction, placed V. in a residential home for people with disabilities, discharged P.B. as V.’s guardian and appointed a professional guardian. It noted that the proceedings had been initiated after the court had been notified by a medical clinic that V. had likely suffered from sexual abuse, because she suffered from a moderate mental disability and was pregnant by P.B.’s seventy-one-year-old partner – the applicant. The interim injunction was essentially based on the fact that P.B. had not prevented the applicant from abusing V. and making her pregnant, as well as the fact that P.B. and V. had not manifested any wish to change the circumstances that had led to the abuse of V. and her pregnancy. Prior to delivering its decision, the District Court had heard V. and P.B. and also the applicant in person.
The District Court ordered three expert opinions concerning V.’s physical and mental state of health.
Subsequently, the public prosecutor, who had been informed by the District Court, initiated criminal proceedings in respect of sexual abuse – again against the applicant, and for the first time against P.B. (as V.’s guardian at the relevant time).
On 2 March 2011 V. gave birth to a son, who has been living with a foster family ever since. At the time that the application was lodged, the applicant, whose paternity had been established, had been having supervised contact with his son about once a month. V. had separate contact with her son about once every four to six weeks.
On 21 March 2011 the Erding District Court upheld the interim injunction of 20 September 2010. Relying on three expert opinions dated 3 November, 20 December 2010 and 2 March 2011, which were summarised extensively and assessed as valuable in the wording of the decision, relying furthermore on the submissions of the relevant authority, on the criminal case files of the prosecution, on the hearing of V., P.B. and the applicant and on the new hearing of V. in the presence of her guardian on 15 March 2011, it found that V. was in need of a guardian because she was unfit to manage any of her affairs by herself. She suffered from a moderate mental disability and from epilepsy. She was highly restricted in her ability to comprehend, concentrate and memorise things, as well as in her sense of orientation. Her ability to communicate was limited to word fragments, which rendered impossible any meaningful communication. She had no ability to make judgments, as her intellectual development corresponded to that of a four-year-old child (whereas her physical development corresponded to that of a 14- or 15-year-old).
The District Court further observed that V. was incapable of resistance in the sense of the relevant criminal provisions, since she had proved easily susceptible to any and every seemingly friendly suggestion. In this respect, she was unable to detect or even oppose inappropriate advances. She was not able to build up lasting relationships, had no sense of the appropriateness (or otherwise) of social situations or time, and no sense of responsibility or the needs of others. She had no comprehension of sexual relationships, marriage or even her pregnancy. Moreover, owing to the events leading up to her pregnancy, she had become significantly distracted. This state of mind had proved to be temporary, due to her lack of memory and any sense of time. The District Court concluded, given the background of the aforementioned facts and developments that guardianship was therefore to be conferred upon the professional guardian already appointed under the interim injunction of 20 September 2010.
The District Court also explained in detail why the opinion of the private expert Z. commissioned by P.B. was not convincing and did not lead to other conclusions. In this respect it held that the opinion did not comply with scientific standards as it essentially reproduced information and opinions given by P.B., without appreciating their veracity and reliability and without taking into account available objective information from other sources. The District Court moreover observed that the supposed expert had never met the applicant or V. and concluded that Z.’s expert opinion had no value.
As regards the (brief) hearing of the applicant the District Court noted that the applicant declared that in view of the prosecutor’s decision to stay the criminal proceedings (see paragraph 8 above) there was no reason to separate V. from her mother or him. In his view V. was of full age, had a free will and could have sexual intercourse with whoever she wanted.
On 24 May 2012 the Traunstein Regional Court proposed to discontinue the criminal proceedings on condition that P.B. pay a fine of 1,000 euros (EUR) and the applicant pay a fine of EUR 8,000. The court suggested that condition, as it had established that – irrespective of whether it was determined that V. had been able to resist (which required an assessment of whether any consent given by her could be considered to have had legal effect) – it could not be ruled out that the applicant had inevitably erred in his assessment of the legality of his acts. In particular, it could not be ruled out that the applicant was not accountable for relying on the assessment of the public prosecutor of 10 December 2009, according to which it would not be possible to establish that V. was incapable of resisting invitations to engage in sexual intercourse. As a result, criminal liability pursuant to section 179 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 43 below) was ruled out in these proceedings. The Regional Court, however, drew particular attention to the fact that this December 2009 assessment had been proved wrong, given the findings in the present proceedings. It added that criminal liability pursuant to section 174 c § 1 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 43 below) had to be considered as the applicant had taken advantage of the special relationship of confidence between V. and her mother. However, in view of the circumstances and, in particular, the existence of claims for child support and inheritance, the public interest in prosecuting could be satisfied with the payment of the sums indicated to non-profit organisations.
On 26 July 2012, after the public prosecutor, P.B., and the applicant had agreed to the proposal, the Regional Court discontinued the criminal proceedings provisionally and on 14 September 2012, after the fines had been paid, definitively.
On 2 September 2012 P.B. and the applicant visited V. in order to take part in “open day” festivities on the premises of the residential home in which she now lived. After P.B. and the applicant had left the premises, V., according to the documentation produced by the staff of the residential home, showed clear signs of mental distress, which necessitated medication.
On 4 September 2012 V.’s guardian wrote to the applicant prohibiting any contact between him and V. He informed the applicant that, as he (the applicant) had consistently maintained that he wished to pursue an intimate relationship with V., he (the guardian) would make use of his statutory right to prohibit any further contact between the applicant and V. On the same day the guardian also wrote to P.B. prohibiting contact and informed the Erding District Court of these decisions and requested that it issue formal approval of such contact bans.
On 6 September 2012 the applicant replied to the guardian in writing, asking him to stop treating V. with psychotropic drugs and to remove the “harmful forced” contraceptive coil. Moreover, he opposed the contact ban, since he considered that there was no reason for it. The same day, P.B. who indicated that she lived at the same address as the applicant, replied to the guardian that after the criminal proceedings had been stayed, there were no reasons to prohibit any longer meetings between her daughter and the applicant. She submitted that the contact ban was not in her daughter’s interest and constituted an illegal deprivation of liberty. The mental distress which the guardian had mentioned in his request was the consequence of the arbitrary placement in the residential home of her daughter who wished to come home.
On 12 September 2012 the District Court appointed a guardian ad litem (Verfahrenspfleger) for V. since the proceedings concerned the guardian’s request for judicial confirmation of the contact ban and this decision might affect V.’s fundamental rights.
On 18 October 2012 the District Court heard V. in the residential home in the presence of her guardian and her guardian ad litem.
On 22 November 2012, the District Court decided – referring to section 23 § 2 and 7 § 2 of the Act on Proceedings in Family Matters (see paragraphs 40 and 41 below) – that the guardian’s request for a contact ban to protect V. was to be communicated to the applicant for his comments, since he would be affected by such a decision.
On 22 November 2012, according to a note to the file, the District Court judge met V. on the occasion of a visit to the residential home in the context of another case. V. told him that the applicant would come at Christmas. In reply to the judge’s questions she replied twice that the applicant was the friend of her mother.
On 24 November 2012 the applicant received a copy of the request for a contact ban. The responsible judge notified him that in deciding on the contact ban he would take account of (i) the findings which had been made in the guardianship proceedings and the criminal proceedings, (ii) a website, which P.B. had created and on which she portrayed her, V.’s and the applicant’s fight for a common “family life”, and (iii) V.’s latest personal hearing, which had taken place before the District Court on 18 October 2012. Lastly, the judge invited the applicant to submit his written comments by 15 December 2012. The applicant did not respond to that invitation.
On 10 January 2013 the District Court, presided over by the same judge who had, prior to the decision of 20 September 2010, heard V., P.B. and the applicant in person, prohibited any form of contact between the applicant and V. (including personal encounters, letters and telephone calls), referring to sections 1908i § 1, 1632 § 2 of the Civil Code taken in conjunction with section 23 et seq. of the Act on Procedure in Family Matters (see paragraphs 38-40 below). It added that in case of nonobservance of the contact ban a penalty of up to EUR 25,000, alternatively (ersatzweise) up to six months’ imprisonment could be imposed.
The District Court held that the applicant’s alleged right to contact with V. lacked any basis in the codified law, because that law provided contact rights only with regard to minors, but not with regard to adults.
Moreover, the District Court held that the applicant could not base his claim to a right to contact on the guarantee of family life under Article 6 of the Basic Law (Grundgesetz). V. was, for reasons of her disability, incapable of contracting and of entering into marriage (nicht geschäfts- und ehefähig). The applicant’s and V.’s child was the result of a severe, massive and illegal violation of V.’s personality rights – not to say the criminal sexual abuse of a person incapable of resistance. V. had been fully incapable of forming the will to resist seemingly friendly suggestions. Her mental disorder had precluded the ability even to grasp the substance, consequences and risks of sexual acts and pregnancy; her blindly confident and obedient personality had meant that convincing her to engage in sexual relations had not required significant effort.
According to the District Court, those conclusions were not put into doubt by the fact that the first set of criminal proceedings had been discontinued because V. had been assumed to be capable of physically resisting (see paragraph 8 above). The public prosecutor had issued that decision without personally hearing V. and had not commissioned an expert opinion on her. The same was true as regards the Regional Court’s decision to discontinue the second set of criminal proceedings (see paragraphs 15 and 16 above). In this respect the District Court observed that P.B.’s changing and contradictory allegations also had to be considered. They suggested that, initially, P.B. had rejected the applicant’s sexual advances, so he had subsequently sought sexual relations with V. Moreover it seemed likely that P.B.’s subsequently expressed wish that the parties be allowed to engage in a normal family life (including a wedding) had been rooted in her fear that she and the applicant would be held criminally liable for aiding and abetting the sexual abuse of a person incapable of resistance.
The District Court further noted that V. had not shown that she had any particular bond with the applicant. Rather, she only had unemotional, fleeting and changing memories of a person who, when being personally heard by the District Court, she had consistently referred to as her mother’s partner. Throughout the previous two years, during which she had been living in the above-mentioned residential home, she had not asked for contact with or visits from the applicant, or even noticed his absence.
The District Court underlined that V. had the right to have contact with anyone she wished to see and that the guardian’s right to determine her contacts was limited by the right of third persons and by the purpose of the guardianship, which was, in particular, to protect V.’s best interests. It considered that the decision to impose a contact ban had taken sufficient account of V.’s interests. V. had not wished to have contact with the applicant; her guardian ad litem had also agreed that there was no necessity or purpose – nor any wish on V.’s part – for any written or personal contact with the applicant. Therefore contact with the applicant not only was not in V’s best interest, but would put her interest severely and durably into danger. The District Court noted in this respect that the applicant continued to pursue his intention to abuse V., which would likely lead to further pregnancies and therefore significant further risks for V., since she did not grasp the implications of pregnancy and was unable to give birth without Caesarean section. Having regard to all of the material before it, it concluded that the contact ban was not only necessary, but even imperative.
On 24 January 2013 the applicant, represented by counsel, requested access to the case file in the guardianship proceedings. The Erding District Court informed him that access to a case file in guardianship matters could, under section 13 of the Act on Procedure in Family Matters (see paragraph 40 below), only be granted in so far as strictly necessary, as such a file contained highly personal and sensitive data pertaining to the subject of those proceedings.
After the applicant specified that his request concerned all parts of the case file that had been of relevance for the District Court’s decision on contact of 10 January 2013, the District Court provided him with copies of pages 848 to 996 of that file, which included: its decision of 20 September 2010; its decision of 21 March 2011 (which gave detailed summaries of the expert opinions that the court had cited in its decisions); handwritten observations by staff at V.’s residential home concerning her behaviour on 2 September 2012 and the following day; the guardian’s request for a contact ban to be ordered; and a detailed record of the personal hearing of V. on 18 October 2012.
On 11 February 2013 the applicant appealed against the contact decision of 10 January 2013. On 4 March 2013 he reasoned his appeal and requested a hearing. He complained that he had not been heard in person and that he lacked the necessary knowledge of the contents of the case file in the guardianship proceedings concerning V. Furthermore, the District Court had based its decision on erroneous and insufficiently established conclusions. He requested that further evidence be adduced – in particular, that different witnesses be heard and another expert opinion be ordered.
On 15 March 2013 the Landshut Regional Court dismissed the appeal. Relying on the expert opinions it repeated and endorsed the District Court’s reasoning and confirmed that, in view of the situation, the contact ban was not only lawful but imperative in order to protect V. from sexual assault. It added that there had been no need to hear the applicant in person. He had replied to the guardian’s letter of 4 September 2012, had been invited to submit comments by the District Court (see paragraph 24 above) and, assisted by counsel, had submitted twenty-five pages of reasons justifying his appeal. There was therefore no need to hear the applicant in person. Section 34 § 1 of the Act on Procedure in Family matters did not require a hearing in person because the applicant had had sufficient opportunity to be heard by other means. The Regional Court did not grant leave to appeal against its decision.
On 3 June 2013, the Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint of a violation of his right to be heard.
On 25 August 2013 the Federal Constitutional Court declined to consider a constitutional complaint lodged by the applicant, without giving any reasons (no. 1 BvR 1202/13).
Article 6 of the Basic Law (Grundgesetz), in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“(1) Marriage and the family shall enjoy the special protection of the State.”
Sections 1896 et seq. of the Civil Code (Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch) set out the conditions of guardianship, the criteria used to appoint a guardian and the scope of that person’s guardianship, as well as the rights and duties of the guardian. Section 1901 § 2 of the Civil Code stipulates that the guardian must attend to the affairs of the person under guardianship in a manner that is conducive to his or her welfare. The best interests of the person under guardianship also include the possibility for him or her, within the limits of his or her capabilities, to shape his or her life according to his or her own wishes and ideas. Lastly, under section 1908i § 1 of the Civil Code, several other provisions are applicable with regard to guardianship. That applicability pertains, inter alia, to section 1632 § 2 of the Civil Code, a family law provision that stipulates that childcare duties include the right to determine who has contact with the child in question – even in respect of “third parties”.
Section 1 of the Act on Procedure in Family Matters (Act on Proceedings in Family Matters and in Matters of Non-Contentious Jurisdiction – Gesetz über das Verfahren in Familiensachen und in den Angelegenheiten der freiwilligen Gerichtsbarkeit) specifically provides that the Act is applicable to proceedings in respect of non-contentious matters, to the extent allotted to the courts by law. Sections 271 et seq. of that Act deem guardianship proceedings to constitute such a matter.
The procedural rules under the Act on Procedure in Family Matters differ from the procedure provided for regular civil law proceedings in many ways: Under section 7(2)(1) of the Act, persons whose rights would be directly affected by the proceedings are to be included in the proceedings as participants. Section 274(1) of the Act explicitly stipulates in respect of guardianship proceedings that the person concerned, the guardian and the guardian ad litem are parties to such proceedings. Section 13 of the Act provides that participants in such proceedings may inspect the case court file at the offices of the court registry in so far as this does not conflict with any serious interests (schwerwiegende Interessen) of a participant or a third party. Section 23(2) of the Act provides that the relevant court shall transmit “the application” to the “remaining participants”.
The courts can, under section 23 et seq. of the Act on Procedure and Family Matters, initiate certain proceedings ex officio. Moreover, under section 26 of the Act, a court shall conduct necessary enquiries ex officio in order to establish facts that are relevant to the decision in question. Under section 32 § 1 of the Act, the court may discuss matters with the parties concerned during a court hearing. Under section 34(1) of the Act, the court must conduct an “in-person hearing” when that is necessary in order to ensure a fair legal hearing for the participants, or when so required by the provisions of this or another statute. Under section 48 of the Act, the court of first instance may, possibly also ex officio, rescind or modify a final and binding decision with permanent effect if the factual or legal circumstances have changed significantly. Also, under section 65, a complaint against a decision of a first instance court may be supported by new facts and evidence.
Section 170 § 1 of the Courts Constitution Act (Gerichts-verfassungsgesetz) provides that proceedings, discussions and hearings in respect of family matters and non-contentious matters must not be public. A court may admit the public to proceedings but not, however, against the will of a participant. In respect of matters concerning guardianship of an adult and the admission of a person to a closed institution, at the request of the adult concerned a person who holds a position in that adult’s confidence may be permitted to be present.
Section 179 of the Criminal Code (Strafgesetzbuch) penalizes sexual abuse of persons incapable of resisting. Section 174 c § 1 sanctions sexual abuse by abusing, inter alia, a care relationship installed due to a mental or an emotional illness or disability.
The relevant provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which Germany adopted on 30 March 2007 and which entered into force on 26 March 2009, are reproduced in A.M.V. v. Finland, no. 53251/13, §§ 3948, 23 March 2017 and I.C. v. Romania, no. 36934/08, §§ 4144, 24 May 2016.
In 2015, the United Nations Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities issued its concluding observations on the initial report of Germany. In its observations, the Committee expressed concern that the legal instrument of guardianship, as outlined in and governed by the German Civil Code, was incompatible with the Convention. It recommended that: all forms of “substituted” decision-making be eliminated and replaced by a system of supported decision-making, in line with the Committee’s General Comment No. 1(2014) on equal recognition before the law; the development of professional-quality standards for supported decision-making mechanisms; and (in close cooperation with persons with disabilities) the provision of training on Article 12 of the Convention, in line with the Committee’s General Comment No. 1, at the federal, regional and local levels for all actors (including civil servants, judges, social workers, health and social services professionals and people from the wider community).