This application concerns an alleged violation of Article 8 § 1 of the Convention. The applicant, a 52-year-old Spanish national who was born in Switzerland and has spent his entire life in Switzerland, complained that the withdrawal of his permanent residence permit after a criminal conviction had violated his right to respect for private and family life.
The applicant, a Spanish national, was born in 1968 in Switzerland. He was represented by Mr B. Muralt.
The Government were represented by their Deputy Agent, Mr A. Scheidegger, of the Federal Office of Justice.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant lived in Switzerland and held a permanent residence permit (Niederlassungsbewilligung) since birth. In 1991 his son, who still lives in Switzerland, was born (out of wedlock). In 2003 the applicant married A.G. (born in 1976), a Belarusian citizen, who was subsequently granted a residence permit as part of family reunification.
The applicant’s mother, who also lived in Switzerland, returned to Spain in 2001. One of the applicant’s brothers and his sister are still living in Switzerland. Another brother lives in Spain.
On 11 May 2009 the applicant was convicted by the competent District Court of multiple counts of sexual activity with a minor (mehrfache sexuelle Handlungen mit einem Kind), multiple counts of attempted sexual activity with a minor (mehrfacher Versuch der sexuellen Handlungen mit einem Kind), multiple counts of sexual assault (mehfache sexuelle Nötigung), rape (Vergewaltigung) and multiple counts of pornography (mehrfache Pornographie) committed between March and December 2006. The court considered the applicant to have a high and very serious level of culpability. The victim was the then 13year-old daughter of his extramarital partner and the offences had been committed over a relatively long period of ten months. The District Court was of the opinion that the applicant had disregarded the victim’s right to sexual self-determination without hesitation and had committed acts against the young daughter of his “sexual partner at the time” with complete disregard for the child’s development. By taking advantage of his position of authority, he had abused her trust in the most shameful way to satisfy his inferior sexual inclinations. In doing so, he had not shied away from using psychological and physical violence and threats when pursuing his inappropriate goals. As a result of these terrible experiences, the victim developed serious psychological problems, from which she still suffers to date.
The applicant was sentenced to thirty months’ imprisonment. He served six months under electronic surveillance (house arrest) and the remaining two years were suspended on probation because prior to his conviction the applicant had a clean criminal record.
Nine months after the end of his probation, the applicant installed three miniature cameras in the apartment of his former extramarital partner, the victim’s mother. Criminal proceedings were opened against him in 2012 for coercion and breach of secrecy or privacy through the use of recording devices. The complaint was withdrawn and a settlement was reached, the applicant admitting to the offences. As a result, no conviction was entered.
By a decision of 20 January 2014, the competent Migration Office withdrew the applicant’s permanent residence permit and ordered him to leave Switzerland by 30 April 2014. It based the withdrawal of the permit on Article 63 § 2 and Article 62 (b) of the Federal Act on Foreign Nationals of 16 December 2005 (“FAFN”; see paragraphs 29-30 below).
With regard to the public interest, the Migration Office considered that the applicant had disregarded fundamental norms and massively violated valuable legal interests. It also observed that there were forty-five open loss certificates (offene Verlustscheine) against the applicant amounting to a total of approximatively 75,000 Swiss francs (CHF).
It also held that the sexual assaults had represented a serious interference in the sexual development of the then 13-year-old girl. There were therefore considerable security and public safety interests in revoking the applicant’s permanent residence permit.
Furthermore, the Migration Office pointed to the fact that the applicant had reoffended only nine months after the end of his probation. Even though he had admitted to having installed cameras in his exgirlfriend’s apartment, no conviction had been entered because the complaint had been withdrawn and settlement had been reached. Since particularly valuable legal interests were at stake, the risk of further delinquency was all the more unacceptable.
As to proportionality, the Migration Office held that the revocation of the permanent residence permit would certainly hit the applicant hard, as he had lived in Switzerland since birth. However, he still maintained contact with his homeland and spoke Spanish. The professional experience he had gained in Switzerland would be an advantage for him in Spain. According to the Migration Office, the relationship with his wife could not stop him from committing criminal offences. His wife was free to follow him to Spain. However, if she decided to stay in Switzerland, she could maintain the relationship with her husband in the form of visits, e-mails, Skype, telephone calls and so forth. In addition, the Migration Office raised the question of how stable the relationship with his wife was, given that he had had an intimate relationship with the victim’s mother for several years.
In conclusion, the Migration Office considered that the general interest in ensuring public safety outweighed the applicant’s interest in being able to continue his private and family life with his wife in Switzerland.
The applicant filed an appeal with the competent Administrative Court in which he argued that he had not reoffended since the first judgment and that there were no indications that he would do so. In addition, the applicant argued that no new debt recovery operations had been recorded since 2000 and that he was fully integrated in Switzerland.
By a judgment of 26 June 2014, the Administrative Court dismissed this appeal, ordering the applicant to leave Switzerland by 30 September 2014. It based its decision on the same legal and public-interest grounds as those referred to by the Migration Office.
As to the proportionality of the measure, the Administrative Court held with regard to the right to respect for his private life that the permanent residence permit of a foreigner who had resided in Switzerland for a long time could only be revoked with particular restraint. That court also observed that no new debt recovery operations had been recorded since 2000, but that the applicant was far from being able to reimburse all his debts.
It further stated that even though the applicant had spent his entire life in Switzerland, part of his family lived there and he had no close relationship with Spain, he could still be expected to leave Switzerland and move to Spain, as it offered comparable sociocultural conditions and had a similar economic system. His mother and eldest brother lived there. Due to his good professional education and his knowledge of Spanish, he would be able to find a comparable job there and create an environment for new relationships. There appeared, therefore, to be no overriding private interest in him staying in Switzerland.
The Administrative Court assessed the proportionality of the measure with regard to the right to respect for his family life in a similar way.
In the court’s view, the applicant’s 23-year-old son did not fall within the scope of Article 8 of the Convention because he was an adult. Even though he had always sought to be close to the applicant, he was now leading an independent life. He lived with his girlfriend during the week and had been working since 2013. Special elements of dependency other than normal emotional ties between the applicant and his son had not been claimed and were not evident from the files. Spain was relatively easy to reach from Switzerland, which was why the relationship between the applicant and his son could be maintained even from a distance through occasional visits and various means of communication. This also applied to the applicant’s brother and sister living in Switzerland.
As regards the applicant’s wife, the Administrative Court held that she would certainly be hit hard if she had to follow the applicant to Spain. The applicant was however himself to blame for the consequences that his expulsion would have for his wife. She could still choose not to follow him to Spain. If she decided to stay in Switzerland, she could maintain her relationship with the applicant in the form of visits, e-mail, Skype, telephone calls and so forth.
The applicant appealed to the Federal Supreme Court of Switzerland, submitting, inter alia, that the revocation of the permanent residence permit was disproportionate.
The Federal Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal with a judgment of 5 January 2015, stating that the applicant’s level of culpability (violation of the sexual integrity of a child) was extremely serious. He had committed a serious breach of public order and security through the offences committed. A risk of recidivism could not be ruled out, especially considering the later installation of a camera in the apartment of the victim’s mother and her surveillance by a private detective in 2012, shortly after the end of his probation. The court stated that the applicant had thus shown that he was unwilling or unable to comply with the Swiss legal system in the future and that he therefore posed a threat to public safety.
The Federal Supreme Court also reiterated that there were forty-five open loss certificates against the applicant amounting to a total of approximatively 75,000 CHF, which also had to be taken into account in the assessment of the applicant’s case.
The Federal Supreme Court further held that the lower court had correctly balanced the interests involved. The public interest was not outweighed by the private interests of the applicant in remaining in Switzerland. Contrary to the applicant’s opinion, the difficult economic situation in Spain did not constitute such an overriding private interest or justify his stay in Switzerland.
The Federal Supreme Court held that the right to respect for one’s private and family life was not absolute. Even though in the present case his permanent residence permit could only be revoked with particular restraint and the court had not failed to recognise the hardship that this would entail for the applicant, the offences committed, the applicant’s level of culpability and the behaviour he had shown after committing the offences were so serious that they outweighed the private interest of the latter in remaining in Switzerland.
The applicant left Switzerland on 28 February 2015 and registered in Gandia (Spain) on 9 March 2015. According to information provided to the Court in April 2020, he currently lives in Spain and is unemployed. His wife lives in Switzerland.
The relevant provisions of the Federal Act on Foreign Nationals of 16 December 2005 (Bundesgesetz über die Ausländerinnen und Ausländer; SR 142.20 systematic report - “the FAFN”), as in force at the material time, read as follows:
Article 62
“1.  The competent authority may revoke authorisations, with the exception of a permanent residence permit, and other orders under this Act if the foreign national:
(a)  or their representative in the permit procedure provides false information or conceals material facts;
(b)  has been given a long custodial sentence or made subject to a criminal measure within the meaning of Articles 59 to 61 or 64 of the Criminal Code.”
Article 63
“1.  The permanent residence permit can only be revoked if:
(a)  the conditions laid down in Article 62 § 1 (a) or (b) are fulfilled;
(b)  the foreigner has seriously violated or endangered public safety and order in Switzerland or abroad or endangered internal or external security;
...
The permanent residence permit of foreign nationals who have resided in Switzerland continuously and lawfully for more than [fifteen] years may only be revoked on the grounds of paragraph 1 (b) and Article 62 § 1 (b).”
Article 5 of Annex I to the Agreement of 21 June 1999 between the Swiss Confederation and the European Community and its member States on the Free Movement of Persons (Abkommens zwischen der Schweizerischen Eidgenossenschaft einerseits und der Europäischen Gemeinschaft und ihren Mitgliedstaaten andererseits über die Freizügigkeit; SR 0.142.112.681 – “the AFMP”) reads as follows:
Public Order:
“The rights granted under the provisions of this Agreement may be restricted only by means of measures which are justified on grounds of public order, public security or public health.
...”
Recommendation Rec(2000)15 of the Committee of Ministers concerning the security of residence of long-term migrants, adopted on 13 September 2000, states inter alia:
“4.  As regards the protection against expulsion
(a)  Any decision on expulsion of a long-term immigrant should take account, having due regard to the principle of proportionality and in the light of the European Court of Human Rights’ constant case-law, of the following criteria:
the personal behaviour of the immigrant;
the duration of residence;
the consequences for both the immigrant and his or her family;
existing links of the immigrant and his or her family to his or her country of origin.
(b)  In application of the principle of proportionality as stated in paragraph 4 (a), member States should duly take into consideration the length or type of residence in relation to the seriousness of the crime committed by the long-term immigrant. More particularly, member States may provide that a long-term immigrant should not be expelled:
- after five years of residence, except in the case of a conviction for a criminal offence where sentenced to in excess of two years’ imprisonment without suspension;
- after ten years of residence, except in the case of a conviction for a criminal offence where sentenced to in excess of five years of imprisonment without suspension.
After twenty years of residence, a long-term immigrant should no longer be expellable.
(c)  Long-term immigrants born on the territory of the member State or admitted to the member State before the age of ten, who have been lawfully and habitually resident, should not be expellable once they have reached the age of eighteen.
Long-term immigrants who are minors may in principle not be expelled.
(d)  In any case, each member State should have the option to provide in its internal law hat a long-term immigrant may be expelled if he or she constitutes a serious threat to national security or public safety.”
Recommendation Rec(2002)4 of the Committee of Ministers on the legal status of persons admitted for family reunification, adopted on 26 March 2002, reads as follows in the relevant parts:
Effective protection against expulsion of family members
“1.  When considering the withdrawal, refusal to renew a residence permit or the expulsion of a family member, member states should have proper regard to criteria such as the person’s place of birth, his age of entry on the territory, the length of residence, his family relationships, the existence of family ties in the country of origin and the solidity of social and cultural ties with the country of origin. Special consideration should be paid to the best interest and wellbeing of children.
...”
Recommendation 1504 (2001) of the Parliamentary Assembly on the non-expulsion of long-term immigrants, adopted on 14 March 2001, reads as follows, inter alia:
“11.  Taking account of Rec(2000)15 of the Committee of Ministers concerning the security of residence of long-term migrants, the Assembly recommends that the Committee of Ministers:
2  invite the governments of member states:
...
(c)  to undertake to ensure that the ordinary-law procedures and penalties applied to nationals are also applicable to long-term immigrants who have committed the same offence;
...
(g)  to take the necessary steps to ensure that in the case of long-term migrants the sanction of expulsion is applied only to particularly serious offences affecting State security of which they have been found guilty;
(h)  to guarantee that migrants who were born or raised in the host country and their under-age children cannot be expelled under any circumstances;
...”