The case originated in an application (no. 4054/03) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national, Mr Jan Boszko on 17 January 2003. He was represented before the Court by Ms A. Zemke, a lawyer practising in .
The Polish Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr J. Wołąsiewicz of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
On 11 March 2005 the Court decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Applying Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time.
The applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Hajnówka.
On 15 February 1999 the applicant requested that administrative proceedings be instituted for the purpose of fixing compensation for a partial expropriation of his real property in 1995, involving two small plots designated for the construction of a road.
On 15 March 1999 the Head of the Hajnówka District instituted such proceedings. On 28 July 1999 the Head of the Hajnówka District fixed an amount of compensation to be paid by the  for these plots. The applicant contested the amount of compensation. On 24 September 1999 the Self-Government Board of Appeal quashed the decision and discontinued the proceedings. It was of the view that no purpose was served by continuing the proceedings. The applicant appealed.
On 5 June 2000 the  quashed the contested decision, finding that the conclusion of the Board had no proper legal or factual basis.
On 29 September 2000 the Podlesie Governor quashed the first-instance decision of 28 July 1999 and refused to pay compensation. The applicant appealed.
On 14 February 2001 the  quashed the Governor’s decision. It considered that it was unlawful in that it had infringed the prohibition of reformationis in peius as it applied to administrative proceedings.
On 23 May 2001 the Podlesie Governor again quashed the decision of 28 July 1999 and remitted the case for re-examination. On 15 October 2001 the Head of the Hajnówka District refused to determine the amount of compensation. The applicant appealed.
On 27 November 2001 the Podlesie Governor quashed the decision given on 15 October 2001 and remitted the case for re-examination.
On 31 December 2001 the Head of the Hajnówka District again refused to determine the amount of compensation. The applicant contested this decision. On 14 February 2002 the Podlesie Governor upheld it. The applicant appealed against the Governor’s decision.
On 14 November 2002 the  quashed the Governor’s decision of 14 February 2002 and remitted the case for re-examination. The court considered that the authorities had entirely disregarded its opinion on issues relevant to the case as well as instructions on how to proceed with the case, as containedin its earlier judgments.
By a decision of 26 May 2003 the Head of the Hajnówka District fixed at PLN 29,763 the amount of compensation to be paid to the applicant.
Under Article 35 of the Code of Administrative Procedure (“the Code”) of 1960 an administrative authority should give a decision on the merits of a case within two months. If this time-limit has not been complied with, the authority must, under Article 36 of the Code, inform the parties of that fact, explain the reasons for the delay and fix a new time-limit.
A party to administrative proceedings may make a complaint under Article 37 of the Code in order to urge the relevant administrative authority to issue a decision within the time-limits fixed in the Code. Moreover, in cases where an authority persistently failed to do so, a party could lodge, under sections 17, 26 and 30 of the Supreme Administrative Court Act 1995 as in force at the material time, a complaint with the  against the authority’s failure to give a decision.
In cases where allegations of inactivity were well-founded, the  could oblige that authority to issue a decision. Pursuant to section 30 of the Act, the decision of the  ordering an authority to put an end to its inactivity was legally binding on the authority concerned. If the authority did not comply with the decision, the court could, under section 31 of the 1995 Act, impose a fine on it. It also could itself give a ruling on the merits of the administrative case.
Under section 17 of the 1995 Act, a party to administrative proceedings could, at any time, lodge a complaint with the  about inactivity on the part of an authority obliged to issue an administrative decision.
Section 26 of the Act provided:
“When a complaint alleging inactivity on the part of an administrative authority is well-founded, the  shall oblige that authority to issue a decision, or to perform a specific act, or to confirm, declare, or recognise a right or obligation provided for by the law.”
As of 1 January 2004 the 1995 Act was replaced by the Act on Proceedings before Administrative Courts of 30 August 2002 which provides for similar remedies.
Articles 417 et seq. of the Civil Code (Kodeks cywilny) provide for the State’s liability in tort.
In the version applicable until 1 September 2004, Article 417 § 1, which lays down a general rule, read as follows:
“1.  The State Treasury shall be liable for damage caused by a State official in the course of carrying out the duties entrusted to him.”
Article 418 of the Civil Code, as applicable until 18 December 2001, provided for the following exception in cases where damage resulted from the issue of a decision or order:
“1.  If, in consequence of the issue of a decision or order, a State official has caused damage, the State Treasury shall be liable only if a breach of the law has been involved in the issue of the decision or order and if that breach is the subject of a prosecution under the criminal law or of a disciplinary investigation, and the guilt of the person who caused the damage in question has been established by a final conviction or has been admitted by the superior of that person.
The absence of the establishment of guilt by way of a criminal conviction or in a decision given in disciplinary proceedings shall not exclude the State Treasury’s liability for damage if such proceedings cannot be instituted in view of the [statutory] exception to prosecution or disciplinary actions.”
On 1 September 2004 the Law of 17 June 2004 on amendments to the Civil Code and other statutes (Ustawa o zmianie ustawy – Kodeks cywilny oraz niektórych innych ustaw) (“the 2004 Amendment”) entered into force. While the relevant amendments have in essence been aimed at enlarging the scope of the State Treasury’s liability for tort under Article  417 of the Civil Code – which included adding a new Article 4171 and the institution of the State’s tortious liability for its omission to enact legislation (the so-called “legislative omission”; “zaniedbanie legislacyjne”) – they are also to be seen in the context of the operation of a new statute introducing remedies for the unreasonable length of judicial proceedings.
Following the 2004 Amendment, Article 4171, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“3.  If damage has been caused by failure to give a ruling (orzeczenie) or decision (decyzja) where there is a statutory duty to give them, reparation for [the damage] may be sought after it has been established in the relevant proceedings that the failure to give a ruling or decision was contrary to the law, unless otherwise provided for by other specific provisions.”
However, under the transitional provisions of Article 5 of the 2004 Amendment, Article 417 as applicable before 1 September 2004 shall apply to all events and legal situations that subsisted before that date.
Article 155 of the Code of Administrative Procedure permits the amendment or annulment of any final administrative decision at any time where necessary in the general or individual interest, if this is not prohibited by specific legal provisions. In particular, pursuant to Article 156, a final administrative decision is subject to annulment if it has been issued by an authority which had no jurisdiction, or if it is without a legal basis or contrary to the applicable laws.
Article 160 of the Code of Administrative Procedure as applicable at the material time enabled persons who have sustained damage as a result of a final administrative decision which was declared null and void pursuant, inter alia, to Article 156, or as a result of such decision having been annulled, to submit a compensation claim to the administrative authority which annulled this decision, and this within three years from the date on which the decision on annulment became final. An administrative decision in respect of the compensation claim can be appealed against in a civil court.