The case originated in an application (no. 25047/05) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Sergey Viktorovich Pryanishnikov (“the applicant”), on 15 June 2005.
The applicant was represented by Mr A. Nachinkin, a lawyer practising in St Petersburg. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicant alleged that the refusal to grant him a film reproduction licence had violated his freedom of expression.
On 27 August 2009 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1957 and lives in St Petersburg.
The applicant is a producer. He owns the copyright to over 1,500 erotic films. The films were approved for public distribution by the Ministry of Culture for audiences over eighteen years old, and the applicant holds valid distribution certificates in respect of them. He has also produced a film called City of the Future, which contained his election programme for the 2003 elections for the Governor of St Petersburg.
In 2003 the applicant applied to the Ministry of the Press, Broadcasting and Mass Media (hereafter “the Ministry of the Press”) for a film reproduction licence.
On 15 October 2003 the Ministry of the Press refused the applicant’s application for a licence. It referred to the fact that, according to information provided by a deputy Prosecutor General, the applicant “[was] involved in investigative measures concerning the illegal production, advertising and distribution of erotic and pornographic material and films”, an offence under Article 242 of the Criminal Code.
The applicant challenged the refusal before the Commercial Court of Moscow. In particular, he claimed that the refusal breached his right to engage in business activities and his copyright to the films. He submitted that the films had been approved for distribution and that he had never been charged with the distribution of pornography.
On 20 May 2004 the Commercial Court of Moscow rejected the applicant’s challenge and upheld the decision of 15 October 2003, relying on section 9 of the Licensing Act and section 14 of the Protection of Children Act (see paragraphs 17 and 27 below). It found that the decision had been lawful and justified. It noted that the applicant had never been formally charged with the distribution of pornography and had only been questioned by the police as a witness. However, no decision had yet been taken in the criminal proceedings and “it could not be ruled out that [the applicant] was involved in the illegal production of pornographic films with the aim of distributing them”. Therefore, it was necessary to refuse his application for a licence in order to protect minors from pornographic material.
On 7 September 2004 the Ninth Commercial Appeal Court (hereafter “the Appeal Court”) upheld the judgment on appeal. It found that the applicant’s involvement in the distribution of pornography had been confirmed by material from the Internet containing offers to sell pornographic products.
On 22 November 2004 the Federal Commercial Court of the Moscow Circuit (hereafter “the Court of Cassation”) upheld the judgments, finding that they had been lawful. It noted in particular that the licence had been refused because the applicant “[was] involved in investigative measures concerning the illegal production of pornographic material”. The applicant was absent from the hearing.
On 29 November 2004 a copy of the judgment was sent to the applicant. As the applicant did not receive it, he asked the Court of Cassation to send it to him again. He received a copy of the judgment on 18 April 2005.
According to the applicant, the charges of producing and distributing pornography were subsequently dropped in the absence of corpus delicti in his actions, and the prosecutor’s office issued an official apology for unlawful prosecution.
The Constitution of the Russian Federation guarantees freedom of thought and expression, freedom to receive and impart information, and freedom of the mass media. It prohibits censorship (Article 29).
The illegal production, distribution or advertising of pornographic material or objects, and the illegal selling of publications, films, videos, images or other objects of a pornographic nature were offences punishable by a fine or up to two years’ imprisonment (Article 242 of the Criminal Code, as in force at the material time).
Section 14(1) of the Law on Basic Guarantees of the Rights of the Child in the Russian Federation (no. 124-FZ of 24 July 1998, as in force at the material time – hereafter “the Protection of Children Act”) provided that the authorities of the Russian Federation were to take measures to protect children from information, propaganda and incitement harmful to their health or moral and spiritual development, such as, among other things, printed material, audio and video products advocating violence and brutality, pornography, drug abuse or disorderly behaviour.
An author had the exclusive right to use his work by any method, such as by reproduction; distribution; importation; a public showing; public performance; broadcasting, including through cable channels; translation; and revision (section 16(1) and (2) of the Law on Copyright and Related Rights, no. 5351-I of 9 July 1993, in force at the material time – hereafter “the Copyright Act”).
The authors of an audiovisual product were the director, the scriptwriter and the composer. Following the conclusion of a production agreement for an audiovisual product, the exclusive right to its reproduction, distribution, public performance, broadcasting or any other public showing was transferred from the authors to the producer, unless the agreement provided otherwise (section 13(1) and (2) of the Copyright Act).
At the material time, the registration of films was regulated by Governmental Decree no. 396 of 28 April 1993 on the Registration of Films and Control of their Public Distribution (hereafter “the Registration of Films Decree”).
All films intended for public (commercial and non-commercial) distribution or to be reproduced for the purposes of being sold, screened in cinemas or movie houses, hired out through video libraries or video rental facilities, or broadcast through television or cable channels were to be registered with the Ministry of Culture. Such registration pursued the aim of preventing the illegal use and distribution of films in the Russian Federation.
The Ministry of Culture issued distribution certificates (прокатные удостоверения) in respect of films which had been successfully registered. A distribution certificate indicated recommended age restrictions.
Individuals or legal entities owning the copyright to films could sell them for distribution to cinemas, cultural or educational centres, television production companies (including cable television) or other commercial or non-commercial organisations, or make copies for the purpose of selling the films or hiring them out, or distributing them through video libraries or hire centres. However, this was only possible after the films had been registered and distribution certificates issued.
The Ministry of Culture could refuse to issue a distribution certificate if the relevant applicant had not complied with the established procedure, or in other cases prescribed by law. The refusal could be challenged before a court.
By Order no. 112 of 15 March 2005, the Federal Culture and Cinematography Agency approved the Regulation on the Age Classification of Audiovisual Products. The regulation provides that the registration of a film may be refused if the film promotes: war; violence or cruelty; racial, ethnic, religious or social superiority or hatred; or pornography. It defines pornography as the naturalistic and detailed presentation of a sexual act or the detailed depiction of naked genitals in the process of sexual contact, whose primary purpose is to cause sexual arousal in the viewer and which has no artistic or educational aim, as well as the purposeless depiction of group sex. The regulation further provides that the depiction of a sexual act or other erotic scenes, as well as scenes of sexual violence and harassment, is permissible in films classified as being for distribution only to those aged eighteen or over, provided that those scenes are justified by the plot and artistic aim of the film.
A licence was required for the reproduction (production of copies) of audiovisual products and audio-recordings on all types of medium (section 17(86) of Law no. 128-FZ of 8 August 2001 on the Licensing of Certain Activities, in force at the material time – hereafter “the Licensing Act”).
A licence could be refused if the relevant application contained untrue or misrepresented information, or if the applicant or the objects belonging to him or used by him did not meet the licensing requirements and conditions. The refusal could be challenged before a court (section 9(3) and (4) of the Licensing Act).
In addition to technical requirements regarding the equipment used, the licensing requirements included the requirement that the applicant possess documents confirming his right to reproduce audiovisual products – such as a copyright agreement or permission for reproduction from the copyright owner – and a distribution certificate (Governmental Decree no. 381 of 4 June 2002 on Licensing the Reproduction (Making of Copies) of Audiovisual Products and Audio-Recordings on All Types of Medium, in force at the material time).
On 4 May 2008 section 17(86) of the Licensing Act was amended. The amended section 17(86) stated that persons who had copyright to audiovisual products and audio-recordings under a provision of federal law, or under a contract, did not need a licence to reproduce such material. On 4 May 2011 the Licensing Act was repealed and replaced by Law no. 99FZ, which reproduced verbatim the amended section 17(86) of the Licensing Act (section 12(38) of Law no. 99-FZ).
The Code of Criminal Procedure of 2001 provides that a person who has been acquitted or against whom criminal proceedings have been discontinued is entitled to “rehabilitation” (реабилитация) (Article 134). A prosecutor issues an official apology to the rehabilitated person on behalf of the State (Article 136 § 1).
A copy of a judgment of the Court of Cassation must be sent to the parties within five days of the judgment being adopted (Article 289 § 4 of the Code of Commercial Procedure of 24 July 2002).
The relevant extracts from Recommendation No. R (89) 7 of the Committee of Ministers to member states concerning principles on the distribution of videograms having a violent, brutal or pornographic content (adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 27 April 1989 at the 425th meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies) read as follows:
“The following principles are designed to assist member states in strengthening their action against videograms having a violent, brutal or pornographic content – as well as those which encourage drug abuse – in particular for the purpose of protecting minors. They should be envisaged as a complement to other existing Council of Europe legal instruments.
These principles concern in particular the distribution of videograms.
Systems for the distribution of videograms
The member states should:
In all cases, member states remain free to make use of criminal law and dissuasive financial and fiscal measures.
...
Classification and control systems
...
...
Application of criminal law
In conjunction with, parallel to, or independently from the application of classification and control systems, or as an alternative to such systems, the member states should consider if the application of their criminal law concerning videograms is effective in dealing with the problem of videograms having a violent, brutal or pornographic content, as well as those which encourage drug abuse.”