The case originated in an application (no. 17429/10) against the Republic of Estonia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Estonian national, Mr Romeo Kalda (“the applicant”), on 16 March 2010.
The applicant, who had been granted legal aid, was represented by Mr J. Valdma, a lawyer practising in Tallinn. The Estonian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Kuurberg, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicant alleged that his right under Article 10 of the Convention to receive information through the Internet without interference by public authority had been violated.
On 23 October 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1974. He is serving a life sentence in prison.
On 21 July 2005 the applicant requested from the Governor of Pärnu Prison access to (i) the online version of Riigi Teataja (the State Gazette), (ii) the decisions of the Supreme Court and administrative courts, which are available on the Internet, and (iii) the HUDOC database of the judgments of the European Court of Human Rights. The Governor refused his request. The applicant’s subsequent complaint was dismissed by the Pärnu Administrative Court; the Tallinn Court of Appeal dismissed his further appeal. The applicant then appealed to the Supreme Court.
The Administrative Law Chamber of the Supreme Court delivered its judgment on 31 May 2007 (case no. 3-3-1-20-07). In respect of Estonian legislation and the Supreme Court’s rulings, the Supreme Court noted that these were available in the paper version of Riigi Teataja; it considered access to the paper version sufficient and found that the prison’s refusal to grant the applicant access to the online version of Riigi Teataja had been lawful.
However, the Supreme Court noted that from 1 January 2007 the primary official version of Riigi Teataja had been its online version and that since then only five “control copies” of each edition had been printed. Despite that fact, the prisons had a duty to ensure that detainees had a reasonable possibility of searching for and familiarising themselves with legal acts.
Furthermore, the Supreme Court considered that the refusal of the prison administration to grant detainees access to the rulings of the administrative courts and of the European Court of Human Rights interfered with their right to freely obtain information disseminated for public use. Given that the legislature had not specified any restrictions in this regard in respect of prisoners, their right – enshrined in Article 44 § 1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Estonia (Eesti Vabariigi põhiseadus) – to obtain information had to be given an equal level of protection as that afforded to persons at liberty. Accordingly, the refusal of Pärnu Prison to grant the applicant access to the rulings of the Estonian administrative courts and the European Court of Human Rights had been unlawful.
On 18 October 2007 Tartu Prison – to which the applicant had been transferred in the meantime – refused the applicant’s request to be granted access to the Internet sites www.coe.ee (the Council of Europe Information Office in Tallinn), www.oiguskantsler.ee (the Chancellor of Justice, or Õiguskantsler)) and www.riigikogu.ee (the Estonian Parliament, or Riigikogu). According to the applicant, he was involved in a number of legal disputes with the prison administration and needed access to those Internet sites in order to be able to defend his rights in court.
On 23 November 2007 the applicant’s complaint was dismissed by the Ministry of Justice.
By a judgment of 17 July 2008 the Tartu Administrative Court upheld the applicant’s complaint in respect of the Internet site www.coe.ee and ordered Tartu Prison to grant him supervised access to that site via a computer adapted for that purpose. The Administrative Court noted that Tartu Prison had afforded its detainees access to the online version of Riigi Teataja, the database of judicial decisions, and the Internet sites of the European Court of Human Rights and the Supreme Court. The Administrative Court further referred to the Supreme Court’s judgment of 31 May 2007 (see paragraphs 7 and 9 above) and to section 31-1 of the Imprisonment Act (Vangistusseadus) (see paragraph 21 below), which had entered into force on 1 June 2008. It noted that the Internet site of the European Court of Human Rights – to which detainees had been granted access – contained information only in English and French, whereas translations into Estonian of the rulings of the European Court of Human Rights were available on the Internet site of the Council of Europe Information Office in Tallinn. The Administrative Court considered that the burden of having the rulings of the European Court of Human Rights translated into Estonian could not be placed on the applicant and concluded that he also had to be granted access to the Internet site www.coe.ee. It considered that this Internet site was similar to the database of judicial decisions referred to in section 31-1 of the Imprisonment Act. In respect of the Internet sites www.oiguskantsler.ee and www.riigikogu.ee, the court found that access to these sites was not foreseen by section 31-1 of the Imprisonment Act; in any case, the applicant could request information directly from the institutions concerned or from Tartu Prison.
Both parties appealed. On 31 October 2008 the Tartu Court of Appeal dismissed both appeals and upheld the first-instance court’s judgment.
Both parties challenged the Appeal Court’s judgment before the Supreme Court. The Administrative Law Chamber of the Supreme Court referred the case to the Supreme Court’s plenary session on a point of constitutionality. By a judgment of 7 December 2009 the plenary session of the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld Tartu Prison’s appeal. It quashed the lower courts’ judgments in so far as these granted the applicant access to the Internet site www.coe.ee.
The Supreme Court found that the Internet sites in question did not fall under the exceptions provided for in section 31-1 of the Imprisonment Act (see paragraph 21 below). Thus, the Supreme Court had to determine whether that provision was in conformity with the Constitution. The Supreme Court found that section 31-1 of the Imprisonment Act interfered with the right – enshrined in Article 44 § 1 of the Constitution – to freely obtain information disseminated for public use. It noted that the aims of imprisonment included the protection of the legal order and steering detainees towards law-abiding behaviour. As the possibility could not be technically excluded that detainees might misuse the right to use the Internet, access to the Internet was prohibited to them by section 31-1 of the Imprisonment Act. The exception made in respect of the official databases of legislation and the database of judicial decisions was necessary in order to ensure that detainees were afforded an effective possibility to protect their own rights. It had to be taken into account that the official texts of legal acts were only accessible to detainees via the Internet.
The Supreme Court observed that the prohibition of the use of the Internet was necessary primarily in order to restrict detainees’ ability to engage in communication for purposes that did not accord with those of their detention, such as obtaining information that could jeopardise the prison’s security or run counter to the directing of detainees towards law-abiding behaviour. Granting detainees access to any additional Internet site increased the security risk of their obtaining information running contrary to the aims of imprisonment. Moreover, this could create an opportunity for detainees to use the Internet for purposes other than that of freely obtaining information disseminated for public use. Thus, the Supreme Court concluded that the prohibition of detainees’ access to the Internet sites www.coe.ee, www.oiguskantsler.ee and www.riigikogu.ee was justified by the need to achieve the aims of imprisonment and in particular the need to secure public safety.
In respect of the proportionality of the restriction the Supreme Court considered that the denial of detainees’ access to the Internet sites www.coe.ee, www.oiguskantsler.ee and www.riigikogu.ee prevented them from misusing the Internet via these sites and that public safety was thereby protected. Moreover, granting detainees access to these Internet sites could increase the risk of their engaging in prohibited communication; this in turn would necessitate increased levels of control (and therefore costs). Thus, there were no alternative, equally effective means – besides the prohibition imposed by section 31-1 of the Imprisonment Act – of achieving the legitimate aim in question. Lastly, the Supreme Court noted that detainees were able to contact the Riigikogu and the Chancellor of Justice by mail and make a request for information (teabenõue). Therefore, detainees’ access to the public information contained on the Internet sites in question was not unduly restricted. Detainees’ access to the Internet site of the European Court of Human Rights was guaranteed, pursuant to section 31-1 of the Imprisonment Act; those of the Council of Europe’s conventions and treaties that had been ratified by Estonia were accessible on the Internet site www.riigiteataja.ee. The Supreme Court noted that it did not doubt that the printed works of the Council of Europe were accessible through prison libraries, and nor were detainees prevented from contacting the Council of Europe by post. The Supreme Court concluded that the restriction preventing detainees from accessing the Internet sites www.oiguskantsler.ee, www.riigikogu.ee and www.coe.ee was one of “low intensity”; the Supreme Court gave more weight to the aim sought by that restriction. It considered that permitting detainees extensive use of the Internet would increase the likelihood of prison authorities losing control over detainees’ activities, as it could not be completely excluded that via the Internet sites in question detainees could use the Internet for other, unauthorised purposes. Accordingly, the impugned restriction was in conformity with the Constitution.
Four judges out of eighteen delivered a dissenting opinion according to which the applicant should have been granted access to all three of the Internet sites in question. They considered that the use of the Internet sites in question did not generally pose a threat to public safety and was in conformity with the aims of imprisonment. It was unclear what additional costs the State would have to bear, since – in line with the applicable law – prisons were equipped with computers specially adapted to allow detainees access to the official databases of legislation and judicial decisions, and the prison service exercised supervision over the use of such resources. The information available on the Internet sites in question aided the exercising of the right of recourse to the courts. While it was true that detainees could also avail themselves of the right to make a request for information, this was a more time-consuming avenue and, particularly in the case of the Internet site of the Chancellor of Justice, required knowledge of which information was available on such Internet sites. No request for information under the Public Information Act (Avaliku teabe seadus) could be made to the Council of Europe Information Office in Tallinn. The rulings of the European Court of Human Rights available in the HUDOC database – which was accessible to detainees – were not in Estonian (unlike the unofficial translations published on the Internet site ), and it could not be presumed that detainees had sufficient command of English or French to be able to read them. The printed works of the Council of Europe that were available in prison libraries did not include all the information that was published on the Internet site of the Council of Europe Information Office in Tallinn. Thus, the four dissenting judges concluded that the restriction in question was unconstitutional.
Article 44 § 1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Estonia (Eesti Vabariigi põhiseadus) provides that everyone has the right to freely obtain information disseminated for public use.
The Public Information Act (Avaliku teabe seadus) stipulates the conditions and procedure for accessing information that is obtained or created in the course of carrying out public duties. A request for information (teabenõue) may be made orally or in writing (section 13) and the holder of such information, subject to certain exceptions, must release the information in the manner requested by the person making the request (section 17).
Section 31-1 of the Imprisonment Act (Vangistusseadus), which entered into force on 1 June 2008, provides that prisoners are prohibited from using the Internet, except on computers specially adapted for said purpose by a prison which has allowed such access (under the supervision of the prison authorities) to the official databases of legislation and the database of judicial decisions. This provision is still in force and has not been substantially amended.
The Rules of the Committee of Ministers for the supervision
“2.  When supervising the execution of a judgment by the High Contracting Party concerned, pursuant to Article 46, paragraph 2, of the Convention, the Committee of Ministers shall examine:
...
if required, and taking into account the discretion of the High Contracting Party concerned to choose the means necessary to comply with the judgment, whether:
...
general measures have been adopted, preventing new violations similar to that or those found or putting an end to continuing violations.”
A footnote relating to the above provision mentions – as an example of general measures to be taken – publication of a judgment of the Court in the language of the respondent State and its dissemination to the authorities concerned.
On 28 May 2003, at the 840th meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted a Declaration on freedom of communication on the Internet. The relevant part of the Declaration reads as follows:
“Member states should foster and encourage access for all to Internet communication and information services on a non-discriminatory basis at an affordable price. Furthermore, the active participation of the public, for example by setting up and running individual websites, should not be subject to any licensing or other requirements having a similar effect.”
On 16 April 2014 Recommendation CM/Rec(2014)6 of the Committee of Ministers to member States on a Guide to human rights for Internet users was adopted. The relevant part of the Recommendation reads as follows:
“3. The Internet has a public service value. People, communities, public authorities and private entities rely on the Internet for their activities and have a legitimate expectation that its services are accessible, provided without discrimination, affordable, secure, reliable and ongoing. Furthermore, no one should be subjected to unlawful, unnecessary or disproportionate interference with the exercise of their human rights and fundamental freedoms when using the Internet.”
Furthermore, the relevant parts of the Guide read as follows:
“1. Access to the Internet is an important means for you to exercise your rights and freedoms and to participate in democracy. You should therefore not be disconnected from the Internet against your will, except when it is decided by a court. In certain cases, contractual arrangements may also lead to discontinuation of service but this should be a measure of last resort.”
“You have the right to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of your choice, without interference and regardless of frontiers. This means:
you have the freedom to express yourself online and to access information and the opinions and expressions of others. This includes political speech, views on religion, opinions and expressions that are favourably received or regarded as inoffensive, but also those that may offend, shock or disturb others. You should have due regard to the reputation or rights of others, including their right to privacy;
restrictions may apply to expressions which incite discrimination, hatred or violence. These restrictions must be lawful, narrowly tailored and executed with court oversight;
...
public authorities have a duty to respect and protect your freedom of expression and your freedom of information. Any restrictions to this freedom must not be arbitrary, must pursue a legitimate aim in accordance with the European Convention on Human Rights such as, among others, the protection of national security or public order, public health or morals, and must comply with human rights law. Moreover, they must be made known to you, coupled with information on ways to seek guidance and redress, and not be broader or maintained for longer than is strictly necessary to achieve a legitimate aim ...”
The UN Human Rights Council’s Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression stated the following in his report of 16 May 2011 to the Human Rights Council (A/HRC/17/27):
“60.  The Internet, as a medium by which the right to freedom of expression can be exercised, can only serve its purpose if States assume their commitment to develop effective policies to attain universal access to the Internet. Without concrete policies and plans of action, the Internet will become a technological tool that is accessible only to a certain elite while perpetrating the “digital divide”.
The term “digital divide” refers to the gap between people with effective access to digital and information technologies, in particular the Internet, and those with very limited or no access at all ... [D]igital divides also exist along wealth, gender, geographical and social lines within States. ...
The Special Rapporteur is thus concerned that without Internet access, which facilitates economic development and the enjoyment of a range of human rights, marginalized groups and developing States remain trapped in a disadvantaged situation, thereby perpetuating inequality both within and between States. ...
In some economically developed States, Internet access has been recognized as a right. For example, the parliament of Estonia passed legislation in 2000 declaring Internet access a basic human right. The constitutional council of France effectively declared Internet access a fundamental right in 2009, and the constitutional court of Costa Rica reached a similar decision in 2010. Going a step further, Finland passed a decree in 2009 stating that every Internet connection needs to have a speed of at least one Megabit per second (broadband level). The Special Rapporteur also takes note that according to a survey by the British Broadcasting Corporation in March 2010, 79% of those interviewed in 26 countries believe that Internet access is a fundamental human right.
...
Given that the Internet has become an indispensable tool for realizing a range of human rights, combating inequality, and accelerating development and human progress, ensuring universal access to the Internet should be a priority for all States. Each State should thus develop a concrete and effective policy, in consultation with individuals from all sections of society, including the private sector and relevant Government ministries, to make the Internet widely available, accessible and affordable to all segments of population.
...
Where the infrastructure for Internet access is present, the Special Rapporteur encourages States to support initiatives to ensure that online information can be accessed in a meaningful way by all sectors of the population, including persons with disabilities and persons belonging to linguistic minorities.”