The case originated in an application (no. 42447/10) against Romania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Romanian nationals, Mr Constantin Elisei-Uzun and Mr Adrian Vlad Andonie (“the applicants”), on 9 April 2010.
The applicants were represented by Ms B.L.A. Elisei-Uzun, a lawyer practising in Târgu Mureș. The Romanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms C. Brumar, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The applicants alleged, in particular, a breach of their right to a fair trial and of their right to respect for their possessions, as well as discrimination on the grounds of their profession.
On 5 February 2016 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicants were born in 1975 and live in Târgu-Mureş.
At the time of the facts of the present case, the applicants were working as judicial officers at the Mureş County Court (hereinafter “the County Court”). They had held those positions since 29 June 2000.
On 18 December 2007, relying on the provisions of the
In a judgment of 14 February 2008 the County Court allowed the claim. It found that the relevant law created a difference in treatment between the applicants and the rest of the judicial and non-judicial court staff and that there was no justification for that different treatment. The court concluded that Article 14 of the Convention and Article 1 Protocol No. 12 to the Convention were applicable and declared that the applicants had been discriminated against because they had not been awarded the loyalty bonus. The court ordered that the applicants be paid compensation for the discrimination suffered, representing 5% of their monthly salary for the period running from December 2004 until 31 March 2006 and 15% for the period running from 1 April 2006 until the day the discrimination ended. The judgment was immediately enforceable.
On 16 and 25 April 2008 the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Finance appealed, arguing in the main that the court had overstepped the limits of its judicial authority and had acted as a “lawmaker” when it had awarded the applicants a right which had not been provided to them by law. On this point, they argued that the Anti-discrimination Ordinance did not apply to the manner in which social relations were regulated by law; it only concerned the applicability in practice of those laws.
In a final decision of 30 May 2008 the Târgu Mureş Court of Appeal (hereinafter “the Court of Appeal”) dismissed the appeal as unfounded in so far as it concerned the Ministry of Justice and as out of time in so far as it concerned the Ministry of Finance. It considered firstly that the Antidiscrimination Ordinance applied to the applicants’ situation and on this point it dismissed the defendant party’s allegations of a breach of the principles of the separation of powers by the courts. It further considered that, in the light of Article 2 of the Anti-discrimination Ordinance and of the Court’s case-law on Article 14, the applicants had proved their allegations of discrimination, particularly that they had been treated differently from individuals in similar situations, without justification. In the court’s view, the protected right at stake was the principle of equality of treatment in the system of remuneration for work. On the merits of the case, the court relied on the laws regulating “confidentiality bonus[es]” (spor de confidenţialitate), noting that the applicants had to respect the confidentiality of the information to which they had access and for this reason concluded that they should be entitled to a “confidentiality bonus”, like other members of the judiciary and ancillary staff. It therefore awarded the applicants such a “confidentiality bonus”.
The use of the term “confidentiality bonus” in the court’s decision was brought to the court’s attention on 20 November 2008 by the defendants by means of an extraordinary appeal (subsection C below) and on 27 November by the applicants by means of an application for correction of material errors (subsection B below).
Meanwhile, on 14 October 2008 the authorities paid each of the applicants 30% of the amount they were entitled to receive as compensation for the period from December 2004 to July 2008.
On 27 November 2008 the applicants lodged an application for correction of material errors in the final decision adopted by the Court of Appeal in their case. They asked in particular that the word “confidentiality” be replaced with the word “loyalty” throughout the whole decision.
In an interlocutory judgment of 4 December 2008 the same bench – sitting in camera – of the Court of Appeal allowed the application, without notifying the parties. The court considered that the use of the phrase “confidentiality bonus” stemmed from a technical error and did not affect the reasoning of the judgment.
On 20 November 2008 the Ministry of Justice lodged an extraordinary appeal against the final decision of 30 May 2008, claiming that the Court of Appeal had failed to examine the grounds of appeal as stated by the defendants. It pointed out that the subject matter of the dispute was not a confidentiality bonus, as wrongly established by the court, but rather a loyalty bonus. It relied on the provisions of Article 318 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure (“the CCP”) (see paragraph 27 below).
On 7 January 2009 the applicants, who had received a copy of the defendant party’s submissions, added their observations to the file. They argued that the defendant had failed to observe the time-limits set by law for lodging the appeal. They further argued that all the reasons for appeal had been thoroughly examined by the Court of Appeal, which had resolved the legal matter brought before it, that is to say – the right to compensation for the damage caused by discrimination. They also raised an objection of unconstitutionality of Articles 318 and 319 of the CCP, which in their view, by allowing for an open-ended possibility of lodging the extraordinary appeal, contradicted the right of access to court guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution and by Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, the latter having been incorporated into domestic law by Article 20 of the Constitution. Their objection was dismissed by the Constitutional Court on 12 May 2009, on the grounds that the said provisions did set the time-limits for the extraordinary appeal and that in any case, the enforcement proceedings were subject to the general statutes of limitation.
The Court of Appeal sitting in a different formation held a hearing on 14 October 2009. The applicants were not present, but requested that the extraordinary appeal be decided in their absence. The Court of Appeal ruled that the subject matter of the dispute had been wrongly determined as being an entitlement to a confidentiality bonus. In its view, the matter could not be considered as a simple material error:
“It cannot be considered that this is a simple material [or] typographical error, which arose because of the striking similarity between the words ‘confidentiality’ and ‘loyalty’, as it had been adjudged in the interlocutory judgment of 4 December 2008 whereby this court ordered the correction of this material error by replacing the word ‘confidentiality’ with the word ‘loyalty’. The court of appeal referred to a completely different legal matter, which had not been brought before it by the parties, and thus dismissed as unfounded the appeal lodged by the Ministry of Justice without examining the arguments put before it by [the Ministry of Justice] by mistakenly copying the reasoning from a different decision, in which it had examined the issue of awarding a confidentiality bonus.”
Consequently, in the same hearing, the Court of Appeal allowed the extraordinary appeal and quashed the final decision. It observed that on 3 July 2008 the Constitutional Court had declared the relevant provisions of the Anti-discrimination Ordinance to be unconstitutional (decisions nos. 818 and 821 of 2008; see paragraph 24 below). It concluded that there were no longer any legal grounds to support the applicants’ action. The Court of Appeal thus allowed the appeal, quashed the judgment rendered by the County Court and rejected the applicants’ initial action. It found as follows:
“In their initial action, the [applicants] argued firstly that they had been discriminated against [vis-à-vis] the remaining judicial staff, because they had been excluded from the benefit of the loyalty bonus. They relied on the provisions of Articles 1-6 and 27 § 1 of the [Anti-discrimination Ordinance] and of Articles 5 and 154 § 3 of the Labour Code.
The provisions of Articles 27 § 1 as well as those of Article 1 and 2 of the [Antidiscrimination Ordinance] were declared unconstitutional by Decision no. 821 of 3 July 2008, as well as by Decision no. 818/2008 of the Constitutional Court. According to Article 31 of Law no. 47/1992 on the organisation and functioning of the Constitutional Court, the decisions rendered in verification of the constitutionality of a law are binding on everyone. This means that the provisions of Article 27 § 1 of the [Anti-discrimination Ordinance] can no longer be applied.
In these conditions, the first-instance [court’s] decision to allow the [applicants’] action can no longer be justified on these legal provisions which have been declared unconstitutional. Therefore, ... the decision lacks legal basis.
For this reason the court will not examine the remaining grounds of unlawfulness, will ... allow the appeal, and will ... reject the action lodged by the [applicants].”
The applicants unsuccessfully lodged several extraordinary appeals against that decision, all of which were rejected by final decisions of the Court of Appeal (19 January 2010, 20 January 2010, and 4 February 2010). For instance, on 19 January 2010 the Târgu Mureş Court of Appeal rejected the applicants’ argument that the Ministry of Justice had lodged its extraordinary appeal outside the time-limit set by law.
Judicial officers are law graduates with at least five years’ work experience, who are appointed by the Ministry of Justice on the basis of a recommendation from the Economic and Social Council for a five-year mandate. The Council is a consultative body of the Government and Parliament whose role is to ensure dialogue between employers, trade unions and civil society. It was regulated at that time by Law no. 109/1997, and later by Law no. 248/2013.
Judicial officers’ status is regulated by Law no. 304/2004 on the organisation of the judiciary (Articles 55 and 110 to 115). In accordance with that Law, judicial officers, along with judges, form the benches which settle labour-law and social-insurance conflicts as first-instance courts. They give an advisory opinion in the cases they sit in. Judicial officers are subject to the same obligations, restrictions and rules on discipline, conflicts of interest and termination of office as judges and prosecutors. Their work experience counts towards the accumulation of seniority in the court system. In accordance with Government Decision no. 616 of 23 June 2005, judicial officers can be transferred permanently or on a secondment basis to other courts. Nothing prohibits the renewal of their mandate.
At the material time, judicial officers did not receive a loyalty bonus with their monthly salary, unlike judges, prosecutors, and specialist and non-specialist ancillary personnel, which included court clerks, probation officers, prison guards, administrative staff, as well as civil servants working in the courts and in the Ministry of Justice.
Discrimination is prohibited by Article 16 of the Constitution. Discrimination is defined in Article 2 § 1 of the Anti-discrimination Ordinance (Government Ordinance no. 137/2000 on preventing and punishing all forms of discrimination) and in Article 5 §§ 2 and 3 of the Labour Code. Under Article 27 § 1 of the Anti-discrimination Ordinance, a person who alleges discrimination may bring a court action to seek compensation and to have the discriminatory treatment brought to an end.
On 3 July 2008 the Constitutional Court rendered four decisions, – nos. 818, 819, 820, and 821 – declaring Articles 1, 2, and 27 § 1 of the Antidiscrimination Ordinance unconstitutional in so far as they could be read as granting domestic courts the power to repeal laws which they found to be discriminatory. The decisions were adopted following the examination by the Constitutional Court of the constitutional complaints lodged by the Ministry of Justice in four sets of proceedings in which the domestic courts had declared discriminatory various legal provisions concerning salary adjustments. These decisions were published in the Official Gazette on 16 July 2008. In all four decisions, the Constitutional Court held:
“Reading the provisions of the [Anti-discrimination Ordinance] so as to allow the courts to have the power to repeal legal provisions and to replace them by new provisions or by existing provisions from other laws is evidently unconstitutional as it breaches the principle of the separation of powers enshrined in Article 1 § 4 of the Constitution as well as in Article 61 § 1, which states that Parliament is the only legislative body in the country.
...
Accordingly, the Constitutional Court ... rules that the provisions of Articles 1, 2 § 3, and 27 § 1 of Government Ordinance no. 137/2000 on preventing and punishing all forms of discrimination are unconstitutional in so far as they can be interpreted as allowing the courts to revoke or refuse to apply [laws] on the grounds that they are discriminatory, and to replace them with provisions created on the basis of case-law or provisions from other laws which were not considered by the legislature when adopting the discriminatory provisions.”
Article 31 of the Constitutional Court Act provides that any decision by the Constitutional Court which declares a legal provision unconstitutional is binding. From the date of the publication of the decision, the provisions declared unconstitutional are suspended and have no juridical effect. Likewise, the decisions rendered by the High Court of Cassation and Justice when examining an appeal in the interest of the law are binding on all domestic courts.
Conversely, decisions adopted by the domestic courts in individual cases are not binding on any other domestic courts and do not constitute as such a primary source of law. This principle, which existed at the time of the facts of the present case (for instance, Article 261 § 1 of the CCP provided that decisions had to be adopted on the basis of the law), has since been inscribed in Article 1 of the new Civil Code, in force since 1 October 2011, which instituted as sources of law, in order of precedence: civil law, custom, and the general principles of law; there is no mention of court decisions or of judicial precedent as such in this provision of the Civil Code.
Under the provisions of Article 281 § 1 of the former Code of Civil Procedure (“the CCP”), in force at the relevant time, domestic courts have the power to correct material errors in their decisions:
“Errors or omission concerning the name, the quality of the parties, the [parties’] submissions, or those concerning calculations, as well as any other material errors from decision or interlocutory judgments may be corrected on [the court’s] own initiative or by request.”
At the relevant time, Article 304 of the CCP enumerated nine reasons for which an appeal could be lodged. They all pertained to the legal basis of the decision appealed against. Article 3041 of the CCP extended as follows the scope of the appeal proceedings in cases where the appeal was lodged directly against a decision rendered by a first-instance court, as was the situation in the present case:
“The appeal lodged against a decision [rendered by the first-instance court] is not limited to the reasons provided in Article 304, the court having the power to examine the case under all its aspects.”
The relevant provisions concerning the examination of an ordinary appeal read as follows:
“(4)  If the decision is quashed, the courts will re-examine the merits of the action either in the same hearing in which they declared the appeal admissible, and in this case only one decision will be rendered, or at a different hearing which will be set for that purpose.
(5)  If the decision is appealed against on the grounds that the [lower] court did not examine the merits ... the court, after quashing that decision, will remit the case to the lower court.”
The relevant provisions of the CCP concerning the quashing of a final decision by means of an extraordinary appeal read as follows:
“Decisions rendered by a court of final instance may also be contested when the decision was based on a material error or when the court, when it dismissed or partially admitted the appeal, omitted by mistake to examine one of the reasons for ... appeal.”
“(1)  An [extraordinary appeal] is lodged with the court which rendered the decision under review.
(2)  A final decision may be contested at any point before the start of the enforcement proceedings, and during the enforcement proceedings until the deadline set by Article 401 § 1 (b) or (c).”
“(1)  The appeal shall be examined expeditiously and shall have priority.
...
(3)  The decision rendered in the extraordinary appeal may be challenged through the same means of appeal as the decision under review.”
In addition, the following provisions of the CCP are also applicable:
“The enforcement proceedings may be contested within fifteen days of the date when: ...
(b)  the interested party received notice of the attachment of the financial assets [poprire]. ...
(c)  the debtor who contests the enforcement received notice [of the enforcement proceedings] or from the date when he or she became aware of the first act of enforcement, in those cases in which he or she did not receive notice of enforcement or when the enforcement was done without notice.”
“(1)  The enforcement proceedings must be started within three years, unless the law provides otherwise. ...
(2)  The time-limit starts running from the date when the right to seek enforcement begins.”
The new Code of Civil Procedure, applicable since 2012, provides, in its Article 508, the procedure for examination of extraordinary appeals. The relevant parts of this provision read as follows:
“(1)  The appeal shall be examined expeditiously and as a priority, and will follow the procedure applicable to the to the appeal proceedings which were finalised with the decision under review.
...
(3)  If the reason for the [extraordinary appeal] is grounded, the court adopts a single decision whereby it quashes the decision under review and decides on the initial action. If is it not possible to re-examine the initial action on the same day, the court renders a decision quashing the decision under review and sets a new date when the initial action will be examined and a separate decision will be rendered. In this latter case, the decision ordering the quashing [of the decision under review] may not be appealed against separately.
(4)  The decision rendered in an extraordinary appeal may be challenged through the same means of appeal as the decision under review.”
In accordance with Article 509 § 10 of the new Code of Civil Procedure, the applicants can seek the reopening of the proceedings if the Court adopts a judgment in their favour.
“(1)  Revision of a decision which examines or reiterates the merits may be sought if: ...
The European Court of Human Rights found a violation of the fundamental rights and freedoms because of a court decision, and the severe consequences of this violation are still ongoing.”
The Government directed the Court’s attention to several domestic decisions whereby the courts had ruled against judicial officers in claims of discrimination in relation to the attribution of the loyalty bonus. For instance, in a final decision of 14 March 2008 the High Court of Cassation and Justice had considered that the fact that the plaintiffs had not been entitled by law to a loyalty bonus had not constituted discrimination in so far as they had been appointed only for a fixed five-year mandate, which had been by its nature incompatible with the notion of stability. The High Court had also considered that it had not been possible to use the
In a final decision of 22 August 2007 the Suceava County Court had ruled that judicial officers and magistrates had not been in a similar situation for the purpose of the loyalty bonus in so far as the former had been appointed for a five-year mandate whereas the latter had been permanent in their posts. The same conclusion had been reached in similar cases by the Bacău County Court (final decision of 5 June 2008), the Suceava Court of Appeal (final decision of 4 June 2009), the Bacău Court of Appeal (final decision of 19 March 2008), the Ploieşti Court of Appeal (final decision of 20 May 2009), the Piteşti Court of Appeal (final decision of 18 March 2009), and the Alba Iulia Court of Appeal (final decision of 9 April 2009).
The applicants also submitted two final decisions in which the Cluj Napoca Court of Appeal found in favour of the judicial officers in cases similar to the one at hand (final decisions of 16 April 2009 and 21 May 2009).
In a final decision of 21 February 2008 the Tulcea County Court found that magistrates (save for military magistrates) were not entitled to a confidentiality bonus, which was only granted to military personnel and to the civil servants with special status.