The case originated in an application (no. 32106/08) against the Republic of Lithuania lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Lithuanian national, Mr Vaidas Dungveckis (“the applicant”), on 20 June 2008.
The applicant was represented by Mr V. Sirvydis, a lawyer practising in Kaunas. The Lithuanian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms E. Baltutytė.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that he had been punished twice for the same offence.
On 6 October 2009 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1978 and lives in Kaunas.
On 6 February 2004 the applicant was notified by the Financial Crime Investigation Service that a criminal investigation had been opened against him on suspicion of fraud committed in an organised group (Articles 25 § 3 and 182 § 2 of the Criminal Code of 2000). It was suspected that from October 2001 until May 2002 the applicant and his accomplices, using companies founded or acquired for the purpose, had bought large amounts of fish from unspecified persons without paying value added tax (VAT), forged payment documents to show that the applicable VAT had been paid, and then sold the fish to another company for a price that included the applicable VAT – thus appropriating an amount equal to the said applicable VAT. It was suspected that in this manner the applicant and his accomplices had appropriated 261,854.65 Lithuanian litai (LTL, approximately 75,838 euros (EUR)), which should have been paid into the State budget as VAT.
On the same day the applicant was prohibited from going abroad or leaving his home without the approval of the investigating authorities (kardomoji priemonė – rašytinis pasižadėjimas neišvykti).
On 6 May 2004 the prosecutor issued an indictment against the applicant and his accomplices. The applicant was charged with several counts of fraud and forgery of documents committed in an organised group (under Articles 25 § 3, 182 § 2 and 300 § 2 of the Criminal Code of 2000). The indictment noted that the applicant had admitted his guilt and cooperated with the investigative authorities.
On 3 February 2005 the Kaunas Regional Court found the applicant guilty of all charges and ordered him to pay a fine of LTL 18,750 (EUR 5,430).
On 3 February 2006 the Court of Appeal partly amended the judgment of the regional court. It acquitted the applicant of fraud but upheld his conviction for forgery of documents and sentenced him to two years of imprisonment. The sentence was suspended for two years, during which time an injunction (įpareigojimas) was imposed on the applicant: he was prohibited from leaving his home for more than seven days in a row without the approval of the supervising institution (hereinafter, “the sentence for forgery”).
The applicant began complying with the injunction imposed on him by the Court of Appeal (see paragraph 17 below).
On 5 December 2006 the Supreme Court partly amended the judgment of the Court of Appeal. It quashed the applicant’s acquittal of fraud and returned that part of the case for re-examination by the Court of Appeal. The remaining of the appellate court’s judgment was upheld.
On 4 July 2007 the Court of Appeal, after re-examining the above-mentioned part of the case, convicted the applicant of fraud. When determining the sentence, the court took into account various aggravating circumstances (the crime had been well organised, the applicant had played a leading role in its commission, and the value of the appropriated property had been high), as well as mitigating circumstances (the applicant had admitted his guilt, he had a family and a job, and he had been complying with the injunction previously imposed on him). As a result, the Court of Appeal sentenced the applicant to imprisonment for two years and three months – a sentence which was close to the minimum sentence stipulated in the Criminal Code (see paragraphs 28-29 below). The court combined this sentence with the one previously imposed on the applicant for forgery of documents (see paragraph 10 above) and ordered a consolidated sentence (subendrinta bausmė) for the two crimes – imprisonment of two years and three months. The Court of Appeal stated that because the crime of fraud was serious (sunkus nusikaltimas), the consolidated sentence could not be suspended (see paragraph 32 below).
The applicant submitted a cassation appeal to the Supreme Court. He asked the court to quash the sentence of imprisonment for the crime of fraud ordered by the Court of Appeal and instead restore the fine imposed by the Kaunas Regional Court in its judgment of 3 February 2005 (see paragraph 9 above).
On 31 July 2007 the Supreme Court delayed the execution of the Court of Appeal’s judgment of 4 July 2007 until the applicant’s cassation appeal was examined. The Supreme Court’s decision did not explicitly indicate whether the applicant had to continue complying with the injunction imposed on him during the term of suspension of the sentence for forgery (see paragraph 17 below). Nonetheless, during the period of the delay the applicant continued complying with the injunction.
On 8 January 2008 the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s cassation appeal. It found that when determining the sentence the Court of Appeal had correctly assessed the gravity of the crime, the applicant’s personality, and all relevant mitigating and aggravating circumstances. It also reiterated that the Criminal Code excluded the possibility of suspending the sentence in the event that the individual concerned had been convicted of a serious crime, such as fraud. However, the Supreme Court partly amended the Court of Appeal’s judgment of 4 July 2007 by applying the terms of a 2002 law on amnesty and reducing the applicant’s sentence of imprisonment by one fifth. Thus, the applicant’s final consolidated sentence was one year and nine months of imprisonment (hereinafter, “the consolidated sentence”).
After the Court of Appeal’s judgment of 3 February 2006 (see paragraph 10 above), the applicant began complying with the injunction imposed on him during the term of suspension of the sentence for forgery. The applicant was not allowed to leave his home for more than seven days without the approval of the supervising institution. He was also obliged to report to the local prison department every two months, which he did from March 2006 until January 2008. At the applicant’s request, on 1 February 2008 the local prison department issued a certificate stating that he had been complying with the injunction and that the term of suspension of his sentence for forgery would end on 3 February 2008.
In January 2008 the applicant submitted a request to the Kaunas Regional Court to be released from serving the consolidated sentence. The applicant stated that he had nearly completed serving the term of suspension of the sentence for forgery by complying with the injunction imposed by the Court of Appeal. According to the applicant, given that the sentence for forgery (two years of imprisonment) was longer than the consolidated sentence (one year and nine months of imprisonment) and given that he had served the former, he should be released from serving the latter; otherwise he would have to serve two sentences for one crime.
On 28 January 2008 the Kaunas Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s request. The court reiterated that the applicant had been convicted of two crimes – one of which (fraud) was serious and the other (forgery of documents) less serious (apysunkis) – and the Criminal Code did not permit the suspension of a sentence for a serious crime.
On 28 February 2008 the Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal against the regional court’s judgment. The court firstly found that the applicant had not yet finished serving the term of suspension of the sentence for forgery: the completion of the term had to be confirmed by a decision of the relevant district court, but no such decision had been adopted as at that date (see paragraph 33 below). The Court of Appeal further held that the imposition of an injunction during the term of suspension of a sentence (įpareigojimai, paskirti nuosprendžio vykdymo atidėjimo metu) did not amount to the serving of that sentence (bausmės atlikimas); therefore, the applicant had not actually served his sentence for forgery, so the question of “double punishment” did not arise. The fact that he had been complying with the injunction was relevant only during the determination of the final consolidated sentence, and that had been done by the Supreme Court.
The judgment was final and not subject to appeal.
Subsequently the applicant submitted a request to the Kaunas District Court, asking it to confirm that he had completed the term of suspension of the sentence for forgery. On 18 March 2008 the court refused to examine the applicant’s request because, under domestic law, a request for the term of suspension of a sentence to be declared completed could only be submitted by the supervising institution and not by the convicted person (see paragraph 33 below).
On 15 April 2008 the Kaunas Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal. The court stated that that the applicant had been prohibited from leaving his home since 6 February 2004 (see paragraph 7 above), so during the entire time he had been complying with that restrictive measure and not with the injunction relating to the suspended sentence. The court further held that the Court of Appeal’s judgment of 4 July 2007 had annulled the suspension of the sentence for forgery, but that the domestic law did not provide for the possibility to release a convicted person from the obligation to serve a sentence due to the fact that he or she had been complying with an injunction which had subsequently been annulled.
The judgment was final and not subject to appeal.
Around the same time the applicant submitted a request to the Kaunas Regional Administrative Court, asking it to order the local prison department to request a district court to affirm that the applicant had completed the term of suspension of the sentence for forgery (see paragraph 21 above). On 9 April 2008 the Kaunas Regional Administrative Court held that it did not have the competence to examine the applicant’s request because that request only related to matters of criminal sentencing and not acts of public administration. On 13 May 2008 the Supreme Administrative Court upheld the decision of the lower court on the same grounds.
On 16 April 2008 the applicant began serving the consolidated sentence in the Pravieniškės Correctional Facility. After serving one-third of the sentence, on 26 January 2009 he was released on probation.
Article 31 of the Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania provides:
“... Punishment may be imposed or applied only on the grounds established by law.
No one may be punished for the same crime a second time ...”
Article 2 § 6 of the Criminal Code of 2000, in force from 1 May 2003, provides:
“No one may be punished for the same criminal act twice.”
In its ruling of 10 November 2005, the Constitutional Court held as follows:
“In Paragraph 5 of Article 31 of the Constitution the principle non bis in idem is articulated. This constitutional principle means a prohibition on [being punished] twice for a single deed that is contrary to law – that is to say, for the same criminal offence, as well as for the same violation of law which is not a criminal offence ...
The above-mentioned constitutional principle does not mean that different kinds of liability may not be applied to a person in respect of a violation of law ...
In itself, the constitutional principle non bis in idem does not deny the possibility of applying more than one sanction of the same kind (i.e. defined by the norms of the same branch of law) to a person for the same violation – such as the main and additional punishment, or the main and additional administrative penalty.
The constitutional principle of non bis in idem also means, inter alia, that if a person who has committed a deed which is contrary to law has been held administratively but not criminally liable – that is to say, he or she has incurred a sanction (a penalty not for a crime but for an administrative violation of law) – then he or she cannot be held criminally liable for the said deed.
It should also be mentioned that the constitutional principle non bis in idem may not be construed to mean that it does not allow the prosecution and punishment of a person for a violation of law in respect of which the prosecution of such person was started but terminated on grounds which, under procedure established by law, were later recognised as without foundation and/or illegal and the person was not held legally liable – no sanction (imposed punishment or penalty) was applied to him or her.
In itself, the exemption of a person from one kind of legal liability on the grounds and [under the] procedure established in law cannot be an obstacle to ... him or her [being subject to] legal liability of another kind on the grounds and under the procedure established in law.”
At the material time, the relevant provisions of the Criminal Code of 1961, which remained in force until 1 May 2003, read as follows:
“... Such conduct which concerns a customs declaration, confirms a tax payment, or concerns another especially important official document, or which has caused significant harm to the interests of the State or society, or rights or lawful interests of others, shall be punished by imprisonment for a term of up to five years and by a fine.”
“Appropriation of other persons’ property through fraud or deceit shall be punished by imprisonment for a term of up to three years, with or without a fine.
The same conduct carried out repeatedly or by a pre-arranged group of persons shall be punished by imprisonment for a term of up to five years, with or without a fine.
The same conduct concerning very large amounts shall be punished by imprisonment for a term of one to ten years, with or without a fine.”
At the material time, the relevant provisions of the Criminal Code of 2000 read as follows:
“1.  A person who, by deceit, acquires another’s property for his or her own benefit or for the benefit of other persons, or acquires a property right, avoids a property obligation or annuls it, shall be punished by [being required to perform] community service or by the restriction of liberty, or by arrest, or by imprisonment for a term of up to three years.
A person who, by deceit and for his or her own benefit or for the benefit of other persons, acquires a property of a high value or a property right belonging to another person, or avoids or annuls a property obligation of a high value, ... shall be punished by imprisonment for a term of up to eight years.”
“1.  A person who produces a false document, forges a genuine document or stores, transports, forwards, uses or handles a document known to be false or a genuine document known to be forged, shall be punished with a fine or by arrest, or by imprisonment for a term of up to three years.
A person who commits the acts listed in paragraph 1 of this Article, where this incurs major damage, shall be punished by imprisonment for a term of up to five years ...”
In its ruling of 22 December 1998, the Senate of the Supreme Court of Lithuania held as follows:
“2.  The essential element of fraud is the use of deceit in order to appropriate property or to acquire a property right. Deceit is used with the aim of misleading the owner of the property who, as a result, voluntarily transfers the property (or the property right) to the perpetrator, in the belief that the latter has the right to receive them.
Deceit can be manifested through the presentation of false documents or incorrect data, or the deliberate failure to mention circumstances which are essential for the owner’s decision to transfer the property, or other similar means ...
If the perpetrator appropriates property by forging an official document, such activity is qualified as concurrence of the crimes under Article 207 (Forgery of a document) and Article 274 (Fraud) of the Criminal Code.
The use of forged documents for the purpose of fraud does not in itself imply the concurrence of the two crimes because in such cases the forged documents are only used as the means of appropriating property through fraud.
However, if the perpetrator forges the official document himself or herself and uses it as a means of deceit, such activity shall be qualified as the concurrence of the crimes under Articles 207 and 274 of the Criminal Code ...”
At the material time, the relevant parts of Article 63 of the Criminal Code of 2000 read as follows:
“1.  Where several criminal acts have been committed, a court shall impose a punishment for each criminal act separately and subsequently impose a final combined sentence. When imposing a final combined sentence, the court may impose either a consolidated sentence or a fully or partially cumulative sentence.
Where a consolidated sentence is imposed, the more severe penalty shall cover any more lenient penalty, and the final combined sentence for all the separate criminal acts shall be equal to the most severe single penalty imposed ...
A court shall impose a consolidated sentence where:
1)  there is a full concurrence of criminal acts (ideali nusikalstamų veikų sutaptis);
2)  where the criminal acts committed differ markedly in their degree of severity and are designated under different types or categories of criminal acts under Articles 10 or 11 of this Code;
3)  where a custodial sentence of a period of twenty years or life imprisonment has been imposed for the commission of one of the criminal acts ...”
At the material time, the relevant parts of Article 75 of the Criminal Code of 2000 read as follows:
“1.  Where a person is sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years for the commission of one or several minor or less serious premeditated crimes or not exceeding six years for crimes committed through negligence, a court may suspend the sentence imposed for a period ranging from one to three years. The sentence may be suspended where the court rules that there is a sufficient basis for believing that the purpose of the penalty will be achieved without the sentence actually being served.
When suspending a sentence, a court shall impose on the convicted person one of the penal sanctions provided for in Chapter IX of this Code and/or one or more of the following injunctions:
1)  to compensate for or remedy the property damage caused by a crime;
2)  to offer an apology to the victim;
3)  to provide assistance to the victim in respect of any medical treatment [necessitated by the convicted person’s actions];
4)  to take up employment or register at a labour exchange, or not to change employment without the consent of the court;
5)  to undertake studies, resume studies or acquire a professional speciality;
6)  to undergo treatment for alcohol addiction, drug addiction, addiction to toxic substances, or for a sexually transmitted disease, in the event that the convict agrees thereto;
7)  not to leave his or her place of residence for a period exceeding seven days without the consent of the institution supervising the suspension of the sentence.
When imposing the injunctions provided for in paragraph 2 of this Article, a court shall lay down a time-limit, with which the convict must comply.
Where, during the period of the suspension of sentence, the convicted person:
1)  has complied with the penal sanction and/or the injunctions imposed by a court and committed none of the violations listed in sub-paragraph 3 of this paragraph, and there is a basis for believing that in the future the person will abide by the law and will not commit any further criminal acts, the court shall release the convicted person from the punishment [in question] upon the expiry of the term of the suspension of sentence ...”
At the material time, Article 358 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provided as follows:
“1.  When the serving of a sentence has been suspended, in line with [Article 75] of the Criminal Code, such suspension can be cancelled or its conditions can be changed by the district court of the convicted person’s place of residence, at the request of the institution in charge of supervising the convicted person’s behaviour.”