The case originated in an application (no. 47274/15) against the Federal Republic of Germany lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two German nationals, Mr Ingo Hentschel and Mr Matthias Stark (“the applicants”), on 22 September 2015.
The applicants were represented by Mr M. Noli, a lawyer practising in Munich, and Ms A. Luczak, a lawyer practising in Berlin. The German Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agents, Mr H.J. Behrens and Ms K. Behr, of the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection.
The applicants alleged, under Article 3 of the Convention, that they had been beaten and that pepper spray had been used on them by police officers who, owing to an inadequate investigation, had been neither identified nor punished. They further complained under Article 13 that they had had no judicial remedy at their disposal to challenge the discontinuation and the ineffectiveness of the investigation.
On 26 February 2016 the application was communicated to the Government.
The first applicant was born in 1969 and lives in Illertissen. The second applicant was born in 1989 and lives in Harburg.
On 9 December 2007 both applicants went to a football match in Munich.
The police had predicted an increased risk of clashes between rival football supporters owing to confrontations at previous matches between the two teams. Therefore a total of 227 police officers were deployed, including two squads – comprising eight to ten police officers each – of the 3rd platoon of the Munich riot control unit (Unterstützungskommando), one squad of the 2nd platoon of the Munich riot control unit and the 23rd platoon of the 6th Dachau public-order support force battalion (Bereitschaftspolizei). The deployed officers of the Munich riot control unit also included “video officers”, who carried handheld video cameras and recorded videos of incidents that might be relevant under criminal law. The officers of the Munich riot control unit were dressed in black/dark blue uniforms and wore black helmets with visors. The officers of the Dachau public-order support force battalion wore green uniforms and white helmets with visors. Both uniforms did not include any name tags or other signs identifying the individual officers. However, on the back of the helmets an identification number of the squad was displayed.
After the match had ended the police cordoned off the stands of the supporters of one of the teams, including both applicants, to prevent them from leaving the stadium and encountering supporters of the other team. The cordon was lifted after around fifteen minutes.
According to the first applicant, he left the stands after the blockade had been lifted. While walking between the exit of the stands and the exit of the football stadium a group of police officers dressed in black uniforms came running towards the exiting spectators with their truncheons raised above their heads. Some of these officers started hitting the spectators with their truncheons without any prior warning as soon as they reached them. The first applicant himself was hit with a truncheon on the head, which resulted in a bleeding laceration of 3 cm behind his ear. After having reached the exit of the stadium he was treated by a paramedic in an ambulance that was parked close to the ground. Subsequently, he returned to his home town, where he was treated in the emergency unit of the local hospital.
The second applicant also exited the stands after the blockade had been lifted. Before exiting the stadium he was grabbed by the shoulder and, after turning round, had pepper spray doused in the face at close range. He lay down on the ground and was subsequently struck on his left upper arm with a truncheon. He suffered swelling and redness of his face and pain in his arm.
Both applicants were able to identify their attackers as police officers, but were not able to distinguish them further, owing to their identical uniforms and the lack of identifying signs or name tags.
According to the Government the blockade was lifted due to the aggressive behaviour of some of the spectators and the pressure applied to the police cordon. When the supporters streamed from the stands towards the exit, they came upon police units which had been called in to provide backup for the police cordon. Subsequently some of the supporters continued their aggressive behaviour towards these officers and provoked them. The supporters’ conduct resulted in the arrest of one supporter and two police officers sustained minor injuries. After a few minutes the police pacified the situation and got the exiting supporters under control.
The Government furthermore challenged the accounts of the applicants and submitted that there was no credible evidence that the applicants had deliberately been hit or harmed by police officers and that the injuries had been a result of the police operation.
As of 15 December 2007 the press reported about the police operation in the aftermath of the football match, inter alia quoting football supporters describing arbitrary attacks by police officers of the riot control unit with truncheons and pepper-spray. In an article of 18 December 2007 a spokesperson of the police commented on the operation and stated that the alleged assaults by police officers would be investigated. On 2 January 2008, the Munich public prosecutor’s office instigated a preliminary investigation. On 21 January 2008 the second applicant reported the alleged police violence and submitted a medical certificate concerning the effects of the pepper spray on his face from the same day. He filed a formal criminal complaint on 7 March 2008. The first applicant filed a criminal complaint against an unidentified police officer on 25 April 2008. He also submitted a medical certificate confirming a bleeding laceration on his head. The certificate was issued at 12.05 a.m. on 10 December 2007. Several other spectators at the match had also lodged criminal complaints against unidentified police officers.
The investigation was conducted by the unit of the Munich police responsible for offences perpetrated by public officials under the responsibility of the Munich public prosecutor’s office. The officer in charge interviewed a total of twenty witnesses, including the applicants, the officer in charge of the Munich riot control unit and the squad leaders of the deployed squads of the 2nd and 3rd Munich riot control units.
The investigating division was also provided with a DVD showing excerpts of the video surveillance recorded by the riot control police at the football match. The DVDs were compiled by the “video officers” of the Munich riot control unit. In line with their usual procedure the entire recorded video material was reviewed by the respective video officer after his or her deployment and the parts which were deemed relevant under criminal law and of sufficient quality to serve as evidence were copied to a DVD.
On 10 September 2008 the competent public prosecutor discontinued the investigation. He found that the investigation had produced evidence that some of the police officers had used truncheons against spectators, including women and children, in a disproportionate way and without an official order or approval. However, he concluded that the investigation had not led to a situation where concrete acts of violence could be related to specific police officers and it could not be ascertained either whether the use of force had been justified. In sum, the public prosecutor had been able neither to establish whether the applicants’ injuries had been inflicted by police officers nor to identify the suspects who had allegedly struck and used pepper spray on the applicants.
The applicants appealed against the decision to discontinue the investigation and argued, in particular, that the public prosecutor had only questioned the squad leaders, but had not identified all the officers involved in the operation and deployed in the area of the stadium at issue.
On 14 October 2008 the public prosecutor reopened the investigation and ordered further enquiries. On 20 October 2008 the head of the investigation unit met with the platoon leaders of the Munich riot control unit and other division heads of the Munich police to discuss the investigation. Neither the public prosecutor nor the applicants’ representative attended the internal police meeting. Subsequently, a further twenty-two witnesses were interviewed including fourteen platoon leaders, squad leaders and video officers of the deployed police units. The individual squad members of the three squads of the Munich riot control unit were not interviewed. The applicants had requested that they be interviewed, as the evidence had suggested that the alleged perpetrators had belonged to one of these three squads.
The investigating police unit was also provided with video surveillance recorded by the 23rd platoon of the 6th Dachau public-order support force battalion. Upon the request of the applicants to secure the entire video material of the police operation, and not only the already submitted video excerpts, it was established that the original video tapes and possible digital copies had already been deleted and that only the excerpts were still available.
On 4 August 2009 the public prosecutor discontinued the investigation again. In a detailed fifteen-page decision he first summarised the investigative measures taken, referring in particular to the interviews of several witnesses, including police officers and the alleged victims, the review of video material from the police and from the internet, the assessment of the applicants’ written observations and of the submitted documents, inter alia, medical certificates, as well as gathered information and reports on past events and applicable guidelines. After assessing all the available evidence, the public prosecutor concluded that the enquiries had shown that several supporters had aggressively approached, insulted and provoked the deployed police officers and that therefore a situation had existed in which the officers could have been justified in using their truncheons. Besides this general conclusion he held that the applicants had neither been able to identify a particular suspect nor to determine whether the suspected police officers had been male or female and that the investigation had not produced other persons who had witnessed the alleged acts against the applicants. Furthermore, he outlined in detail certain “considerable discrepancies” in the witness statements of the first applicant and referred to “unspecific” statements of the second applicant. Consequently, according to the public prosecutor, there was insufficient evidence to establish criminal conduct by specific police officers to the detriment of both applicants. He concluded that the investigation had to be discontinued again, since the considerable additional investigative measures had not revealed disproportionate conduct on the part of individual police officers, in particular truncheon strikes against innocent bystanders, which would require criminal prosecution of the respective officers.
On 20 August 2009 the applicants appealed and pointed out that the members of the deployed squads had still not been questioned and that the inspected videos were fragmentary, but nonetheless contradicted certain parts of the statements made by the squad leaders.
On 3 February 2011 the Munich general public prosecutor confirmed the decision of the public prosecutor’s office of 4 August 2009 to discontinue the investigation. The instructions on available legal remedies attached to the decision informed the applicants that they could request a judicial decision in the framework of proceedings to force criminal proceedings (Klageerzwingungsverfahren).
On 19 September 2011 the Munich Court of Appeal declared the applicants’ application to force further enquiries inadmissible. The court interpreted the applicants’ request as an application to force criminal proceedings (Klageerzwingungsantrag) and held that these proceedings were only admissible if the prosecution of one or more identified accused had been requested. An application to force criminal proceedings against an unidentified accused had to be declared inadmissible, since the proceedings were not supposed to identify the accused or replace investigations. Only in a case where a public prosecutor’s office had entirely refrained from investigating a crime had a court the possibility to order an investigation. Under Article 173 § 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Strafprozessordnung – hereinafter “the CCP”; see paragraph 37 below) a court was only allowed to conduct minor enquiries to fill in remaining gaps in an investigation. Moreover, the applicants had not submitted specific facts or evidence that would have allowed the court to identify an accused.
On 25 October 2011 the applicants lodged a constitutional complaint, relying on Articles 2 § 2, 19 § 4 and 103 § 1 of the German Basic Law (Grundgesetz) (see paragraphs 29-31 below). Besides referring to articles of the Basic Law, the applicants also referred in their complaint to Articles 2, 3, and 13 of the Convention. In essence they complained that the investigation had not been effective and that the Court of Appeal had not evaluated the effectiveness of the investigation.
On 23 March 2015 the Federal Constitutional Court (hereinafter “the Constitutional Court”) refused, in a reasoned decision (2 BvR 1304/12), to admit the applicants’ constitutional complaint. The court held that the investigations had been conducted diligently, but had not established sufficient suspicion of criminal conduct on the part of specific police officers. Moreover, the remaining gaps and factual uncertainties could not be attributed to omissions in the investigation. The court also found that it had not been necessary to question all the squad members who had possibly been involved. In its decision the Constitutional Court referred to the Court’s case-law concerning the procedural obligation of Article 2 of the Convention and, in particular, to the cases of McCann and Others v. the United Kingdom (27 September 1995, Series A no. 324) and Grams v. Germany ((dec.), no. 33677/96, ECHR 1999VII). The court also emphasised that the public prosecutor’s office had been the responsible authority for the investigation and thereby “master of the proceedings” (Herr des Verfahrens).
During the investigation the applicants also filed criminal complaints in respect of assistance given in an official capacity in avoiding prosecution or punishment (Strafvereitelung im Amt) and suppression of evidence (Beweismittelunterdrückung). The applicants alleged that several relevant parts of the video material, showing disproportionate police violence, had been deleted. The investigation against the five police officers was discontinued by the Munich public prosecutor’s office.
A subsequent appeal before the Munich general public prosecutor was to no avail.
Article 2 § 2 of the Basic Law reads:
“Every person shall have the right to life and physical integrity. Freedom of the person shall be inviolable. These rights may be interfered with only pursuant to a law.”
Article 19 § 4 of the Basic Law, in so far as relevant, reads:
“Should any person’s rights be violated by public authority, he may have recourse to the courts. ...”
Article 103 § 1 of the Basic Law, in so far as relevant, reads:
“In the courts every person shall be entitled to a hearing in accordance with the law. ...”
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure regulating criminal investigations, in so far as relevant, read:
“(1)  The public prosecutor’s office shall have the authority to bring public charges.
(2)  Except as otherwise provided by law, the public prosecutor’s office shall be obliged to take action in relation to all prosecutable criminal offences, provided there are sufficient factual indications.”
“(1)  As soon as a public prosecutor’s office obtains knowledge of a suspected criminal offence either through a criminal complaint or by other means it shall investigate the facts to decide whether to bring public charges. ...”
“(1)  If an investigation provides sufficient reasons for bringing public charges, the public prosecutor’s office shall bring charges by submitting a bill of indictment to the competent court.
(2)  In all other cases a public prosecutor’s office shall terminate the proceedings. The public prosecutor shall notify the accused thereof if he was examined as such or a warrant of arrest was issued against him; the same shall apply if he has requested such notice or if there is a particular interest in the notification.”
“If the public prosecution office does not grant an application for preferring public charges, or after conclusion of the investigation it orders the proceedings to be terminated, it shall notify the applicant, indicating the reasons. ...”
“(1)  The bill of indictment shall indicate the indicted accused, the criminal offence with which he is charged, the time and place of its commission, its statutory elements and the penal provisions which are to be applied (the charges). ...”
The organisation of the public prosecutor’s office is governed in the Courts Act (Gerichtsverfassungsgesetz). The relevant provisions, in so far as relevant, read:
“(1)  The official duties of the public prosecutor’s office shall be discharged:
...
at the Courts of Appeal and the Regional Courts by one or more public prosecutors;
at the District Courts by one or more public prosecutors or officials of the public prosecutor’s office with a right of audience before the District Courts. ...”
“The officials of the public prosecutor’s office must comply with the official instructions of their superiors.”
“The right of supervision and direction shall lie with:
...
the Land agency for the administration of justice in respect of all the officials of the public prosecutor’s office of the Land concerned;
the highest-ranking official of the public prosecutor’s office at the Courts of Appeal and the Regional Courts in respect of all the officials of the public prosecutor’s office of the given court’s district.”
The highest-ranking official of the public prosecutor’s office at the Courts of Appeal bears the title general public prosecutor. The Munich general public prosecutor supervises, inter alia, the public prosecutors at the Munich Regional Court.
The hierarchical order and relations between the public prosecutor’s office and the police are regulated by the CCP and the Courts Act. The relevant provisions, in so far as relevant, read:
“(1)  For the purpose indicated in Article 160 § 1 to § 3 [of the CCP], the public prosecutor’s office shall be entitled to request information from all authorities and to initiate investigations of any kind, either itself or through the authorities and officials in the police force provided there are no other statutory provisions specifically regulating their powers. The authorities and officials in the police force shall be obliged to comply with such a request or order of the public prosecutor’s office and shall be entitled, in such cases, to request information from all authorities.”
“(1)  The authorities and officials in the police force shall investigate criminal offences and shall take all measures that may not be deferred, in order to prevent concealment of facts. To this end they shall be entitled to request, and in exigent circumstances to demand, information from all authorities, as well as to conduct investigations of any kind in so far as there are no other statutory provisions specifically regulating their powers.
(2)  The authorities and officials in the police force shall transmit their records to the public prosecutor’s office without delay. Where it appears necessary that a judicial investigation be performed promptly, transmission directly to the Local Court shall be possible. ...”
“(1)  The investigating personnel of the public prosecutor’s office shall be obliged in this capacity to comply with the orders of the public prosecutor’s office of their district and the orders of the officials’ superior thereto. ...”
The possibilities for an aggrieved person to challenge a decision to discontinue a criminal investigation are regulated in Article 172 of the CCP, which, in so far as relevant, reads:
“(1)  Where the applicant is also the aggrieved person, he shall be entitled to lodge a complaint against the notification made in accordance with Article 171 [of the CCP, see paragraph 32 above] to the official superior of the public prosecutor’s office within two weeks of receipt of such notification. ...
(2)  The applicant may, within one month of receipt of notification, apply for a court decision in respect of the dismissal of the complaint by the official superior of the public prosecutor’s office. He shall be instructed as to this right and as to the form such an application shall take; the time-limit shall not run if no instruction has been given. ...
(3)  The application for a court decision must indicate the facts which are intended to substantiate the bringing of public charges, as well as the evidence. The application must be signed by a lawyer; legal aid shall be governed by the same provisions as in civil litigation. The application shall be submitted to the court competent to decide.
(4)  The Court of Appeal shall be competent to decide on the application. ...”
The CCP provisions regulating the proceedings to force criminal proceedings read:
“(1)  Upon the request of a court a public prosecutor’s office shall submit to the court the records of the hearings conducted so far.
(2)  The court may inform the accused of the application, setting him a time-limit for making a statement in reply.
(3)  The court may order an investigation to prepare its decision and may entrust such investigations to a commissioned or requested judge.”
“If after hearing the accused, the court considers the application to be wellfounded, it shall order that public charges be brought. This order shall be carried out by the public prosecutor’s office.”
Section 31 of the Federal Constitutional Court Act (Bundesverfassungsgerichtsgesetz – hereinafter “the Constitutional Court Act”) declares the decisions of the Constitutional Court binding upon all constitutional organs, courts and administrative authorities. It reads:
“(1)  The decisions of the Constitutional Court shall be binding upon the constitutional organs of the Federation and of the Länder, as well as on all courts and those with public authority.”
Under section 32 of the Constitutional Court Act, the Constitutional Court is empowered to issue preliminary injunctions and under section 35 of the Constitutional Court Act it may specify who is to execute its decisions and the method of execution. These provisions read, as far as relevant, as follows:
“(1)  In a dispute, the Constitutional Court may provisionally decide a matter by way of a preliminary injunction if this is urgently required to avert severe disadvantage, to prevent imminent violence or for another important reason in the interest of the common good. ...”
“The Constitutional Court may specify in its decision who is to execute it; in individual cases it may also specify the method of execution.”
The relevant provisions regulating constitutional-complaint proceedings read:
“(1)  Any individual claiming a violation of one of his or her fundamental rights or of one of his or her rights under Article 20 § 4, Articles 33, 38, 101, 103, or 104 of the Basic Law by a public authority may lodge a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court.
(2)  If legal recourse to other courts exists, the constitutional complaint may only be lodged after all remedies have been exhausted. However, the Constitutional Court may decide on a constitutional complaint that was lodged before all remedies were exhausted if the complaint is of general relevance or if prior recourse to other courts were to the complainant’s severe and unavoidable disadvantage.”
“(1)  If the Court allows a constitutional complaint, the decision shall declare which provision of the Basic Law was violated and by which act or omission. The Constitutional Court may simultaneously declare that any repetition of the contested act or omission would violate the Basic Law.
(2)  If the Court allows a constitutional complaint that challenges a decision, the Constitutional Court shall reverse the decision; in the cases referred to in § 90 sec. 2 sentence 1, it shall remit the matter to a competent court. ...”
In accordance with the jurisdiction of the Constitutional Court the term “decision” in section 95(2) of the Constitutional Court Act is not limited to court decisions, but understood in a way that it entails every act of a public authority violating the fundamental rights of a plaintiff (1 BvR 289/56, 7 May 1957). In line with this understanding the Constitutional Court set aside, in the case 2 BvR 878/05 (17 November 2005), the reasoning of a decision to discontinue criminal proceedings, as it violated the presumption of innocence of the plaintiff.
The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) stated in its report to the German Government published on 1 June 2017 on the visit to Germany from 25 November to 7 December 2015 (CPT/Inf (2017) 13) with reference to the Court’s judgments in Kummer v. the Czech Republic (no. 32133/11, §§ 85-87, 25 July 2013) and Eremiášová and Pechová v. the Czech Republic (no. 23944/04, 16 February 2012) that it:
“has some doubts as to whether investigations carried out by investigators of the central investigation units – and even more so those carried out by criminal police officers of regional or local police headquarters – against other police officers can be seen to be fully independent and impartial.” (CPT/Inf (2017) 13, § 18)
The CPT further reiterated its recommendation that the police authorities should take the necessary steps to ensure that police officers wearing masks or other equipment that may hamper their identification be obliged to wear a clearly visible means of identification (for example a number on the uniform and/or helmet). It held that:
“... the CPT has repeatedly stressed that appropriate safeguards must be in place in order to ensure that police officers wearing masks or other equipment that may hamper their identification can be held accountable for their actions (e.g. by means of a clearly visible number on the uniform). Such a requirement is also likely to have a preventive effect and significantly reduce the risk of excessive use of force and other forms of ill-treatment.” (ibid., § 21)