The case originated in an application (no. 17504/07) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Aleksey Nikolayevich Chuprikov (“the applicant”), on 9 April 2007.
The applicant was represented by Ms Ye. Krutikova, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged that his detention had been unlawful and not based on relevant and sufficient grounds, and that he had been denied the right to a judicial review of his detention and an enforceable right to compensation.
On 1 December 2010 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1969 and is currently serving a prison sentence in correctional colony IK-3 in the Ryazan Region.
On 10 June 2004 the applicant was arrested on suspicion of murder, and on 12 June 2004 he was charged with aiding and abetting murder under Articles 33 § 5 and 105 § 1 of the Criminal Code.
On the same day (12 June 2004) the Oktyabrskiy District Court of Ryazan (hereinafter “the District Court”) authorised the applicant’s detention pending investigation. The court noted that the applicant was suspected of having committed a particularly serious criminal offence and held that, if he remained at large, he might abscond from the investigation and the court and obstruct the establishment of truth in the case. On 22 June 2004 the Ryazan Regional Court (hereinafter “the Regional Court”) upheld the above decision on appeal.
On 6 August 2004 the District Court extended the applicant’s detention until 26 September 2004. The court reiterated that the applicant had been charged with a particularly serious criminal offence and that his position during the investigation gave grounds to believe that, if released, he might abscond and obstruct the establishment of the truth.
On 22 September 2004 the District Court extended the applicant’s detention until 26 November 2004. The court once again relied on the particular gravity of the charges against the applicant and the risk of his absconding and obstructing the establishment of the truth.
On 18 November 2004 criminal proceedings were instituted against the applicant who in these proceedings was suspected of being involved in kidnapping and robbery under Articles 126 § 2 (a) and 161 § 2 (a) and (d) of the Criminal Code respectively. On the same day the two criminal cases against the applicant were joined.
On 24 November 2004 the proceedings concerning the charges of aiding and abetting murder were discontinued owing to lack of evidence and the charges were dropped. On the same day, charges of kidnapping and robbery were brought against the applicant following the investigation instituted on 18 November 2004 (see paragraph 10 above).
On 25 November 2004 the District Court extended the applicant’s detention until 10 December 2004. The court relied on the gravity of the new charges against the applicant and the applicant’s previous criminal record, which characterised him as a person prone to unlawful conduct. On 7 December 2004 the Regional Court upheld the above decision on appeal.
On 8 December 2004 the District Court further extended the applicant’s detention until 26 January 2005. The court relied on the gravity of the charges against the applicant and the risk of his absconding from the investigation.
Upon receipt of the case file, on 1 February 2005 the District Court scheduled the opening date of the trial and extended the applicant’s detention until 1 August 2005 with reference to the gravity of the charges and the risk of the applicant’s absconding from the court.
At the end of the trial, on 20 May 2005 the prosecutor dropped the charges of robbery, following which the District Court convicted the applicant of kidnapping and sentenced him to seven years’ imprisonment. However, on 14 July 2005 the Regional Court quashed the above judgment on appeal and remitted the case for retrial. The court held that the preventive measure should remain unchanged.
On 12 August and 13 October 2005 the District Court, referring to the gravity of the charges against the applicant, extended his detention until 1 November 2005 and 1 February 2006 respectively.
On 19 December 2005 the District Court again convicted the applicant of kidnapping and sentenced him to six years’ imprisonment. However, on 2 February 2006 the Regional Court again quashed the judgment on appeal and remitted the case for retrial. The court held that the preventive measure should remain unchanged.
On 16 February 2006 the District Court, relying on the gravity of the charges against the applicant, extended the applicant’s detention until 1 May 2006.
On 27 April 2006 the District Court once more convicted the applicant of kidnapping and sentenced him to nine years’ imprisonment. On 13 July 2006 the Regional Court again quashed the judgment and remitted the case for retrial. The court held that the preventive measure should remain unchanged and should be extended for three months.
On 25 July 2006 the District Court scheduled the opening date of the trial and held that the preventive measure should remain unchanged.
On 4 September 2006 the District Court referred the case to the prosecutor for rectification of the bill of indictment. The court further held that the preventive measure should remain unchanged. On 12 October 2006 the Regional Court upheld the above decision on appeal. It further held that the preventive measure should remain unchanged and should be extended for three months.
Following a request by the applicant, on 26 December 2006 the Presidium of the Regional Court quashed, by way of supervisory review, the decision of 12 October 2006 in so far as it concerned the extension of the applicant’s detention. The court held as follows:
“Pursuant to Article 109 § 13 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the court cannot examine the application for extension of the custodial measure in the absence of the defendant.
The above requirements of the law, mandatory for the appeal court, were not complied with in the present case.
In addition, the decision of the appeal court lacks any reasoning for extending [the applicant’s] detention; it contains no reference to the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure or indication of the specific date until which his detention was extended.
Therefore, the breach by the appeal court of the requirements of the Code of Criminal Procedure when examining the extension of [the applicant’s] detention is substantial and leads to the amendment of the [relevant] part of the decision of the Ryazan Regional Court of 12 October 2006.”
The applicant was released from custody on the same day.
In the meantime, on 13 November 2006, the District Court again remitted the case to the prosecutor for further rectification of the bill of indictment. On 21 December 2006 the Regional Court upheld the above decision on appeal.
The applicant signed the rectified bill of indictment on 28 December 2006 and it was returned to the District Court on 29 December 2006.
On 15 January 2007 the District Court scheduled the preliminary hearing for 26 January 2007. On that date the District Court ordered that the applicant be remanded in custody again. The court justified its decision by reasoning that the applicant might interfere with the witnesses, abscond or otherwise obstruct the examination of the case on the merits. On 8 February 2007 the Regional Court upheld the above decision on appeal.
On 7 May 2007 the applicant lodged an application for release. He argued, in particular, that the statutory three-month time-limit had expired on 26 April 2007. On the same day the District Court dismissed the applicant’s request. Referring to Article 255 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the court held that the time-limit for the applicant’s detention pending trial could not exceed six months from the date on which the court received the file until the date on which a judgment was given. The court opined that the timelimit had started to run on 29 December 2006 and that it would come to an end on 28 June 2007. The operative part of the decision stated that it could be appealed against within ten days to the Regional Court.
The applicant appealed against the above decision. He challenged the District Court’s interpretation of Article 255 and argued that the repeated application of the six-month time-limit was incompatible with the judicial guarantees of liberty and security. He also referred to the overall length of his detention.
On 22 May 2007 the Regional Court discontinued the examination of the appeal. Referring to Article 355 § 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure it held that the rulings rendered by the District Court in the course of the trial were not amenable to appeal. The Regional Court further held, relying on the ruling of the Constitutional Court of 22 March 2005 no. 4-P, that the applicant could apply for release again in the event that circumstances showing the existence of grounds for terminating the custodial measure were discovered.
On 7 June 2007 the applicant applied for release again. His application was dismissed on the same day.
On 28 June 2007 the District Court convicted the applicant of kidnapping and sentenced him to seven years’ imprisonment. On 18 October 2007 the Regional Court upheld the conviction on appeal but reduced the sentence to six years’ imprisonment.
Relying on the Presidium’s decision of 26 December 2006, the applicant brought proceedings against the Federal Treasury and the Ministry of Finance for damage incurred in respect of his unlawful detention from 12 October to 26 December 2006.
On 10 December 2007 the Tverskoy District Court of Moscow rejected the applicant’s claim. Relying on Articles 1070 and 1100 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation and Articles 133 and 134 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation, the court held that the applicant had failed to produce evidence showing that the custodial measure had been applied to him unlawfully, and that his right to rehabilitation had been recognised in accordance with the established procedure. It further held that the decision of 12 October 2006 had been quashed by the Presidium of the Regional Court on account of a violation of the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, rather than unreasonable application of the measure in question.
The applicant did not appeal against the above decision.
Since 1 July 2002, criminal-law matters have been governed by the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation (Law no. 174-FZ of 18 December 2001).
“Preventive measures” (меры пресечения) include an undertaking not to leave a town or region, personal surety, bail and detention (Article 98). If necessary, the suspect or accused may be asked to give an undertaking to appear (обязательство о явке) (Article 112).
When deciding on a preventive measure, the competent authority is required to consider whether there are “sufficient grounds to believe” that the accused would abscond during the investigation or trial, reoffend or obstruct the establishment of the truth (Article 97). It must also take into account the gravity of the charge, information on the accused’s character, his or her profession, age, state of health, family status and other circumstances (Article 99).
Detention may be ordered by a court if the charge carries a sentence of at least two years’ imprisonment, provided that a less restrictive preventive measure cannot be applied (Article 108 § 1). If the question relating to the choice of a custodial measure arises in court, the court takes the relevant decision on the request by a party to the proceedings or on its own initiative (Article 108 § 10). The decision authorising the application of a custodial measure may be appealed against to a higher court within three days. The appeal court examines the appeal not later than three days after receiving it (Article 108 § 11).
After arrest the suspect is placed in custody “pending investigation”. The maximum permitted period of detention pending investigation is two months but it can be extended for up to eighteen months in “exceptional circumstances” (Article 109 §§ 1-3). The period of detention pending investigation is calculated up to the date on which the prosecutor sends the case to the trial court (Article 109 § 9).
From the time the prosecutor sends the case to the trial court, the defendant’s detention is “before the court” (or “pending trial”). The period of detention pending trial is calculated up to the date on which the judgment is given. It may not normally exceed six months, but if the case concerns serious or particularly serious criminal offences, the trial court may approve one or more extensions of no longer than three months each (Article 255 §§  2 and 3). The decision extending the application of a custodial measure may be challenged on appeal (Article 255 § 4).
An appeal may be lodged with a higher court within three days against a judicial decision ordering or extending detention. The appeal court must decide the appeal within three days after its receipt (Article 108 § 10).
Under Article 237 of the Code, the trial judge can return the case to the prosecutor in order for defects impeding the trial to be remedied, for instance if the judge has identified serious deficiencies in the bill of indictment or a copy of it was not served on the accused. The judge must require the prosecutor to comply within five days (Article 237 § 2) and must also decide on a preventive measure in respect of the accused (Article 237 § 3).
Procedural rulings rendered by a court in the course of a trial in response to requests lodged by a party to the trial proceedings are not amenable to separate appeal (Article 355 § 5 (2)).
In its decision no. 1 of 5 March 2004 “on the application by the courts of the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure”, the Supreme Court of Russia held as follows:
“16.  The courts’ attention is drawn to their obligation to comply with the provisions of Article 255 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation to the effect that the period of detention between the submission of the case to the court and delivery of the judgment cannot exceed six months.
Upon expiry of the period of detention [pending trial] in cases where an accused is charged with serious or particularly serious criminal offences, the court has the right to extend it in accordance with Article 255 § 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation. The extension order must mention the grounds justifying the extension and indicate its maximum duration.”
In its decision no. 44-O of 6 February 2004, the Constitutional Court held as follows:
“3.  In accordance with Article 355 § 5 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation, [procedural decisions] rendered by the court in the course of the trial granting or rejecting requests [lodged] by participants of the trial proceedings are not amenable to [separate] appeal.
This approach is consistent with the legal position of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation, as stated in its ruling of 2 July 1998 ..., pursuant to which, in order to secure the independence of the court, the lawfulness and well-foundedness of intermediate court decisions can only be challenged once the proceedings before the first-instance court are completed, at the same time as, and in connection with, a judgment [on the merits of the criminal case].
In the above-mentioned ruling the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation admitted, at the same time, that delayed control over the lawfulness and wellfoundedness of intermediate court decisions ... is not a sufficient guarantee of human rights and freedoms and cannot be found in compliance with Articles 21 § 1, 22 § 1, 45 § 2 and 46 §§ 1 and 2 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation. When such decisions (including decisions on application, or altering, of the preventive measure) lead to consequences going beyond the framework of proper criminal-procedural relations, they significantly limit a person’s constitutional rights and freedoms and cause damage which may be impossible to rectify in the future. Judicial control over [such procedural decisions] must be provided without delay, until the pronouncement of the judgment [on the merits of the criminal case].
This legal position of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation was reflected in the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation. Its Articles 108 §§ 10-11 and 255 § 4 regulate the procedure for dealing, in the course of a trial, with the choice of measure of restraint and extending the custodial measure, as well as the procedure and time-limits for appealing against relevant court decisions.
It follows from the legal positions formulated in the ruling of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation of 2 July 1998 that when it comes to examination on appeal of a complaint against a decision rendered in the course of a trial on the application of a custodial measure or its extension, the provisions of Article 355 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federations should be applied together with Article 108 §§ 10 and 11 and Article 255 § 4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, regardless of whether the contested ruling on the custodial measure had been taken on the initiative of the court or on the request of a party to the trial proceedings.”
It its ruling no. 4-P of 22 March 2005, the Constitutional Court held as follows:
“1.2.  In his complaint Mr Brovchenko S.V. also challenges the constitutionality of Article 355 §§ 5 and 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation in so far as [the relevant provisions] exclude, in the applicant’s opinion, the possibility to appeal against the decisions taken by a first-instance court to reject a request for release ... and thereby groundlessly restrict the right to judicial protection.
The Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation, in its ruling of 2 July 1998 regarding the constitutionality of Articles 331 and 464 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the RSFSR ... governing the procedure for appeal against first-instance court decisions, held that the above provisions had been in violation of the Constitution of the Russian Federation in so far as they excluded the possibility, prior to delivery of the judgment [on the merits of the criminal case], to challenge on appeal court decisions authorising or extending preventive measures in respect of the accused ...
The above ruling remains in force, and the legal position expressed in it is applicable to determining the question of the possibility of challenging a court’s decision rejecting a request for release until delivery of a judgment [on the merits of the criminal case].
Taking into account this legal position, the provisions of Article 355 §§ 5 and 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the Russian Federation cannot be viewed as violating an individual’s constitutional rights and liberties. Moreover, upon discovery of circumstances showing the existence of grounds for termination of the custodial measure, the interested person is entitled to lodge a further request for release.”
The relevant provisions of the Civil Code read as follows:
“1.  Damage inflicted on the person or property of an individual ... shall be compensated for in full by the person who inflicted the damage ...
The person who inflicted the damage shall be liable for it unless he proves that the damage was inflicted through no fault of his ...”
“1.  Damage caused to an individual as a result of unlawful conviction, unlawful institution of criminal proceedings, unlawful application of a preventive measure in the form of placement in custody or an undertaking not to leave the place of residence, or an unlawful administrative penalty in the form of detention or community service shall be compensated in full, irrespective of the fault of the officials or agencies ...
... Damage sustained by an individual in the framework of the administration of justice shall be compensated for provided that the judge’s guilt has been established in a final criminal conviction.”
“Compensation for non-pecuniary damage shall be made irrespective of the fault of the tortfeasor when:
... the damage has been caused to an individual as a result of unlawful conviction, unlawful institution of criminal proceedings, unlawful application of a preventive measure in the form of placement in custody or an undertaking not to leave the place of residence ...”
Article 133 of the Code of Criminal Procedure governs the exercise of the “right to rehabilitation”, which is, in essence, restoration of the person to the status quo ante following termination or discontinuation of criminal proceedings. This right includes the right to compensation in respect of pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage and the restoration of employment, pension, housing and other rights. The damage must be compensated for in full, irrespective of the fault of the investigator, prosecutor or court (paragraph 1). Paragraph 2 confers the “right to rehabilitation” on defendants who have been acquitted, against whom charges have been dropped, in respect of whom proceedings have been discontinued or whose conviction has been quashed in its entirety or in part. Paragraph 3 provides that “any individual who has been unlawfully subjected to preventive measures in criminal proceedings shall have the right to rehabilitation”.
Article 134 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that the right to rehabilitation of defendants who have been acquitted and in respect of whom proceedings have been discontinued must be recognised respectively by the court, the investigator or the inquirer.