The case was referred to the Court by the French Government ("the Government") on 7 August 1995, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 para. 1 and Article 47 of the Convention (art. 32-1, art. 47). It originated in an application (no. 20368/92) against the  lodged with the European Commission of Human Rights ("the Commission") under Article 25 (art. 25) by a French national, Mr Gérard Vacher, on 18 November 1991.
The Government’s application referred to Articles 44 and 48 (art. 44, art. 48). The object of the application was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 6 para. 1 of the Convention (art. 6-1).
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 para. 3 (d) of Rules of Court A, the applicant stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings and designated the lawyer who would represent him (Rule 30).
The Chamber to be constituted included ex officio Mr L.-E. Pettiti, the elected judge of French nationality (Article 43 of the Convention) (art. 43), and Mr R. Bernhardt, the Vice-President of the Court (Rule 21 para. 4 (b)). On 5 September 1995, in the presence of the Registrar, the President of the Court, Mr Ryssdal, drew by lot the names of the other seven members, namely Mr C. Russo, Mr J. De Meyer, Mrs E. Palm, Mr A.N. Loizou, Mr A.B. Baka, Mr J. Makarczyk and Mr E. Levits (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 para. 5) (art. 43).
As President of the Chamber (Rule 21 para. 6), Mr Bernhardt, acting through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Government, the applicant’s lawyer and the Delegate of the Commission on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 37 para. 1 and 38).  Pursuant to the order made in consequence, the Registrar received the applicant’s memorial on 11 March 1996 and the Government’s memorial on 29 March 1996. On 30 April 1996 the Secretary to the Commission informed the Registrar that the Delegate would submit his observations at the hearing.
On 7 May 1996 the Commission produced the file on the proceedings before it, as requested by the Registrar on the President’s instructions.
In accordance with the President’s decision, the hearing took place in public in the Human Rights Building, , on 24 June 1996. The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:
- for the Government
- for the Commission
- for the applicant
The Court heard addresses by Mr Soyer, Mr Ricard and Mr Dobelle, and also their replies to its questions.
Mr Gérard Vacher, a French national, is a company director and lives at Neuilly-sur-Seine.
On 21 September 1988 the Public Works Department of the département of Hauts-de-Seine lodged a criminal complaint against the applicant alleging offences under the Town Planning Code and, more particularly, that he had built a wall without first obtaining planning permission.
On 9 February 1990 the Nanterre Criminal Court sentenced the applicant to a fine of 8,000 French francs (FRF), payment of which was suspended, and ordered him to alter the wall so that it complied with regulations.
On 23 May 1991, following an appeal brought by Mr Vacher on 16 February 1990 and a subsequent cross-appeal by the prosecution, the Versailles Court of Appeal upheld the judgment of the court below in its entirety and further ordered that the wall should be altered to comply with regulations within a period of four months from the date of its judgment, on penalty of FRF 200 per day’s delay starting at the end of that period. It also ordered the applicant to pay the civil party claiming damages FRF 3,000 in respect of the costs incurred by that party.
On 28 May 1991 Mr Vacher lodged a notice of appeal on points of law against the judgment of the Versailles Court of Appeal with that court’s registry (Article 576 of the Code of Criminal Procedure - see paragraph 13 below).
On 19 June 1991 the case file for the appeal was registered by the Court of Cassation registry. On 14 August 1991 the applicant filed a pleading in support of his appeal.
On 3 September 1991 the chief registrar of the Court of Cassation sent Mr Vacher the following letter:
"Further to your letter, I have to inform you that the Criminal Division of the Court of Cassation delivered a judgment on 6 August 1991 dismissing your appeal.
Consequently, the pleading received from you at the criminal registry on 14 August 1991 will be disregarded as being out of time."
The judgment in question, which was served on the applicant on 30 October 1995, was based on the following ground:
"No ground of appeal has been filed in support of the appeal; the judgment appealed against is in the proper form and the findings of fact, which cannot be appealed against, justify both the classification of the offence and the sentence."
The main provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure referred to in the present case are the following:
Article 568
"The prosecuting authority and all the parties shall have five clear days in which to appeal to the Court of Cassation after delivery of the judgment appealed against.
..."
Article 576
"Notice of appeal shall be given to the registrar of the court which delivered the judgment appealed against.
It must be signed by the registrar and by the appellant himself or by a lawyer [avoué] at the court which gave judgment, or by a specially authorised person ...
The appeal shall be recorded in a special public register and any person shall be entitled to obtain a copy of it."
Article 584
"An appellant on points of law may lodge a pleading bearing his signature and containing the grounds of his appeal with the registry of the court against whose judgment he is appealing either when he gives notice of appeal or within the following ten days. The registrar shall issue him with a receipt."
Article 585
"After expiry of that time-limit, a convicted appellant may send his pleading directly to the Court of Cassation; the other parties may not avail themselves of this provision without retaining a member of the Court of Cassation Bar.
..."
Law no. 93-1013 of 24 August 1993, which came into force on 2 September 1993, inserted Article 585-1, which provides:
"Save where the President of the Criminal Division decides otherwise, a convicted appellant shall lodge his pleading with the registry of the Court of Cassation no later than one month from the date of the notice of appeal."
In his report of 23 June 1993 presented to the National Assembly on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Law, Legislation and the General Administration of the Republic, Mr Jean Tibéri justified the insertion of the new Article 585-1 as follows:
"The new Article 585-1 is intended to resolve a difficulty which has appeared in recent years.  The Court of Cassation frequently dismisses appeals on points of law because no pleadings have been filed in support of them. As the Law does not lay down a time-limit for filing a pleading, a convicted appellant’s pleading may reach the court a few days after his appeal has been dismissed. Indeed, applications are pending before the European Commission of Human Rights on this question. So as to avoid such situations recurring, the new Article 585-1 provides that convicted appellants shall have a period of one month, which may be extended by the President of the Criminal Division, in which to file their pleadings."
Article 586
"On pain of a 50-franc civil fine imposed by the Court of Cassation, the registrar shall, within a maximum period of twenty days from the date of the notice of appeal, number and initial the documents in the case file and place in the case file an office copy of the judgment appealed against, an office copy of the notice of appeal and, where relevant, the appellant’s pleading. He shall draw up a schedule of the whole case file."
Article 587
"When the case file has been made ready in the manner described above, the registrar shall deliver it to the representative of the public prosecutor’s office, who shall immediately send it to the procureur général at the Court of Cassation, who shall, turn, forward it to the registry of the Criminal Division.
The President of that Division shall designate a judge to report on the case."
Article 588
"Where one or more counsel have been instructed, the reporting judge shall set a time-limit for pleadings to be filed with the registrar of the Criminal Division."
Article 590
"The pleadings shall contain the grounds of appeal and cite the legal provisions alleged to have been infringed.
...
They must be lodged within the prescribed time-limit. No further pleadings may be added to them once the reporting judge has filed his report. Any pleading setting out additional grounds that is lodged out of time may be declared inadmissible."
Article 604
"In cases concerning any category of criminal offence, the Court of Cassation may give judgment on the appeal on points of law as soon as ten days have elapsed after receipt of the case file by the Court of Cassation.
..."
Mr Vacher applied to the Commission on 18 November 1991. Relying on paragraphs 1 and 3 (b) and (c) of Article 6 of the Convention (art. 6-1, art. 6-3-b, art. 6-3-c), he complained that he had not had a fair hearing and that he had not been able to put his case, in that the Court of Cassation, without having given him a time-limit for lodging his pleading, dismissed his appeal approximately two and a half months after it had been brought because he had not filed grounds of appeal.
The Commission declared the application (no. 20368/92) admissible on 17 May 1994. In its report of 5 April 1995 (Article 31) (art. 31), it expressed the opinion by eight votes to four that there had been a violation of Article 6 (art. 6). The full text of the Commission’s opinion and of the dissenting opinion contained in the report is reproduced as an annex to this judgment
In their memorial the Government asked the Court "to dismiss Mr Vacher’s application".
The applicant requested the Court to hold "that he [had] not had a fair hearing within the meaning of Article 6 paras. 1 and 3 (b) and (c) of the Convention (art. 6-1, art. 6-3-b, art. 6-3-c)".