The case originated in an application (no. 39912/09) against the Slovak Republic lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Slovak nationals, Ms Natália Ferenčíková (“the first applicant”) and Ms Jessica Júlia Ferenčíková (“the second applicant”) (jointly “the applicants”), on 16 July 2009.
The applicants were represented by Mr R. Heinrich, a lawyer practising in . The Government of the  (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Pirošíková.
The applicants alleged, in particular, that the decision to declare their claim for maintenance for the period between 5 February 2001 and 16 February 2004 inadmissible had been contrary to their right of access to court pursuant to Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
Of its own motion, the Court raised the question whether the applicants had been denied the effective remedy guaranteed by Article 13 of the Convention.
On 14 April 2011 the application was communicated to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The first applicant was born in 1976. She is the mother of the second applicant, who was born in 1997. The applicants live in .
On 22 May 1996 the first applicant married A., a United States national, in the .
On 8 November 1996 the first applicant left the United States for  and has remained there since. This gave cause to several judicial proceedings, all of which took place before the courts in .
While the first applicant’s marriage was dissolved and the second applicant was entrusted to her care and custody, the subject matter of the present application concerns the second applicant’s maintenance.
This matter was determined in three different sets of proceedings.
First, by way of a judgment (rozsudok) that became final and binding on 16 February 2004 (“the first judgment”), ruling on appeal by the first applicant against a judgment of the Bratislava IV District Court (Okresný súd), the Bratislava Regional Court (Krajský súd) dismissed a maintenance claim against A., observing that the first applicant had failed to indicate an address for the defendant in the United States and that it had been impossible to make him available for the purposes of the proceedings.
A maintenance order made in such circumstances would not be enforceable in the  and there was thus no point in making it.
While the District Court’s ruling was phrased as “[the court] refrains from making a ruling” on the claim, the Regional Court changed it into “[the court] dismisses the claim” observing specifically that should the first applicant be able to obtain the defendant’s address in the future there would be no obstacle to her lodging a fresh application in the same matter.
Second, by way of a ruling, which became final and binding on 1 October 2004 (“the second judgment”), which was attached to the judgment in the divorce proceedings, and which concerned the period subsequent to the divorce, the District Court ordered A. to contribute to the second applicant’s maintenance by way of monthly payments.
was identified as residing at the same address as that indicated in the first judgment, and he took part in the proceedings by making a written submission and through a court-appointed representative.
The third set of proceedings concerning the second applicant’s maintenance is the actual subject matter of the present application. It is described below.
Following the dismissal of her first claim concerning the maintenance of the second applicant in the period prior to the divorce (see paragraph 9 above), in February 2004 the first applicant made a fresh claim and indicated a new address for the defendant.
On 21 July 2005 the District Court inquired at the Centre for the International Legal Protection of Children and Youth (Centrum pre medzinárodnoprávnu ochranu detí a mládeže – “the Centre”) about the address of the employer of A. and any other information concerning him. In the absence of a reply, the District Court sent a reminder on 2 September 2005, to which the Centre replied on 29 September 2005, submitting that no such information was available and that, under the 1956 Convention on the Recovery Abroad of Maintenance (Decree of the Minister of Foreign Affairs no. 33/1959 Coll.), the Centre had no power to investigate such matters.
On 21 November 2005 the District Court sent a request to the  authorities to question the defendant under the 1970 Convention on the Taking of Evidence Abroad in Civil or Commercial Matters (Decree of the Minister of Foreign Affairs no. 129/1976 Coll.). In the absence of a reply, the District Court sent reminders on 9 February 2007 and 21 January 2008.
On 7 April 2008 the District Court again enquired with the Centre about the address of the employer of A. and any other information concerning him. The Centre replied on 14 April 2008 submitting that no information was available except for the last address for A., which was substantially the same as that used in the previous proceedings (see paragraphs 9 and 10 above).
On 19 June 2008 the District Court gave a decision, making two different rulings concerning the periods before and after the first judgment (16 February 2004) (see paragraph 9 above).
As regards the period prior to 16 February 2004, the District Court observed that it was covered by the first judgment, which constituted a res judicata. The matter could accordingly not be examined again, and that part of the action was declared inadmissible.
As regards the period after 16 February 2004 and until the second judgment (1 October 2004) (see paragraph 10 above), the District Court ordered A. to make monthly contributions to the second applicant’s maintenance in the same amount as under the second judgment.
The first applicant challenged the judgment of 19 June 2008 in so far as the action had been declared inadmissible. She relied on the first judgment, in that the matter had not been decided upon on the merits, and it was open to her to bring the claim anew once an address had been established for the defendant.
On 21 January 2009 the  dismissed the appeal. It observed that although the first applicant had submitted a new address for the defendant, it had still not been possible to make him available for the purposes of the proceedings and, to that extent, the matter was a res judicata.
Eventually, after the proceedings had been concluded, on 14 December 2009 a report was obtained from the  authorities concerning A. being questioned, pursuant to the District Court’s request of 21 November 2005 (see paragraph 14 above).
On 9 April 2009 the applicants challenged the judgments of 19 June 2008 and 21 January 2009 by way of a complaint under Article 127 of the Constitution (Constitutional law no. 460/1992 Coll., as amended) in the  (Ústavný súd). They relied, inter alia, on Article 6 § 1 of the Convention and Article 5 of Protocol No. 7 (equality between spouses). They alleged a violation of their right of access to court and to a fair trial, and submitted that they had identified A.’s address and that he himself had confirmed that address in his written submission to the court in the divorce proceedings. Moreover, maintenance orders had been enforced against A. in the past via the Centre and its counterpart in the .
On 14 May 2009 the  declared the complaint inadmissible. It found that the applicants had failed to exhaust ordinary remedies as required under section 53(1) of the Constitutional Court Act (Law no. 38/1993 Coll., as amended) by seeking protection of their rights before the ordinary courts by way of an appeal on points of law (dovolanie) under Article 237 (f) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Law no. 99/1963 Coll., as amended - “the CCP”).
As observed by the Constitutional Court, it was true that that the subject matter of the proceedings fell within the ambit of the Family Code (Law no. 36/2005 Coll., as amended) and that, pursuant to Article 238 § 4 of the CCP, appeals on points of law were specifically unavailable in matters governed by the Family Code.
However, if there were serious procedural irregularities within the meaning of Article 237 of the CCP, an appeal on points of law was available in all cases. To that end, the  relied on a commentary to the CCP of 2006 by Krajčo J. and others, page 618, and on its own inadmissibility decision of 17 April 2008 in a case no. I. ÚS 136/08 (see paragraphs 34 below).
The applicants subsequently lodged a request with the Prosecutor General, seeking that he use his discretionary powers and challenge the contested judgments on the applicants’ behalf by way of an extraordinary appeal on points of law (mimoriadne dovolanie).
In a letter of 20 July 2009 the Prosecutor General responded that no such remedy was available in the applicants’ case, as it fell within the Family Code and, under Article 243f § 2 (a) of the CCP, no extraordinary appeal on points of law could be lodged in matters governed by the Family Code (see paragraphs 35 and 36 below).
Article 127, subsumed under Section (Oddiel) One (dealing with Judicial Power) of Part (Hlava) Seven (dealing with the ), provides:
“1.  The Constitutional Court shall decide on complaints by natural or legal persons alleging a violation of their fundamental rights or freedoms ... unless the protection of such rights and freedoms falls within the jurisdiction of a different court.
If the Constitutional Court finds a complaint justified, it shall deliver a decision stating that a person’s rights or freedoms as set out in paragraph 1 have been violated by a final decision, specific measure or other act and shall quash that decision, measure or act. If the violation that has been found is the result of a failure to act, the  may order [the authority] which has violated the rights or freedoms to take the necessary action. At the same time it may remit the case to the authority concerned for further proceedings, order that authority to refrain from violating the fundamental rights and freedoms ... or, where appropriate, order those who have violated the rights or freedoms set out in paragraph 1 to restore the situation to that existing prior to the violation.
In its decision on a complaint the  may grant appropriate financial compensation to a person whose rights under paragraph 1 have been violated.”
Under section 53(1) an individual complaint under Article 127 of the Constitution is not admissible if the complainant has not exhausted effective remedies or other legal means available for the protection of the complainant’s fundamental rights or freedoms.
Section 53(3) provides that such a complaint may be lodged within two months of the date on which the decision in question has become final and binding, or on which a measure has been notified or notice of other interference with the complainant’s interests has been given. As regards measures and other types of interference, this period commences when it is practically possible for the complainant to become aware of them.
Procedures for of civil proceedings are regulated by Part Four, Chapter Two. Under Article 228 § 1 (d), civil proceedings can be reopened where the Court has found a violation of the requesting party’s Convention rights and where serious consequences of the violation have not been adequately redressed by the award of just satisfaction.
The procedure in respect of appeals on points of law is defined in Part Four, Chapter Three. Under Article 236 (1) an appeal on points of law is available against final decisions of a court of appeal if the law so provides.
Pursuant to Article 237 (f) an appeal on points of law is admissible against any decision of the appellate court where a party has been prevented, by the appellate court’s conduct from acting before the court.
Under Article 238 § 4, as a matter of principle, an appeal on points of law is not admissible in matters governed by the Family Code. The existing exceptions are not relevant to the case at hand.
Further statutory rules concerning appeals on points of law are summarised in the Court’s judgment in the case of Ringier Axel Springer Slovakia, v. Slovakia (no. 41262/05, §§ 61-8, 26 July 2011).
According to a commentary by Krajčo J. and others (EUROUNION, 2006, page 618, “inadmissibility of an appeal on points of law against certain decisions of a court of appeal cannot stem from the provisions of Articles 238 §§ 4 and 5 and 239 § 3. These provisions do not allow for an appeal on points of law except in cases where an appeal on points of law would otherwise be admissible under Articles 238 §§ 1 and 3 and 239 §§ 1 and 2. This means that even in cases where an appeal on points of law is excluded under Articles 238 §§ 4 and 5 and 239 § 3, such an appeal is admissible on the grounds envisaged by Article 237. Thus, in the light of the existing legal framework, even in cases governed by the Family Code... admissibility of an appeal on points of law is based on Article 237.”
In accordance with Article 243f § 1 (a) the Prosecutor General has the power to challenge final and binding judicial decisions by way of an extraordinary appeal on points of law in cases falling within the ambit of Article 237 of the Code (see above).
However, under Article 243f § 2 (a) no extraordinary appeal on points of law is admissible in matters governed by the Family Code.
On 17 April 2008 the  declared a case, no. I. ÚS 136/08, inadmissible on account of the complainant’s failure to lodge an appeal on points of law under Article 237 of the CCP in a matter regulated by the Family Code. It cited reasons similar to those mentioned above.
This approach was later followed in inadmissibility decisions on 27 January 2009 and 26 January 2010 in cases nos. III. ÚS 26/09 and III. ÚS 39/2010.
However, in a judgment (nález) of 1 July 2009 in case no. II. ÚS 398/08, the Constitutional Court found that admitting an appeal on points of law on the ground envisaged under Article 237 (f) of the CCP in divorce proceedings, a matter governed by the Family Code, had violated the complainant’s rights under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention because, by virtue of Article 238 § 4 of the CCP no such appeal was admissible. In order to reach this conclusion, the  conducted a full-fledged jurisprudential, doctrinal and comparative analysis.
In a decision (uznesenie) of 17 June 2005, the Supreme Court (Najvyšší súd) ruled on admissibility of an appeal on points of law in case no. 2Cdo 128/2005. That appeal had been lodged in reliance on Article 237 (f) of the CCP against a decree of divorce, a matter being regulated by the Family Code. The Supreme Court found that any such an appeal was excluded by virtue of Article 238 § 4 of the CCP, which superseded its Article 237. At the same time, however, the Supreme Court referred to its previous judgement in case no. MCdo 29/03 and observed that its own practice in that respect was not uniform.