The case concerns the recovery of damages from the applicant’s old age pension, which she sees as unlawful and causing her insurmountable hardship.
The applicant was born in 1950 and lives in Kretinga. She was granted legal aid and was represented by Ms L. Gudaitė, a lawyer practising in Vilnius.
The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms L. Urbaitė.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
By a judgment of 31 December 2014, the Kretinga Region District Court convicted the applicant, who was an old-age pensioner, under Article 138 §§ 2 (5) and 5 and Article 145 § 2 of the Criminal Code, of minor psychological injury to and terrorising (žmogaus terorizavimas) a neighbouring family who lived in the apartment above. It was established that, over a period of one year and one month, on dozens of occasions the applicant had wrongfully informed on her neighbours’ family to the police and to the municipal and child care authorities, which had caused one of those neighbours to suffer fear and post-traumatic stress disorder, which had eventually developed into medium-severity and then severe depression. Another member of that neighbouring family – a minor – also suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder as a consequence of the applicant’s actions. The applicant was sentenced to two years and six months of imprisonment, with the execution of the sentence being suspended for two years. She was also ordered not to approach the victims. The court also partly granted a civil claim lodged by one of the victims in the criminal proceedings for compensation for pecuniary and non-pecuniary damage, awarding an amount of 5,908 euros (EUR). Appeals lodged against that decision by the applicant were dismissed by the appellate court in 2015 and by the cassation court in 2016.
Afterwards, on 24 November 2016, the Kretinga Region District Court issued a writ of execution. The applicant was encouraged by the bailiff to pay the amount owed in compensation. As the compensation was not paid within the prescribed time, the bailiff seized the applicant’s property, namely a plot of land of 0.06 hectares.
On 22 December 2016 the bailiff also sent a letter regarding the recovery of the debt to the Kretinga division of the State Social Care Insurance (SODRA), seeking to recover the sums owed by the applicant by means of seizing twenty per cent of her monthly old-age pension.
As confirmed by the applicant, between 20 January 2017 and 13 March 2019, a total of EUR 2,019 was recovered from her. Of that amount, during that period, the monthly sums deducted from the applicant’s old-age pension varied from EUR 20.24 to EUR 24.64.
As noted by the Government in their observations of 11 April 2019, and confirmed by the applicant in her observations in reply of 24 May 2019, at the time of those observations, the applicant was in receipt of a monthly old-age pension of EUR 123.21.
In addition to that, as of 2019 the applicant has also been receiving a monthly allowance of EUR 60.47, from which the debt has not been recovered.
The applicant also confirmed that as of 1993 she had been provided with municipal housing by the municipal authorities of the Kretinga region. As of December 2016 the applicant had to pay EUR 11.02 for that housing each month.
The parties also agreed that, in addition to her old-age pension, the applicant also received other monetary income from social assistance: a monthly social welfare allowance (socialinė pašalpa) of EUR 5, which was paid between January 2018 and March 2019, and a monthly social security pension (šalpos pensija) of EUR 2.59, which was paid in December 2016 and between January 2018 and March 2019. In addition to that, in January 2018 she received a one-time lump sum of EUR 76, and in January 2019 she received another one-time lump sum of EUR 114.
In 2017 the difference between the amount of the applicant’s actual income and the level of State-supported income was not sufficiently significant, thus the above-mentioned social benefits were not paid.
As concerns the execution of court decisions, the Code of Civil Procedure, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
Article 663. Restrictions on recovering a debt from the property of a physical person
“1. A sum of money may not be recovered by seizing a debtor’s property if the debtor can provide the bailiff with proof that the debt can be cleared within six months by making deductions in line with the percentages laid down in Article 736 of the Code, from the debtor’s salary, pension, scholarship or other income. In such circumstances, the bailiff may seize the debtor’s property ... [only] if it appears that the deductions from the debtor’s salary, pension, scholarship or other income would not be sufficient to execute the court decision.
Periodical payments (periodinės išmokos) can also be directly recovered from the debtor’s salary, pension, scholarship or other income, if they can be recovered by making the deductions referred to in Article 736 of this Code. ...”
Article 643. Rights of a debtor
“A debtor shall be entitled:
1) to be personally involved, or involved through his representatives, in the steps taken for execution;
...
4) to dispute the ownership of property or its valuation;
5) to appeal against the actions of a bailiff;
6) to submit requests ... ;
7) to conclude out-of-court settlements; ...”
Article 668. Property which may not be seized for debt recovery
“1. When recovering a debt from a natural person, no recovery steps can be taken against ... property which is indispensable for the debtor’s or his or her family’s subsistence ... In addition, no recovery steps can be taken against an amount of money that does not exceed the minimum monthly salary ...”
Article 736. Size of deductions to be taken from debtor’s salary or other income
“1. Deductions of a part of a debtor’s salary, or analogous payments and allowances, which do not exceed the minimum monthly salary as fixed by the Government, shall be made under the writ of execution until the recoverable amounts are recovered in full:
1) in relation to recovering periodical maintenance payments, compensation for damage to health ... as well as for compensation for damage caused by criminal acts – up to fifty per cent, unless otherwise indicated in the writ of execution or established by law or a court;
2) in relation to all other recoveries – up to twenty per cent, unless otherwise indicated in the writ of execution or established by law or a court.
...
Seventy per cent can be deducted from the part of the salary, or analogous benefits, exceeding the minimum monthly salary as set by the Government, unless otherwise established by law or a court. ...”
Article 736. Size of deductions to be taken from debtor’s salary or other income (as in force from 1 December 2018)
“1. Deductions of a part of a debtor’s salary, or analogous payments and allowances, which do not exceed the minimum monthly salary as fixed by the Government, shall be made under the writ of execution until the recoverable amounts are recovered in full:
1) in relation to recovering periodical maintenance payments, compensation for damage to health ... up to thirty per cent, unless otherwise indicated in the writ of execution or established by law or court;
2) in relation to all other recoveries – up to twenty per cent, unless otherwise indicated in the writ of execution or established by law or court. ...”
Article 737. Recovery from the debtor’s other income, analogous to a salary
“The rules relating to recovery from a salary shall also apply when recovery is made from the debtor’s:
...
7) pensions.”
Article 739. Sums of money which are not subject to recovery
“It is not permitted to recover a debt from sums paid to the debtor as:
...
6) under the Law on State Social Allowances and other allowances and compensation paid from State or municipal budgets for the social care of indigent persons.”
On 19 December 2017 the enlarged chamber of the Supreme Court in case no. 3K-7-315-421/2017 examined the situation concerning the recovery of money from a prisoner’s account, which had originally been transferred into that account by other persons (such as the prisoner’s family members, although the Supreme Court did not specify). The Supreme Court firstly noted that the restriction set out in Article 668 § 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure aimed to safeguard the interests of the debtor so that, when the recovery process was started, the debtor would have a sufficient sum at his disposal to satisfy his basic needs and the minimum amount required for subsistence. That restriction also aimed to balance the interests of the creditor and the debtor, in order to ensure that the debtor’s rights were not breached.
That being so, such a restriction requiring the recovery of sums exceeding the value of one minimum monthly salary was a “one-time restriction” (vienkartinis apribojimas). The Supreme Court also held that the law did not provide for any exceptions which would mean that recovery from the accounts of persons serving a prison sentence would be performed any differently from recovery from those persons who were not in prison. The fact that the debtor in that case – a prisoner – had been provided with clothing and food in prison, was irrelevant.
On 28 February 2018 the Supreme Court, in case no. 3K-3-74-313/2018, again examined the situation concerning the recovery of money from a prisoner’s account. The Supreme Court pointed out that a prisoner’s right to obtain money transfers and to have cash brought into the correctional institution had been established in Article 98 of the Code for the Execution of Sentences. Such money would then be placed in the prisoner’s account at the correctional institution and was his property, which the prisoner could then use to satisfy his basic needs. Neither the Code for the Execution of Sentences nor the Code of Civil Procedure or other laws prohibited debt recovery from such money.
The Supreme Court then reiterated that, under Article 668 § 1 of the Code of the Civil Procedure, debts could not be recovered from a sum of money that did not exceed one minimum monthly salary. However, that was a “one-time restriction”. If, after the recovery process had been initiated, the bailiff established that the debt to be recovered was larger than the sums recovered on the first attempt, the bailiff could then take recovery steps against the debtor’s salary or any other income which the debtor would receive in the future. In relation to that future income, money transferred into a prisoner’s account by other persons fell into the category of “other income” under Article 736 of the Code of Civil Procedure, which could then be the object of recovery under the rules set out in that Article (the Supreme Court referred to its earlier ruling of 19 December 2017, cited above).