The case originated in two applications (nos. 28492/15 and 49975/15) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by two Kyrgyz nationals, Mr T.K. and Mr S.R. (“the applicants”), on 15 June 2015 and 11 October 2015 respectively.
The applicants were represented by Ms N. Yermolayeva, a lawyer practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
The applicants alleged that in the event of their removal to Kyrgyzstan, they risked being subjected to treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Convention.
On 16 June 2015 and 12 October 2015 respectively the Court indicated to the respondent Government, under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, that the applicants should not be extradited or otherwise involuntarily removed from Russia to Kyrgyzstan or another country for the duration of the proceedings before the Court. It was also decided to grant the cases priority under Rule 41 of the Rules of Court.
On 16 June 2015 and 10 March 2016 respectively the Government were given notice of the applications.
On 22 September 2016 the Court granted a request for third-party intervention lodged by the International Commission of Jurists in the case of the second applicant.
The Court further decided to grant the applicants anonymity and the case files confidentiality under Rules 33 and 47 § 4 of the Rules of Court.
The applicants are Kyrgyz nationals of Uzbek ethnic origin, born in 1957 and 1986 respectively. Before being arrested, the first applicant lived in Verkhneye Mukhanovo, Oryol Region and the second applicant lived in Elektrogorsk, Moscow Region.
According to various international reports, in June 2010 intercommunal violence in the cities of Osh and Jalal-Abad in southern Kyrgyzstan left more than 400 people dead, 2,000 wounded, thousands displaced internally and externally, and extensive damage to property. Those cities are home to substantial Uzbek minority communities – around 14% of Kyrgyzstan’s overall population – living in their historic centres, and growing numbers of Kyrgyz residents who have migrated from rural areas. Social and political tensions created by the ethno-territorial structure of post-Soviet Central Asia, and a lack of economic opportunity, provided a backdrop to the political instability following the overthrow of President Kurmanbek Bakiyev in April 2010.
Until 2010 the applicant had been living in Osh, Kyrgyzstan. He arrived in Russia in July 2010.
On 13 September 2010 the applicant was charged in absentia with aggravated misappropriation of approximately 18,500 euros (EUR), since as a director of a private company he received money from four other companies in business transactions, but spent them on his personal needs. The Kyrgyz authorities ordered his pre-trial detention and issued an international search-and-arrest warrant bearing his name.
On 11 July 2013 the applicant was apprehended in Russia; subsequently, his detention was ordered and extended by the Russian courts. He was released on 2 April 2014 and currently resides in Verkhneye Mukhanovo, Oryol Region.
On 30 July 2013 the Kyrgyz prosecution authorities requested the applicant’s extradition on the above-mentioned charges. The request contained various assurances that he would be treated properly, including (a) guarantees against torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment; (b) no political or discriminatory grounds for prosecution; and (c) every opportunity to defend himself and have access to a lawyer. On 5 February 2014 the Kyrgyz authorities extended the assurances by adding that the applicant would receive visits from Russian diplomatic staff at the places of detention after the transfer.
On 21 February 2014 the applicant’s extradition was authorised by the Deputy Prosecutor General of the Russian Federation. On the same day the Deputy Prosecutor General sent a letter to the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about the pending extradition proceedings and requested cooperation in monitoring the assurances provided by the Kyrgyz authorities. The relevant parts of the letter read as follows:
“The Prosecutor General’s Office of the Kyrgyz Republic has provided necessary assurances in respect of [the applicant’s] rights, including the absence of persecution on ethnic grounds, and guarantees against torture and other cruel treatment and punishment.
At the same time, the recent practice of the European Court of Human Rights demonstrates the critical attitude of the Court to the extradition of individuals of ‘nontitle’ (нетитульная) ethnic origin to Kyrgyzstan due to their vulnerability and risk of cruel treatment.
In the case Mahmudzhan Ergashev v. Russia, the European Court ruling in favour of the applicant indicated that [the assurances] given by the authorities of the Kyrgyz Republic by themselves and in the absence of a monitoring mechanism were insufficient to protect [an individual] from cruel treatment.
Given this practice, the Prosecutor General’s Office of the Kyrgyz Republic has provided extended assurances that [in the event of the applicant’s transfer] the competent authorities of the Kyrgyz Republic will ensure that Russian diplomatic staff have access to the detention facility [where the applicant is going to be detained] in order to monitor respect for his rights.”
It appears from the text that similar letters were sent to the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs in all cases where the Kyrgyz authorities had provided similar extended assurances.
The applicant challenged the extradition decision in court, referring to the fact that he belonged to a vulnerable ethnic group and thus ran a real risk of persecution and ill-treatment.
On 2 April 2014 the Oryol Regional Court ruled in favour of the applicant’s complaint and set aside the extradition decision as unlawful. Referring to the case-law of the Court, the Regional Court concluded that the applicant belonged to a vulnerable ethnic group which ran the risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 of the Convention, and that the assurance of the Kyrgyz authorities might be insufficient to mitigate that risk, given doubts about how they functioned in practice. It further considered that according to the migration authorities’ report, the political, social and economic situation in Kyrgyzstan remained “complex”. The applicant was immediately released from detention.
The prosecutor’s office appealed, referring to, among other arguments, the following three points. First, the applicant was suspected of financial crimes and accordingly there had been no issue of political or ethnic persecution as such. Secondly, referring to the judgment Latipov v. Russia (no. 77658/11, 12 December 2013), they claimed that the applicant could not rely only on the general situation in the country, but had to present evidence of individualised risks. Thirdly, while acknowledging the Court’s conclusions on the persecution of ethnic Uzbeks involved in the 2010 clashes in the judgment Makhmudzhan Ergashev v. Russia (no. 49747/11, 16 October 2012), they argued that the Kyrgyz authorities’ assurances in the applicant’s case were sufficient and contained extensive guarantees that Russian diplomatic staff would have access to detention facilities.
On 28 May 2014 the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation dismissed the appeal and upheld the judgment of the Regional Court. The prosecutor’s office lodged an application for a supervisory review.
On 4 February 2015 the Presidium of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation, sitting as a supervisory court, annulled the previous judgments and remitted the case for reconsideration. The Presidium noted that the Regional Court had relied on the Court’s case-law and the migration authorities’ characterisation of the situation in Kyrgyzstan as “complex”, but considered that the lower courts’ conclusions were based on a general description of the situation without any individualisation of the risks. The relevant part of its decision read as follows:
“It is not possible to agree with the conclusions based [only] on the judgments of the European Court of Human Rights [without] consideration and assessment of the materials of the [individual] case.
A court assessing the risk of a human rights’ violation must not only study the general human-rights situation in the requesting State, but also weigh the specific circumstances of the case, which might in their totality demonstrate the presence or absence of serious grounds to believe that a person might be subjected to [cruel] treatment or punishment.
The law should be interpreted as prescribing that a court assessing extraditionrelated issues needs to consider the statements of the individual [concerned], information from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on the human-rights situation in the requesting State, the assurances provided by the requesting State, as well as other documents and materials.
...
The materials of the case demonstrate that [the applicant] is accused of a crime that did not have an ethnic or political character and was committed in 2008-2009, which is well before the events of June 2010.
[In his statements to the Russian authorities on 11 July 2013 the applicant did not claim persecution on political or other grounds and did not claim that he had arrived in Russia with a view to seeking asylum.]
These statements, which could have influenced the [Regional Court’s] conclusions, were not examined.
Moreover, [the Regional Court] did not duly assess the information from the Prosecutor General’s Office ... on the assurances provided by the competent authorities of the Kyrgyz Republic that Russian diplomatic staff would have access to the place of [the applicant’s] detention.
The trial court, in annulling the extradition decision, referred to the migration authorities’ report, but only to the part describing the political, social and economic situation in Kyrgyzstan as ‘complex’, and neglected the other part, which listed the measures adopted by the government of Kyrgyzstan in order to enhance respect for human rights and secure the rights of ethnic minorities.”
On 8 April 2015 the Oryol Regional Court, reconsidering the applicant’s complaint against the extradition decision, followed the reasoning of the Presidium of the Supreme Court and dismissed the complaint. It specifically highlighted that in line with this Court’s case-law, the general situation in a given country might not justify a total ban on extraditions. The Regional Court concluded that the applicant did not face individualised risks given the assurances provided by the Kyrgyz authorities, the possibility of their monitoring by Russian diplomatic staff, the fact that certain progress had been made in respect of human rights in Kyrgyzstan, the financial nature of the crime, and the refusal of his asylum application by the migration authorities.
On 17 June 2015 the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation upheld the lower court’s judgment by a final decision.
On 14 August 2013 the applicant applied for refugee status, referring to risks of persecution in Kyrgyzstan on ethnic grounds.
On 15 January 2014 the migration authorities rejected the application by a final administrative decision. The applicant challenged that decision in the courts, referring to the fact that he belonged to a vulnerable ethnic group and thus ran a real risk of persecution and ill-treatment.
On 17 June 2014 the applicant’s complaint was dismissed by the Basmannyy District Court of Moscow. The applicant did not lodge an appeal.
Until 2010 the applicant had been living in Suzak, Jalal-Abad Region, Kyrgyzstan. He arrived in Russia in January 2011.
On 24 July 2012 the applicant was charged in absentia with violent crimes related to the June 2010 events (see paragraphs 9 above). Specifically, it was stated that the applicant in conspiracy with two other persons on several occasions blocked a highway, stopped passing cars and burnt at least eight of them, robbed their passengers, and murdered six persons, including two women, using firearms and bladed weapons. According to the charges the crimes were ethnically motivated and directed against people of Kyrgyz ethnic origin. The Kyrgyz authorities ordered his pre-trial detention and issued an international search-and-arrest warrant bearing his name.
On 15 April 2014 the applicant was apprehended in Russia; subsequently, his detention was ordered and extended by the Russian courts. He was released on 15 October 2015 as the maximum period for his lawful detention had expired. He currently resides in Elektrogorsk, Moscow Region.
On 13 May 2014 the Kyrgyz prosecution authorities requested the applicant’s extradition on the above-mentioned charges. The request contained various assurances that he would be treated properly, including (a) guarantees against torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment; (b) no political or discriminatory grounds for prosecution; (c) every opportunity to defend himself and have access to a lawyer; and (d) visits from Russian diplomatic staff at places of detention after the transfer.
On 8 July 2015 the applicant’s extradition was authorised by the Deputy Prosecutor General of the Russian Federation.
The applicant challenged that decision in the courts, referring to the fact that he belonged to a vulnerable ethnic group and thus ran a real risk of persecution and ill-treatment at the hands of the Kyrgyz authorities.
On 31 August 2015 the Belgorod Regional Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint, disregarding his allegations of risk of ill-treatment. Referring to the practice of this Court and the UN Human Rights Committee, the Regional Court stressed that apart from the general characterisation of a situation in a given country, an individual alleging the existence of a real risk of ill-treatment had to substantiate it with regard to his personal circumstances. The Regional Court took due note of the international reports presented by the applicant’s representative, but concluded that the applicant had failed to prove the existence of any individualised risks. It considered it relevant that the applicant had travelled several times from Russia to Kyrgyzstan in 2011-14 without any hindrance; that in his statements to the migration authorities he had expressly stated that he had not taken part in any inter-ethnic clashes in 2010 and that he had not been persecuted on political grounds; that he had never participated in any political or social activities; that the general situation in Kyrgyzstan was not such as to prevent all extraditions; and that the applicant’s transfer was secured by relevant assurances from the Kyrgyz authorities.
On 14 October 2015 an appeal lodged by the applicant was dismissed by a final decision of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation. The Supreme Court observed that the Kyrgyz authorities had provided relevant assurances regarding the applicant’s proper treatment (see paragraph 28 above) and that the lower court had been correct in considering those assurances to be a reliable mechanism against treatment prohibited by international law.
On 26 May 2014 the applicant applied for refugee status, referring to the risk of persecution in Kyrgyzstan on ethnic grounds.
On 23 September 2014 the application was rejected by a final administrative decision of the migration authorities. The applicant challenged that decision in the courts, referring to the fact that he belonged to a vulnerable ethnic group and thus ran a real risk of persecution and illtreatment.
On 8 June 2015 his appeal was dismissed by a final decision of the Moscow City Court.
A summary of the domestic law and practice concerning extraditions was previously provided in the case of Mukhitdinov v. Russia (no. 20999/14, §§ 29-31, 21 May 2015 with further references).
The Court has in the past reviewed the relevant information on the situation in Kyrgyzstan, and summaries were provided in Tadzhibayev v. Russia (no. 17724/14, §§ 19‑26, 1 December 2015, with further references) and Turgunov v. Russia (no. 15590/14, § 32, 22 October 2015).
In its assessment, the Court will also consider the following information and material submitted by the parties and obtained proprio motu. In respect of material obtained proprio motu, the Court considers that it would be too narrow an approach under Article 3 of the Convention, in cases concerning aliens facing expulsion or extradition, if the Court, as an international human-rights court, were only to take into account material made available by the parties, without comparing it with material from other reliable and objective sources (see, mutatis mutandis, J.K. and Others v. Sweden [GC], no. 59166/12, § 90, ECHR 2016).
Following the accession of Kyrgyzstan to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (“the OPCAT” hereinafter) in 2008, the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment carried out its first regular visit to Kyrgyzstan in September 2012 (SPT, CAT/OP/KGZ/1, 28 February 2014). The report noted the cooperation of the authorities and the unrestricted access to places of detention. It concluded that despite the recurrence of illtreatment driven by certain structural and systemic problems, certain positive measures had been taken by the authorities to tackle the issue, including the establishment of a national preventive mechanism.
Following the visit to Kyrgyzstan on 11-22 September 2018 the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment issued a report (CAT/OP/KGZ/2). It commended the national preventive mechanism for its will, and its dedication to the goal of preventing torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and noted that the law on the mechanism is rather solid (§ 86). It recommended inter alia that the mechanism focus on its internal working methods and practices, following the recommendations of the Subcommittee. Specifically the report mentioned the following:
“...
The national preventive mechanism ... issues reports and recommendations following each visit, some of which are accessible to the public. An annual report is sent to the parliament by 1 March each year and should be accompanied by the financial statements of the National Centre. In general, there seems to be a lack of interest by the parliament in considering those reports, since the hearing for the 2016 report was largely delayed and the hearing for the 2017 report remained pending at the time of drafting the present report. The recommendations of the national preventive mechanism are generally taken lightly by high-ranking governmental authorities but seem to bear some weight at the operational level.
The Subcommittee notes that there are general misconceptions about the role of the mechanism, especially expectations regarding the investigation of cases of torture and ill-treatment. The efficiency of the mechanism tends to be assessed by the number of complaints it receives and the number of criminal cases initiated by the authorities, which is contrary to the spirit of the Optional Protocol and the preventive mandate of the national preventive mechanism envisaged therein.
...
The Subcommittee observes that funding for the National Centre and its activities has been sustainable and timely, although further adjustments to the mechanism’s budget would enhance the mechanism’s capacity to better implement its mandate. The National Centre has developed a need for additional staff to cover geographic and thematic areas that are not already covered by its current composition.
As a general observation, the Subcommittee believes that the Government of Kyrgyzstan should enhance its efforts in supporting the mandate of the national preventive mechanism, by first and foremost understanding its mandate as envisaged in the Optional Protocol, and thereafter strengthening financial and strategical support for the mechanism, including by giving visibility to its recommendations and enforcing their implementation...”
In April 2015 the UN Human Rights Council adopted the Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review for Kyrgyzstan (HRC, A/HRC/29/4, 9 April 2015), including a review of the authorities’ actions in combating torture, and inhuman and degrading treatment and punishment.
Multiple national delegations in the course of the review noted with approval the special attention given in Kyrgyzstan to the prevention of torture, the ratification of the OPCAT, the establishment of the National Plan to Combat Torture and the National Centre for the Prevention of Torture. The delegations issued a recommendation for an improvement in funding of the national preventive mechanism and further facilitation of its activities. The report also stated:
“69.  ... [T]he occurrence of torture in Kyrgyzstan had been [publicly] recognized at all levels since 2010. Consequently, a number of measures had been undertaken to combat torture and ill-treatment since 2010, in particular the inclusion of anti-torture provisions in the Constitution and the adoption of the National Plan to Combat Torture. Monitoring by the Prosecutor’s Office to uncover cases of torture and illtreatment had been strengthened and the Prosecutor’s Office now conducted systematic and unannounced visits to places of deprivation of liberty. A harsher penalty had been established for torture, which had become a serious crime in law. Methodology and instructions had been developed on how to investigate effectively cases of torture and ill-treatment. Almost all temporary detention sites and investigation cells had been equipped with cameras for internal monitoring.
An important means of combating torture was the Memorandum on Cooperation in Protecting Human Rights and Freedoms, signed in 2012 by the Ombudsman, the Procurator-General, the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Justice, the State Penal Correction Service, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and human rights organizations. The signatories of the memorandum were entitled to carry out joint visits to places of deprivation of liberty throughout the country without prior authorization. The preventive measures had resulted in a decrease in reported cases of torture and illtreatment in 2013 and in 2014 as compared to previous years.”
In 2016-2019 the UN Human Rights Committee considered a number of individual complaints about allegations of torture in 2010-2012 (Ulan Nazaraliev v. Kyrgyzstan, CCPR/C/126/D/2697/2015; Fakhridin Ashirov v. Kyrgyzstan, §§ 3.4 and 6.4, CCPR/C/120/D/2435/2014; Zhakhangir Bazarov v. Kyrgyzstan, §§ 3.4-5.4, CCPR/C/118/D/2187/2012, Azimjan Askarov v. Kyrgyzstan, §§ 3.1, 3.3. and 7.5, CCPR/C/116/D/2231/2012). Having considered these cases, where all material events pre-date 2013, the Human Rights Committee decided, in particular, that there had been violations of the complainants’ rights not to be subjected to torture and to have the relevant allegations effectively investigated. At the same time, the Committee dismissed as unsubstantiated the complaints concerning alleged targeting and discrimination on the basis of their ethnic origin (Ashirov, cited above, §§ 3.4 and 6.4; Bazarov, cited above, §§ 3.4-5.4, Askarov, cited above, §§ 3.1, 3.3. and 7.5).
On 30 May 2018 the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination issued Concluding observations on the combined eighth to tenth periodic reports of Kyrgyzstan (CERD/C/KGZ/CO/8-10). They stated in particular:
“...
The Committee is concerned about the prevalence of stereotyping and stigmatization of ethnic minorities, including Uzbeks, Turks, Uighurs and Mugat, and the incidence of the use of hate speech against them in the media and by public and political figures. The Committee is also concerned at the ethnic profiling by law enforcement officers of these communities, in particular of Uzbeks (arts. 2 and 4–6).
...
The Committee notes that the State party adopted some measures during the period under review to address inter-ethnic tensions, such as the Policy Framework on Strengthening National Unity and Inter-Ethnic Relations in the Kyrgyz Republic. It notes, however, with concern the persistence of such tensions, notably between the Kyrgyz majority and the Uzbek minority. The Committee is concerned that the Policy Framework focused on creating a national identity that is not explicitly inclusive of all ethnicities and may tend to reignite past conflicts. National identity must be built on recognition of all communities in the nation. The Committee is also concerned at the fact that ethnic minorities are underrepresented in the State Agency for Local Government Affairs and Inter-Ethnic Relations, and at the reported ineffectiveness of the Agency.
...
The Committee is concerned that investigations into the human rights violations that occurred during and in the aftermath of the June 2010 ethnic violence in the south of Kyrgyzstan were not effective, and were marred by ethnic bias and lack of respect for fair trial and due process guarantees. The Committee is particularly concerned that, while the majority of victims of human rights violations were of Uzbek origin, most of those who faced criminal prosecutions were also Uzbek. Moreover, according to the information provided during the dialogue, no compensation was provided to Uzbek victims of miscarriages of justice relating to those events. The Committee reiterates its concern about the reported use of torture by law enforcement officials and the reliance on forced confessions in courts, particularly against Uzbeks implicated in the 2010 violence, combined with the State party’s failure to bring the alleged perpetrators to justice and to compensate victims.
...”
The European Union Annual Reports on Human Rights and Democratisation mentioned, until 2014, that ethnic Uzbeks were running a heightened risk of discriminatory and harsh treatment by the Kyrgyz authorities. However, after 2014 no similar concerns were reported. Between 2016 and 2018 the annual reports mark the overall human-rights situation as stable and indicate consistent positive changes in combating torture (despite certain current challenges). The 2016 and 2017 reports state that “the authorities were endeavouring, including through cooperation with international bodies, to establish mechanisms to prevent torture and other forms of cruel and inhuman treatment” and that “Kyrgyzstan continued its effort to prevent torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, including through the work of the National Centre for Prevention of Torture”.
Amnesty International’s 2015/16 report “The State of the World’s Human Rights”, which was mirrored by its 2016/17 report, stated:
“Torture and other ill-treatment, and impunity for these violations, remained commonplace despite the introduction, in late 2014, of a programme of monitoring of places of detention under the National Preventive Mechanism and instructions on how to document torture issued by the Ministry of Health to medical personnel based on the UN Manual on the Effective Investigation and Documentation of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Istanbul Protocol).
...
Kyrgyzstan accepted the recommendations of the [Universal Periodic Review] of Kyrgyzstan ... aimed at combating torture and other ill-treatment. These concerned the investigation of allegations, particularly those by members of ethnic minorities, relating to the June 2010 violence and ensuring that the National Centre for the Prevention of Torture be adequately resourced and remained independent.
...
The NGO Coalition against Torture in Kyrgyzstan documented 79 cases of torture and other ill-treatment in the first half of 2015. A specialist investigation unit created by the Prosecutor General’s Office in June started criminal investigations into three cases of torture. By October [2015], 35 criminal cases in relation to over 80 law enforcement officers accused of acts of torture were under consideration by the courts. However, only in four cases dating back to 2011 did courts hand down a guilty verdict.
...
[In relation to June 2010 events], ethnic Uzbeks have been targeted disproportionately for prosecution.”
At the same time Amnesty International’s 2017/18 report did not include any reporting relevant to the matter.
Human Rights Watch’s “World Report 2016”, which was mirrored by its 2017 report, stated:
“Unaddressed human rights problems and new setbacks marred Kyrgyzstan’s rights record in 2015. Authorities targeted and harassed some human rights groups, journalists, and lawyers. Impunity for ill-treatment and torture persist, and there is still no justice for victims of interethnic violence in 2010.
...
The authorities continue to deny justice to victims of the June 2010 interethnic violence in southern Kyrgyzstan ... In April, Mahamad Bizurukov, an ethnic Uzbek on trial since 2011 in connection with the 2010 violence, was sentenced to 13 years’ imprisonment for murder. He was released in August on parole ...
...
On the fifth anniversary of the violence in June, the OSCE high commissioner on national minorities noted that ‘a sense of insecurity is still prevalent among the ethnic Uzbek community’ and ‘little progress’ has been made in investigating cases related to the June 2010 violence.
...
Authorities acknowledge that torture is a problem and, in May [2015], created a specialized investigative unit in the Prosecutor General’s Office. Nevertheless, the National Center for the Prevention of Torture, an independent, specialized anti-torture body, reported that ‘measures are not being taken to prevent and eradicate torture’.
...
Human rights groups and lawyers say that criminal investigations into allegations of ill-treatment and torture are rare, often delayed, and ineffective, as are trials ... According to information provided by the Prosecutor General’s Office to the Coalition Against Torture, a group of NGOs working on torture prevention, [the] authorities declined to open criminal investigations into 146 of 180 registered complaints of torture between January and June.”
The World Reports for 2018 and 2019, however, marked the progress that had been made with the human-rights situation in Kyrgyzstan, while noting the following challenges:
“Eight years after the June 2010 interethnic violence, victims continued to wait for justice. Ethnic Uzbeks were disproportionately affected by the violence, which left more than 400 dead and destroyed thousands of homes, and was followed by numerous cases of arbitrary detention, ill-treatment, and torture. Authorities did not review torture-tainted convictions delivered in the aftermath of the June 2010 events.
...
In its May 2018 concluding observations, the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) noted with concern ‘the persistence of ... tensions, notably between the Kyrgyz majority and the Uzbek minority’ in Kyrgyzstan, and cautioned that the government’s official inter-ethnic relations policy ‘focused on creating a national identity that is not explicitly inclusive of all ethnicities and may tend to reignite past conflicts.’
...
Impunity for ill-treatment and torture remains the norm, with criminal cases into allegations of ill-treatment or torture rare, and investigations and trials delayed or ineffective. On June 25, at national anti-torture consultations hosted by the National Center for the Prevention of Torture, on the occasion of the International Day to Support Victims of Torture, the prosecutor general’s office reported that it had registered 418 cases of torture in 2017, and brought charges of ‘torture’ against 15 law enforcement officers.
After a visit to Kyrgyzstan in September, the UN Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture found that most of its recommendations from 2012 had yet to be implemented and that safeguards against torture ‘are not protecting [apprehended people] appropriately ...’”
“Impunity for torture remains the norm, and investigations into ill-treatment and torture allegations remain rare, delayed, and ineffective. Kyrgyzstan’s Coalition Against Torture, a group of 16 nongovernmental organizations working on torture prevention, reported in February that the prosecutor’s office had registered 435 complaints of ill-treatment in 2016, but declined to open investigations into 400 cases. Sardar Bagishbekov, a representative of the coalition, noted that, on average, the prosecutor’s office declines to investigate torture allegations in over 90 percent of cases ...”
The International Partnership for Human Rights and the Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights, in their statement on “Key concerns and recommendations on torture and ill-treatment in Kyrgyzstan” of April 2016, stated:
“According to the Prosecutor General’s Office, 265, 220 and 199 complaints involving allegations of torture or other ill-treatment were recorded in 2013, 2014 and 2015 respectively. A total of 18 (in 2013), 16 (in 2014) and 62 (in 2015) criminal proceedings were opened ... In very few cases were the perpetrators adequately punished. In 2013 and 2014 only five police officers were sentenced to prison terms. One of them was sentenced to four years’ imprisonment while the others were given suspended sentences.
...
In a positive move intended to address ongoing impunity the Prosecutor General of Kyrgyzstan set up the Special Prosecutors Unit (SPU) in May 2015, which is tasked with coordinating and overseeing the work of all prosecutors who conduct torture investigations in Kyrgyzstan. The SPU is also authorized to conduct preliminary inquiries, open criminal cases and refer cases to local prosecutors for investigation. While the criminal cases opened into allegations of torture/ill-treatment in 2013 and 2014 coincided with the cases that the NGO Coalition against Torture actively supported, the higher proportion of criminal procedures instigated in 2015 is partly due to the SPU’s work.”
In their submission “Torture and ill-treatment in Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan” (OSCE Human Dimension Implementation Meeting, 23 September 2016), the NGO Coalitions against Torture stated:
“Torture and ill-treatment ... continue to be reported from ... Kyrgyzstan ... Since January 2016 the [NGO Coalition against Torture] registered ... 86 [new cases] in Kyrgyzstan ...
...
At the same time, each of the three Central Asian countries has taken some steps in the right direction in recent years. For example, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention Against Torture (OPCAT) and set up national preventive mechanisms (NPMs) ... the Ministries of Health in Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan obliged medical personnel to examine detainees in line with the standards of the United Nations (UN) Istanbul Protocol ...
...
While courts in Kyrgyzstan have ... ruled in favour of providing compensation to victims in several cases, to date none of the victims has actually received any payment. This includes several cases involving victims of torture from Kyrgyzstan where the UN Human Rights Committee decided under its individual complaints procedure that compensation should be provided ...”
In 2015, the report “Torture in Kyrgyzstan: Current concerns and recommendations” was issued jointly by the NGO Coalition against Torture in Kyrgyzstan (consisting of nineteen non-governmental organisations), the Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights (Poland), the Coalitions against Torture in Kazakhstan and Tajikistan, International Partnership for Human Rights (Belgium) and the World Organisation against Torture. The report provided a comprehensive overview of the situation in Kyrgyzstan, highlighted the progress achieved by the authorities, identified the existing points of concern and put forward a set of relevant recommendations.
The above-mentioned report stressed that in recent years the authorities of Kyrgyzstan had taken several concrete steps to address the persistence of torture and other forms of ill-treatment, most notably by (1) establishing a national preventive mechanism (see paragraph 52 below) and endowing it with the necessary powers to carry out its functions, and (2) introducing some positive legislative changes, including giving defence lawyers easier access to detained individuals, ensuring that detainees received a medical examination in compliance with the most recent international standards, and increasing criminal liability for perpetrators. However, the authors of the report stated that those efforts had not led to the complete eradication of torture, which was still being used by the lawenforcement agencies and in multiple instances with the impunity of the perpetrators.
The National Centre for the Prevention of Torture (“the NPM”) is an independent body established by an act of parliament of Kyrgyzstan in 2012, funded by the State and supervised by the Coordinating Council, which comprises the Ombudsman, two members of parliament and eight representatives of human-rights NGOs (including representatives of ethnic minorities). Since 2014 it has been fully operational and functions as a national preventive mechanism within the meaning of the OPCAT. As such, the NPM assists the anti-torture efforts of the Kyrgyz authorities, acts as a liaison between international and non-governmental organisations, issues recommendations, makes unannounced visits to places of detention, and informs prosecution authorities about all identified cases of illtreatment. The NPM issues annual reports, which are around one hundred pages long, containing detailed information of the yearly activities. Reports are submitted for review to and endorsed by the Kyrgyz Parliament.
According to the annual reports of 2015 to 2018, the NPM conducted between 700 and 1,100 preventive monitoring visits per year. The visits were carried out across the whole country and covered between 500 and 900 institutions and facilities, ranging from temporary detention facilities in police stations to private orphanages. Each visit necessarily included individual interviews with persons detained in a specific facility, and the number of interviews rose from 1,283 in 2015 to 1,829 in 2018. During the visits the NPM staff examined documents justifying detention, medical records and records of sanctions imposed by the facility management. After each notification concerning alleged ill-treatment (via a hotline, from an NGO, or following the death of a detainee), the NPM visited the relevant facilities, issued recommendations and made follow-up visits monitoring the progress achieved. The reports also include information on the number of torture and ill-treatment complaints received (around 120 in 2018), statistics on the criminal inquiries into those cases, as well as individual tracking of open criminal investigations.
Lastly, the reports list specific recommendations for the Parliament, the Government, the Human Rights Coordination Council, the Supreme Court, the Prosecutor General’s Office, the Ministries of the Interior and of Health, and the State Service for the Execution of Sentences, and for monitoring the implementation of investigations.
The Government provided the Court with information on the functioning of the mechanism set up to monitor the assurances provided by the Kyrgyz authorities. They stated that the mechanism had been created through cooperation between the Prosecutor General’s Office of the Russian Federation, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Russian diplomatic staff in Kyrgyzstan and the Prosecutor General’s Office of the Kyrgyz Republic. It appears from the available material that the creation of the mechanism was triggered by the Court’s conclusions in a number of cases concerning the expulsion of ethnic Uzbeks to Kyrgyzstan, specifically concerning (1) the risk of ill-treatment faced by the Uzbeks as a vulnerable ethnic minority; (2) the adequacy of the assurances provided by the Kyrgyz authorities; and (3) the absence of a monitoring mechanism for those assurances. According to the Government, the Russian authorities actively cooperate with their Kyrgyz counterparts. In 2017-18 the Russian and the Kyrgyz prosecution and diplomatic authorities had addressed the issues during at least five relevant meetings.
The Russian Government stated that the Kyrgyz authorities provided, through the cooperation mechanism, statistical data on the prosecution of extradited individuals. According to those data, in 2012-13 out of 130 extradited individuals of all ethnicities, sixty-nine had been convicted (twenty of whom had been released on parole). In respect of the remainder, the criminal proceedings had been discontinued on various grounds.
In 2014-15 the Prosecutor General’s Office of the Russian Federation sent at least five letters to the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights providing updates on the functioning of the above-mentioned mechanism.
According to the information in those letters, the progress in criminal investigations and/or trials of extradited persons had been monitored in at least twelve cases. Russian diplomatic staff visited three pre-trial detention facilities in Osh on various dates in 2014-15 and talked to at least eight previously extradited persons (six of whom were ethnic Uzbeks). On each occasion those individuals were asked about the presence or absence of psychological duress or ill-treatment, the conditions of their detention, the adequacy of medical treatment, as well as whether their defence and other procedural rights had been respected. All of them were found to be satisfied with the treatment by the Kyrgyz authorities. On one occasion Russian diplomatic staff informed the management of a detention facility about the need to improve medical treatment provided to a detainee. Furthermore, in 2015-17 sixteen previously extradited persons were visited in various penal facilities by Russian diplomatic staff. In 2017 eighteen previously extradited persons were released from detention on various grounds.
The information obtained through the above-mentioned mechanism also included specific examples of proceedings against four persons (three of whom were ethnic Uzbeks), who had been extradited prior to the creation of the mechanism. They had been either released on parole or granted an amnesty following their transfer to Kyrgyzstan; in one case, the criminal prosecution had been discontinued.
The monitoring mechanism extends to all persons extradited to Kyrgyzstan, irrespective of whether an application has been submitted to the Court or whether an interim measure has been indicated under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court.