The case originated in an application (no. 80104/13) against Montenegro lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by Mr Dan Laurentiu Tripcovici (“the first applicant”) and his mother, Mrs Armenuhi Tripcovici (“the second applicant”), both with dual Romanian and Italian nationality, on 8 July 2012.
The applicants were represented by Ms D.R. Debrezeni, a lawyer practising in Bucharest, Romania. The Montenegrin Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mrs V. Pavličić.
The applicants complained about the arbitrariness of the relevant court’s judgment. They also alleged that they had not had access to court and complained about an interference with their property rights.
On 17 December 2015 the above complaints were communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
Given that the applicants sent in their observations outside the set time-limit, the President of the Section decided, pursuant to Rule 38 § 1 of the Rules of Court, not to admit the belated observations to the file.
Notified under Article 36 § 1 of the Convention and Rule 44 § 1 (a) of their right to intervene in the present case, the Italian Government and the Romanian Government did not state any wish to do so.
On an unspecified date after 17 December 2015 the second applicant died. On 22 February 2016 the first applicant informed the Court that, as her son, he was “to succeed her in every respect”.
The applicants were born in 1949 and 1923 respectively and lived in Bucharest, where the first applicant still lives.
The applicants were co-owners of two adjacent plots of land in Montenegro.
On 13 June 2009, during a visit to the plots, the first applicant noticed a metal fence built partly on their property. The fence divided the two plots of land and made it impossible for them to access one plot from the other. It appears that the fence had been erected some time in February 2009.
On 15 July 2009 the applicants, who had legal representation, instituted civil proceedings for trespass (radi smetanja posjeda) against B.Ć., their neighbour.
On 27 June 2011 the Court of First Instance (Osnovni sud) in Kotor ruled in favour of the applicants and ordered B.Ć. to remove the fence and pay the applicants 1,435 euros (EUR) in respect of legal costs. The court was satisfied that the applicants had lodged their claim in time, given that the deadline for initiating proceedings was 30 days from the day on which they had noticed the trespass, taking into account that 13 and 14 July were national holidays. In doing so the court relied on section 77 of Property Act (see paragraph 14 below).
On 20 December 2011 the High Court (Viši sud) in Podgorica, ruling on an appeal lodged by B.Ć., quashed the previous judgment and rejected the applicants’ claim (tužba se odbacuje) as submitted out of time. The court held that 13 and 14 July were indeed national holidays when the courts did not sit. It considered, however, that the 30-day period within which the applicants could institute proceedings was mandatory “[in which case] there could be no shifting of the time-limit when its last day fell on a day when the courts [did] not sit”. The time-limit had therefore expired on 13 July 2009, and the applicants had not filed their claim until 15 July 2009.
Section 77 provided that an action for trespass (spor zbog smetanja državine) should be lodged within 30 days of the date on which the trespass and the trespasser became known, and in any event within a year.
Section 126 provides that if a third party (treće lice) disturbs the owner of a certain property without justification – not by taking the property away but in some other manner – the owner can bring an action and seek cessation of the disturbance. Pursuant to section 129 the right to bring this action does not become time-barred.
Section 404 § 1 has the same wording as section 77 of the previous Act.
Section 422 provides that all proceedings initiated before the Act entered into force must be terminated pursuant to the provisions which were in force at the time when the proceedings began, unless differently provided by the Act.
The 2009 Act entered into force on 21 March 2009 and thereby repealed the previous Act.
Section 108 provides that time-limits are calculated in days, months and years. If the time-limit is to be counted in days, the period starts running not on the day when the impugned event occurs but on the next day. It also provides that if the last day of the time-limit falls on a national holiday or a Sunday or some other day when the courts do not work, the time-limit expires on the first working day thereafter.
Section 109 (1) provides that when a submission has to be lodged by a certain deadline (vezan za rok) it is to be considered as submitted in time if it was lodged with a competent court before the relevant time-limit expired.
Sections 112 and 113, taken together, set out the conditions for procedural reinstatement (povraćaj u pređašnje stanje). In particular, if a party to the proceedings failed to meet the deadline to undertake a certain action in the proceedings and therefore lost the right thereto, the court must allow that party, at his/her own request, to undertake that action at a later date (naknadno) if it considers that there were justifiable reasons for the failure to act which could not have been foreseen or avoided.
Section 421 sets out the details as to when proceedings can be reopened (ponavljanje postupka).
Section 440 provides that the courts will always pay particular attention to the need to resolve trespass claims as a matter of urgency, depending on the nature of each case.
Section 443 provides that no appeal on points of law is allowed against civil courts’ decisions on trespass.
On 21 April 2015 the High Court in Podgorica (Gž. br. 4622/14) upheld a decision of the Court of First Instance (P. br. 2266/13) which found that an appellant’s employment-related claim – which had been filed one day after the Easter holidays – had been filed belatedly, since the fifteen-day time-limit had expired on the preceding Saturday, regardless of the fact that Saturday was a non-working day for the courts.
On 20 October 2015 the Court of First Instance in Berane (P. br. 1348/15) rejected as belated an appellant’s claim which had been filed nine days after the expiration of the 30-day statutory time-limit. On 10 February 2016 the High Court in Bijelo Polje upheld this decision (Gž. br. 145/16).