The case originated in an application (no. 8284/07) against Georgia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (the Convention) by a Georgian national, Mr Irakli Batiashvili (the applicant), on 31 January 2007.
The applicant was represented before the Court by Mr I. Baratashvili, a lawyer practicing in Tbilisi; lawyers of a Tbilisi-based non-governmental organisation called “Article 42 of the Constitution” – most recently Mr N. Legashvili; and Mr P. Leach, Mr B. Bowring, and Ms J. Evans of the European Human Rights Advocacy Centre (EHRAC). The Georgian Government (the Government) were represented by their successive Agents, most recently Mr L. Meskhoradze of the Ministry of Justice.
The applicant, relying on Article 5 § 3 of the Convention, alleged that the domestic authorities had failed to justify his detention pending trial. The applicant also complained under Article 5 § 4 about the absence of oral hearings at appellate level, and his limited access to the case material. Relying on Article 6 § 2 of the Convention, the applicant further complained that the presumption of his innocence had been violated by the government’s dissemination of evidence that had been tampered with to the media.
On 16 January 2008 notice of the application was given to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1961 and lives in Tbilisi.
During the 1992-93 armed conflict in Abkhazia, Georgia, as a result of which Georgia lost de facto control over a large part of that region, a valley adjacent to the river Kodori known as “the Kodori Gorge” was defended by a local paramilitary group Monadire (“the armed group”) run by Mr E.K. Following a ceasefire agreement concluded in 1994, the Kodori Gorge remained under the control of the central government and E.K. was appointed as the President’s Envoy to the area, while retaining his status as the leader of the armed group. The armed group continued to be active in the Kodori Gorge after the ceasefire with the aim of ensuring the safety in the area and was granted the status of a battalion of the Georgian military forces by the Ministry of Defence.
On 27 May 2005 the Ministry of Defence ordered the dissolution of the armed group but the latter refused to comply with the order.
On 22 July 2006 E.K. gave a televised address declaring the armed group’s insubordination in relation to the central government which, according to him, was planning to forcibly take control of the Kodori Gorge on 27 July 2006. He warned that the situation could descend into a civil war.
On 22 July 2006 a preliminary investigation was opened at the Special Operative Department of the Ministry of the Interior in respect of a criminal case no. 090060756. The document on the opening of the preliminary investigation indicated that it had concerned “the creation and leadership of an illegal armed group, and the illegal purchase, storage and carrying of firearms” without elaborating on the grounds for opening the investigation, or persons identified as suspects.
On 23 July 2006 the investigating authorities obtained a judicial order permitting the interception and recording of E.K.’s telephone calls. As a result, it was revealed that following his declaration of insubordination, he had been in contact with the applicant, an opposition figure at the time and a former Chairman of the Information-Intelligence Service, who had known E.K. from his role in the 1992-93 armed conflict and the armed group’s subsequent activities in the region. In those telephone conversations the two discussed E.K.’s cause, his further plans (including the need to make another public statement calling on the State armed forces not to use arms on the insurgents), statements made by various opposition politicians, as well as the applicant’s statements to the media outlets.
On 25 and 26 July 2006 the Ministry of the Interior launched a police operation and took control of the Kodori Gorge. Two policemen were injured and one civilian died during the operation. E.K. and members of the armed group went into hiding.
E.K.’s declaration of insubordination and the events in the Kodori Gorge attracted wide media coverage.
On 23 July 2006 the applicant gave an interview to a private television channel Rustavi 2 (Rustavi 2) in relation to the events in the Kodori Gorge. He noted that fighters who had “heroically defended the Kodori Gorge” together with E.K. in the 1992-93 armed conflict were now gathering to back E.K.’s “just protest” against the political situation in the country. The applicant warned against the government’s alleged plan to quell the protest by force, noting that any such effort would have devastating results for the country, as “blood [would] be spilt amongst brothers”. The applicant stated that the government had to handle the situation with prudence and caution, and to abstain from “labelling the people involved in the protest as criminals and traitors”, as they were in fact “heroes who had defended their homeland [in the past]”.
At 7 p.m. on 25 July 2006 the applicant commented on the Kodori Gorge events on a private television channel, Imedi, and stated, among other things, that “if E.K. is a traitor and G.B. [a member of the ruling political party at the time] is a patriot then this country is doomed ...” The applicant also noted in another interview given to the same television channel an hour later that he had been receiving regular updates from E.K. regarding the tense situation in the region.
At 9 p.m. on 25 July 2006 Rustavi 2 broadcast a recording of a telephone conversation between E.K. and the applicant. According to the journalist, the recording had been provided to the television channel by the Ministry of the Interior. The recording as aired by Rustavi 2 lasted one minute and forty-four seconds, and contained the following dialogue:
At 11 p.m. on the same evening the applicant denounced the recording on the Imedi television channel, claiming that it had been manipulated to omit the part where E.K. had clearly refused to accept help from K., and that such a manipulation was aimed at conveying the impression that K. and his forces were to be involved alongside E.K. The applicant added that E.K. had not gone into hiding and the government was misleading the population.
On 25 July 2006, while commenting on the events at the Kodori Gorge on Rustavi 2, Mr M.M., Deputy Chairman of the Parliament of Georgia, stated the following:
“If the people have still not understood what this is about, let me repeat that this is a plan that has been elaborated and financed outside our Georgian borders by supporters of the previous government who are opposed to our leadership, one of whom is Batiashvili ...”
On the same evening of 25 July 2006 Mr G.T., the Chairman of the Defence and Security Committee of the Parliament of Georgia, commented on the events at the Kodori Gorge on Rustavi 2 and, among other things, stated the following:
“I understand that Batiashvili wants to justify himself one way or another, but I hope that we will have enough proof for him to be sent to justify himself elsewhere. It is more than a little surprising that he refers to others’ lack of conscience, when he supported [the former President] and the forces which got us into the situation we are in today ... He was indeed moving around with those so-called partisans who, at the time, were involved in smuggling and profited from it. This gentleman and the others made money alongside E.K. Therefore, obviously no ... justification he offers will be accepted. Just how well the armed group led by E.K. protected Georgia’s interests in the valley is illustrated by the statement he made in the recording. He says that, like before, he is friends with and accepts help from our enemies. ... [That] is therefore, I believe, the evidence with which we proved everything we have said in the last few days. There is no longer any doubt, this is treason ... the betrayal of Georgia we were talking about yesterday, and he will be punished accordingly. I believe that first and foremost we must recognise the need for our government to stand firm and stick to its principles ... Anyone who – and I am no longer talking about Batiashvili who is an obvious enemy of the State, but [our] opposition whose position vis-à-vis E.K. is still not entirely clear – ... lay all responsibility at the ruling party’s door ... should be aware that every politician has his responsibilities and will be dealt with accordingly.”
On 26 July 2006 the applicant was questioned by an investigator of the Ministry of the Interior on the premises of the Chief Prosecutor’s Office as a witness in relation to the criminal case no. 090060756 (see paragraph 9 above). Among other things, the applicant was asked about his knowledge of E.K.’s intentions, whether he had promised to support E.K. through soliciting political and popular support, as well as whether by telling E.K. to “be strong”, as heard in the audio recording of their telephone conversation (see paragraph 15 above), the applicant had encouraged E.K. to keep up the insubordination. The applicant answered that from a legal perspective, E.K. and the group did not have a right to take up arms against the Government, but reiterated their role in defending the region, the importance of resolving the differences through peaceful means, and that he had only expressed his moral support to the people of the region. He noted that several political parties had expressed their adequate position on the matter, but he did not remember having solicited their future support. The applicant also noted that the telephone conversation aired by Rustavi 2 on 25 July 2006 had been edited to omit the part where E.K. had refused to accept K.’s help.
On the same day the applicant made several statements in the media. He stated he had had frequent telephone conversations with E.K., and that he could help defuse the situation if he were to be sent to the Kodori Gorge. He criticised the government for having chosen to resolve the matter with force and warned against a further escalation of the situation.
In the evening of 26 July 2006 the applicant was interviewed by N.T., a journalist of Rustavi 2, as part of an evening programme. The relevant part of the interview went as follows:
“[N.T.]: ...[if] I am not mistaken, there is a phrase said by you “be strong, be strong” in that telephone conversation concerning [K.’s] military aid which you say was cut...
[The applicant]: First of all, I would like to tell you, that as a television company with which I believe I cooperate and do not refuse to give an interview, you should not have accepted such a shamelessly mutilated recording without any criticism, where it was obvious that it had been edited...
...
[N.T.]: I will answer that, if you allow. In any civilised country, when public interest exists, and you will probably agree that a military rebellion deserves such public interest, any journalist is sometimes led to give up on verifying objectivity in favour of expeditiousness, which has happened in this case and then you were given [time] as part of the Kurieri programme, and I am not planning to justify myself now regarding that.
[The applicant]: I understand...”
The criminal case file in respect of the applicant contained an official transcript of the intercepted telephone conversation between the applicant and E.K. on 23 July 2006 prepared by the Ministry of the Interior on 29 July 2006. It is unclear when the applicant was granted access to the document in question. According to the transcript, the telephone conversation between the applicant and E.K. lasted one minute and fortyfour seconds and, in so far as relevant, went as follows [the parts of the conversation that had not been included in the recording as aired by Rustavi 2 (see paragraph 15 above) are italicised]:
On 1 August 2006 Mr G.T., Chairman of the Defence and Security Committee of the Parliament of Georgia made the following statement at a press conference regarding the applicant which was aired live on Rustavi 2:
“We have witnessed further evidence presented by the Prosecutor’s Office in relation to the Batiashvili case and I think you have all seen that Mr Irakli Batiashvili was giving advice to [E.K.]. This advice was designed to help the latter with achieving a successful conclusion to the rebellion. ... I think naturally we did not have any questions regarding the guilt of this person [the applicant], and I think if anyone did have [questions], they should no longer have such questions. Accordingly, if there had been a need for ‘lustration’ of those in our political opposition, I think they effectively ‘lustrated themselves’ when they unanimously declared this person to be illegally detained and a political prisoner while he was involved in treason, in the organisation of a rebellion against the State. By this [action] I think they finally revealed their views, their absolutely anti-governmental thinking and turned their backs on their homeland at a decisive moment, and I think society has answered them many times and that finally they will get this answer at the elections.”
On 27 July 2006 the investigating authorities obtained a judicial order authorising the retrieval of the call logs for the applicant’s incoming and outgoing telephone calls.
On 28 July 2006 E.K. was charged in absentia with high treason aimed at overthrowing the constitutional order by force.
On 29 July 2006 the applicant was arrested in relation to the criminal case no. 090060756 (see paragraph 9 above). He was charged with covering up the preparation of a crime, owing to his failure to inform the relevant authorities of the possible involvement of the Abkhaz separatist forces in the rebellion, and with aiding and abetting high treason aimed at overthrowing the constitutional order by force. The first charge concerning the applicant’s alleged failure to inform the relevant authorities of the possible involvement of the Abkhaz separatist forces in the rebellion was based solely on the applicant’s telephone conversation with E.K. as aired on Rustavi 2 on 25 July 2006 (see paragraph 15 above). As regards the second charge, namely aiding and abetting high treason, it was alleged that the applicant had provided intellectual support to E.K. by giving him instructions, advice, information, and the encouragement necessary to achieve his aims. According to the document containing the charges, the applicant further promised to create a favourable image of E.K. and his plans in public, and called E.K. a hero in one of his public speeches while calling on the government not to forcibly quell the rebellion in another speech. He further advised E.K. on his public speeches and image. The second charge was based on several recordings of telephone conversations between the applicant and E.K. during the period of 23-25 July 2006, the applicant’s speeches and comments broadcast by the media, E.K.’s speeches and other evidence.
On 29 July 2006 the investigator lodged an application before the Tbilisi City Court for the applicant’s pre-trial detention. Without specifying the exact date when the applicant came under suspicion, the investigator submitted that the criminal investigation no. 090060756 against E.K. and another person had revealed that the applicant had committed the crimes with which he had been charged. According to the investigator, it was necessary to place the applicant in detention owing to the particular seriousness of the charges, and that there were reasons to believe that, if released, the applicant would continue his criminal activities, impede the course of justice as the other persons implicated in the crimes in question were still at large, and abscond.
On 30 July 2006 the first-instance court ordered the applicant’s pretrial detention for two months. It reasoned that the seriousness of the charges against the applicant justified such a decision. Furthermore, noting the applicant’s televised speeches and telephone conversations with E.K., the court concluded that there existed a risk that the applicant would reoffend if he were to be released. The court further noted that there was a risk that the applicant would obstruct justice due to the fact that other suspects were still at large and the applicant could have contacted them, if he were to be released. Finally, the court noted, without elaborating any further, that there was a risk of the applicant absconding. The court also noted that the relevant national legislation was in compliance with the Convention.
On 1 August 2006 the applicant appealed, arguing that the risks cited by the first-instance court to justify his pre-trial detention had been unsubstantiated. He noted that the court had failed to consider the fact that he had voluntarily appeared before the investigating authorities upon being summoned, and had a family, a permanent residence, and a job at a university.
On 3 August 2006 the Tbilisi Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal of 1 August 2006 in a reasoned decision. It endorsed the reasoning of the lower court (see paragraph 28 above) and added that the particular public threat posed by the actions ascribed to the applicant, the potentially larger circle of accomplices, the fact that the other identified suspects were still at large, the seriousness of the charges and the severity of the potential sentence all reinforced the suspicion that the applicant would abscond and obstruct justice. The court further noted that considering the swift arrest of the applicant, he had not had the opportunity to interfere with the course of the criminal investigation or tamper with the evidence, and his detention was in order to prevent such a risk from materialising. Accordingly, the fact that the applicant had voluntarily appeared before the investigating authorities before he had been charged could not have served as a sufficient reason for not detaining him pending the outcome of the criminal investigation.
On 29 July 2006 an investigator made a report on the applicant’s familiarising himself with the evidence available in the criminal case file. The report was signed by the applicant’s lawyer and the applicant with a handwritten note that the criminal case file was missing the evidence indicated in the statement outlining the suspicion against him. On 31 July 2006 the applicant’s lawyer was informed about the possibility to get acquainted with the case file at the Ministry of the Interior. On 4 August 2006 the investigator attempted to reach the applicant’s lawyer at the latter’s cell phone without success. On 12 August 2006 the applicant’s lawyer familiarised himself with the criminal case file, including transcripts of various telephone conversations, as confirmed by his signature on the relevant document. The lawyer remarked that the file had not contained a recording of the applicant’s interview given to a Russian television channel, and audio recordings of the applicant’s telephone conversations with E.K. On 15 August 2006 the applicant’s lawyer familiarised himself with the recordings of the telephone conversations in question. On 21 August 2006 the applicant’s lawyer made a complete photocopy of the criminal case file, as confirmed by his signature.
On 22 September 2006 the prosecutor requested an extension of the applicant’s pre-trial detention by one month, noting that a number of witnesses, including E.K.’s brother, had yet to be questioned and the investigation to be finalised.
On 22 September 2006 the Tbilisi City Court held an oral hearing in the presence of the parties and extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention by one month. It reasoned that the case being particularly complex and the investigation being in an active phase, a number of investigative actions such as the questioning of E.K.’s brother and persons identified from the applicant’s phone call logs had not yet been carried out. Furthermore, three out of four charged persons remained at large. Therefore, the reasons to keep the applicant in pre-trial detention persisted.
On 24 September 2006 the applicant appealed against the extension of his pre-trial detention. He submitted that the case materials did not contain cassettes with the recordings of the telephone conversations or the relevant material televised in the media and used as a basis for his charges. Furthermore, he argued that the second charge ought to be dropped as the transcript of the relevant telephone conversation showed that E.K. had refused any help from separatist forces. The applicant further argued that it was unclear why the witnesses had not yet been questioned. Furthermore, E.K.’s brother had been questioned on 11 August 2006, yet no questions had been put to him regarding the applicant’s case. He suggested the investigating and prosecuting authorities were stalling the investigation to keep him detained as long as possible. Furthermore, the applicant noted that the need to finalise the case could not have served as a ground for extending his pre-trial detention.
On 27 September 2006 the Tbilisi Court of Appeal upheld the lower court’s decision in a written procedure. According to the court, the applicant’s arguments regarding the persistence of the grounds justifying his pre-trial detention had been duly addressed by the lower court, and no new circumstances justifying the alteration of the preventive measure had emerged. It further noted that the complexity of the case was a ground set out in Article 162 § 3 that could justify the extension of pre-trial detention (see paragraph 47 below). The court reasoned that in addition to the grounds noted by the lower court, the complexity of the case made it difficult to conclude the investigation within the initial pre-trial detention period, and justified, in the absence of arbitrary delays on the part of the investigative authorities, the need for additional time to finish the investigation and implement certain investigative measures, draw up the indictment and send the case for trial.
On 23 October 2006 the investigator applied to the Tbilisi City Court for a second extension of the applicant’s pre-trial detention for one month. He pointed out that a number of persons identified from the applicant’s phone call logs were still to be questioned, the indictment had to be drawn up, and the case was to be sent firstly to the prosecutor and then to the trial court.
On 26 October 2006 the Tbilisi City Court held an oral hearing in the presence of the parties and, agreeing with the investigator’s arguments concerning the need to finalise the investigation, including in respect of persons possibly connected to the applicant and the risk of the obstruction of justice, delivered a decision to extend the applicant’s detention by another month.
The applicant appealed, arguing that the investigating authorities had failed to demonstrate why it had been impossible since 29 July 2006 to determine with precision the identity of the relevant witnesses and to question them, and querying which calls in his call logs had been suspicious. Furthermore, the need to finalise the indictment and send the criminal case to the prosecutor did not figure as one of the legitimate grounds for continuing pre-trial detention either in domestic law or the Convention. Nor was the complex nature of a case such a ground. Finally, the court’s conclusion that the risk of the applicant absconding and obstructing justice “was not excluded” had not been based on any reasoned arguments or evidence, especially considering the applicant’s voluntary cooperation with the investigating authorities.
On 1 November 2006, the Tbilisi Court of Appeal examined the applicant’s appeal in a written procedure and upheld the lower court’s findings. The appellate court noted that the criminal case no. 090060756 concerned the applicant “and other individuals”. The court reasoned that considering the particular complexity of the case and the investigative measures that remained to be carried out, and in the absence of arbitrary delays, extra time was objectively necessary for the authorities to conclude the investigation. The appellate court further reasoned, regarding the possible use of non-custodial measures of restraint, that factors such as the factual circumstances of the case, the nature of the charges, the severity of the penalty and the existence of co-perpetrators that needed to be identified, in their totality created a reasonable doubt that, without the use of pre-trial detention, the applicant would abscond, tamper with the evidence, and reoffend. The court further noted that in accordance with the domestic legislation on the matter (see paragraph 48 below) it was within an appellate court’s discretion to dispense with an oral hearing.
On 24 November 2006, the indictment which reproduced the charges of 29 July 2006 (see paragraph 26 above) was approved by a prosecutor as part of a criminal case no. 090061129 and the applicant was committed for trial in the Tbilisi City Court. The indictment did not provide an explanation as to the change of the criminal case number.
On 18 September 2006 the applicant lodged a complaint with the Chief Prosecutor’s Office regarding the tampering with evidence and requested that a criminal investigation be opened into the matter. He submitted that the recording of the telephone conversation between him and E.K. aired on Rustavi 2 had been disseminated by government authorities in a manipulated form to conceal the part where E.K. had refused to accept K.’s offer. It was aimed at creating an impression that the applicant had been complicit in a crime, and had failed to report K.’s involvement in the rebellion.
On 2 October 2006 the Chief Prosecutor’s Office rejected the applicant’s application, noting the absence of a crime. It indicated that the criminal case file had contained a full transcript of the telephone conversation in question and it appeared that the television company had shortened the conversation on their own initiative, given the limited airtime available.
On 14 February 2007, while the criminal proceedings against the applicant were pending before the first-instance court, the applicant requested that N.T., the former director of the Rustavi 2 channel, be questioned as a witness. The applicant referred to N.T.’s statement on 26 July 2006 stating that sometimes journalists have to prioritise delivering information without delay over verifying the objectivity of such information (see paragraph 21 above) and submitted that N.T. would have confirmed before the court that the recording of the applicant’s telephone conversation with E.K. had been given to the media outlet in question in an already manipulated form, with the parts of the conversation where E.K. had refused to agree to the involvement of Abkhaz separatist forces being muted. The court granted the applicant’s request to question N.T. as a witness.
On 3 May 2007 the applicant requested to question K.K., the deputy head of Rustavi 2’s Information Service instead of N.T., who had apparently moved to the US and who it was impossible to locate. The prosecutor moved to reject the application as being irrelevant since the relevant charge concerning the failure to report a crime (see paragraph 26 above) had since been dropped, without specifying the date when this happened. The firstinstance court rejected the applicant’s request as being aimed at unduly delaying the proceedings.
As it appears from the parties’ submissions, the applicant was found guilty by the court of first instance and the appellate court on 23 May and 13 September 2007 respectively. However, on 28 January 2008 the Supreme Court discontinued its consideration of an appeal on points of law lodged by the applicant in view of an earlier presidential pardon, granted on an unspecified date.
The relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CCP) concerning pre-trial detention as they stood at the relevant time are summarised in the cases of Patsuria v. Georgia (no. 30779/04, § 32, 6 November 2007) and Giorgi Nikolaishvili v. Georgia (no. 37048/04, §§ 35 and 36, 13 January 2009).
Article 162 § 3 of the CCP provided that the initial period of detention “pending investigation” of two months could be extended on a maximum of two occasions, each time by one month, based on, among other grounds, the complexity of the case.
Article 243 § 10 of the CCP, in force at the material time, authorised an appellate court to dispense with an oral hearing in proceedings concerning the review of measures of restraint applied at the preliminary investigation stage.
Article 18 of the Civil Code, as it stood at the relevant time and in so far as relevant, provided: