The case originated in an application (no. 33825/10) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Mr Sergey Vladimirovich Zhulin (“the applicant”), on 14 May 2010.
The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
On 17 January 2012 the application was communicated to the Government.
On 13 April 2012 the Government submitted a unilateral declaration inviting the Court to strike out the application. They acknowledged that a part of the applicant’s detention did not comply with the requirements of Article 3 of the Convention and offered to pay a sum of money. They further submitted that the complaints about the remaining period of the detention were inadmissible.
On 5 March 2013 the Court decided not to accept the unilateral declaration as it did not cover the entire period of the applicant’s detention. It invited the Government to submit observations on the admissibility and the merits of the case.
The applicant was born in 1971 and lives in Nizhniy Novgorod.
THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE CASE
On 10 December 2008 the applicant was charged with an aggravated fraud and remanded in custody.
On 4 February 2010 the Arzamas Town Court of the Nizhniy Novgorod Region found the applicant guilty and sentenced him to five years and six months’ imprisonment and a fine. The applicant appealed, complaining about a number of procedural irregularities and allegedly erroneous assessment of the evidence.
On 9 April 2010 the Nizhniy Novgorod Regional Court upheld the applicant’s conviction, reducing the sentence by one month.
During several periods between 10 December 2008 and 6 February 2010 the applicant was held in the temporary detention centre (IVS) of Arzamas in the Nizhniy Novgorod Region. He was regularly taken out of that facility either to take part in the trial or to undergo medical treatment in a prison hospital.
The conditions of the applicant’s detention in IVS of Arzamas were characterised by the following elements: the applicant’s cell 6 in the basement measured 5.3 sq. m and accommodated two inmates, there was no window, table or bench, the toilet was not seaprated from the rest of the cell by a partition. In addition, no outdoor exercise was available to the detainees.
The applicant brought an action in connection with poor conditions of detention in IVS of Arzamas. By the judgment of 18 February 2010, the Arzamas Town Court found that the applicant had been detained in an overcrowded cell located in the basement that had no windows. The applicant was not taken outdoors. It held that the conditions of the applicant’s detention during that period had fallen short of the requirements of Russian law.