The case originated in an application (no. 32303/13) against the Republic of Slovenia lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Slovenian private institute, Mirovni Inštitut (“the applicant institute”), on 13 May 2013.
The applicant institute was represented by Ms N. Šorli and Mr T. Kovačič, lawyers practising in Ljubljana. The Slovenian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr L. Bembič, State Attorney.
The applicant institute alleged that the lack of reasoning in a decision of the Administrative Court and the absence of an oral hearing before it amounted to a violation of the right to a fair trial under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 30 May 2016 the complaint concerning Article 6 was communicated to the Government and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The applicant institute is a private institute that carries out research in the field of social sciences. Its registered office is in Ljubljana.
In June 2003, the Ministry of Education, Science and Sport (hereinafter “the Ministry”) made two calls for tenders for the purpose of making awards for scientific research projects; one call was directed at private entities and the other at public research organisations. The Ministry announced that in 2004 it would finance 100,000 research hours, which were estimated to amount to 750,000,000 Slovenian tolars (SIT – approximately 3,130,000 euros (EUR)). The research projects were to be evaluated under the Rules on Quality Assessment and Funding of the Public Research Organisation Programme. The applicant institute submitted a tender for research in the field of social sciences.
Subsequently, the Ministry seems to have joined the proceedings for the two tenders, but no formal decision regarding the joinder appears to have been made. On 17 February 2004 the Ministry decided that the applicant institute would not be awarded any funding.
The applicant institute applied to the Administrative Court of the Republic of Slovenia (“the Administrative Court”), seeking the setting aside of the Ministry’s decision. The action was granted by a decision of 4 April 2007 and the case was remitted to the Ministry for reconsideration.
On 19 October 2009 the applicant institute lodged another action before the Administrative Court on account of the Ministry’s failure to adopt a decision within the prescribed time-limit.
On 30 March 2010 the Ministry again decided that the applicant institute would not be awarded any funding. It explained that the institute’s research programme had been ranked fifth among the research programmes in the field of political sciences and that only four programmes in that group would receive funding. The Ministry pointed out that it was presumed that no conflict of interests existed, even when evaluators worked in the same institution whose tenders they were evaluating and that this was a common European practice. It was further noted that evaluators had signed a declaration of confidentiality and an undertaking to withdraw in the event that a conflict of interests was found.
In order to reflect the fact that the Ministry had adopted the decision of 30 March 2010, the applicant institute supplemented its action of 19 October 2009, which it had originally lodged on account of the Ministry’s failure to adopt a decision (see paragraph 9 above), with a request that the Ministry’s decision be set aside. It further urged the Administrative Court to decide that it would be awarded funding. It complained that the Ministry had joined the proceedings that had initially been intended for consideration of tenders from private research organisations to the proceedings for consideration of tenders from public research organisations, without issuing a formal decision to that effect. It also complained of errors in the evaluation of the competing programmes, because not all of the criteria specified in the Rules on Quality Assessment and Funding of the Public Research Organisation Programme had been taken into account. It argued, inter alia, that the evaluation procedure had been unfair because some of the evaluators had been biased, as they had been evaluating research programmes which were competing with the very programmes in which they themselves participated. This provoked a distortion of the results of the procedure, as shown by the fact that only those research programmes in which the evaluators were leaders or members of research teams obtained financing. The applicant institute expressly requested a hearing at which witnesses could be heard with regard to the alleged procedural errors in the evaluation of the programmes. Additionally, it submitted a letter of 2 December 2003 which one of the witnesses, K., had sent to the Minister of Education, Science and Sport and several other addressees. In the letter K. notified them of problems he had detected in the tender proceedings in which he had participated as an evaluator.
After the parties had exchanged a number of written submissions, the Administrative Court, without holding a hearing, dismissed the action. In its decision of 2 February 2011 the court gave an extensive account of the proceedings before the Ministry and the submissions of both parties. The reasons for the decision were given on a single page. Invoking section 71(2) of the Administrative Dispute Act (Zakon o upravnem sporu – hereinafter “the ADA”, see paragraph 23 below), the Administrative Court chiefly referred to the submissions of the Ministry. It considered, among other things, that the Ministry had not acted unlawfully in joining the proceedings. It accepted the Ministry’s submission that its decision had been dictated by the nature of the research and infrastructural programmes, taking into account the guidelines of the National Research and Development Programme. The court also pointed out that the procedural rules for the evaluation of research programmes adopted by the National Scientific and Research Council clearly defined the stages of the evaluation procedure, the participants in it and their tasks. Regarding the alleged conflict of interests, the court stated that it agreed with the Ministry as to why no such conflict existed and cited section 71(2) of the ADA (see paragraph 23 below). As to the alleged errors in the evaluation of the competing programmes, the court merely disagreed with the applicant institute that not all criteria had been taken into account and again cited section 71(2) of the ADA.
No reasons were given for not holding a hearing. None of the evidence relied on by the applicant institute in their appeal (see paragraph 11 above) was acknowledged or referred to in the court’s reasoning.
On 31 March 2011 the applicant institute lodged an appeal on points of law. It complained that the Administrative Court had not held a hearing even though the facts of the case had been contested and the applicant institute had explicitly requested a hearing at which witnesses could be heard. It also argued that the Administrative Court had failed to address its allegations that errors had been made in the evaluation procedure, and complained that insufficient reasoning had been given for the decision.
On 1 September 2011 the Supreme Court rejected the appeal as inadmissible. No reasons were given in its decision on the merits of the applicant institute’s complaints.
The applicant institute then lodged a constitutional complaint, arguing, among other things, that the decisions of the Ministry and the domestic court had been arbitrary and that the courts had failed to address its allegations that errors had been made in the evaluation procedure. It reiterated that the witnesses it had proposed had not been heard and that no hearing had been held.
On 19 November 2012 the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant institute’s complaint, finding that it did not concern an important constitutional question or entail a violation of human rights with serious consequences for the applicant institute.
Section 1 of the Administrative Disputes Act (“the ADA”) reads:
“In an administrative dispute against decisions and actions of State authorities, local authorities and holders of positions of public authority, the rights and legal interests of individuals and organisations will be protected in accordance with the methods and procedures laid down in this Act, unless any other form of due process is provided for by the law for a particular matter ...”
Section 2 of the ADA reads:
“In an administrative dispute the Administrative Court rules on the legality of final administrative decisions that interfere with the legal status of the complainant ...”
Section 83 of the ADA, as it stood at the material time, read as follows:
“(1)  A judgment of a first-instance court may be challenged by an appeal on points of law, which shall be lodged within thirty days of the service of the judgment on the party.
(2)  The appeal on points of law is admissible if:
the value of the contested part of the final administrative act or final ruling, when the court took a decision on merits, in matters where the right or obligation of a party is expressed in monetary terms, exceeds EUR 20,000;
it concerns an important legal question or if the ruling of the court of first instance deviates from the case-law of the Supreme Court with regard to a legal issue that is essential for the decision, or if there is no uniform position concerning this legal issue in the case-law of the court of first instance and the Supreme Court has not yet adjudicated on the matter;
the impugned decision has serious consequences for the party;
...”
Section 85 of the ADA reads:
“(1) An appeal on points of law can be lodged:
on account of a significant violation of the administrative dispute procedure as described in subsections (2) and (3) of section 75 of this Act;
on account of errors in substantive law.
(2) An appeal on points of law cannot be lodged on account of erroneous or incomplete establishment of the facts of the case.
...”
Section 20 of the ADA reads:
“(1) The Administrative Court assesses or examines the facts within the limits of the complainant’s submissions.
(2) The Administrative Court is not bound by the evidence adduced by the parties to the proceedings and may examine all evidence in so far as it is relevant for clarification of the matter and may contribute to the establishment of a legal and correct decision.
...”
Section 59 of the ADA reads:
“(1)  The Administrative Court may issue a decision without holding a hearing if the facts on which the administrative decision is based are uncontested.
(2)  Regardless of the provision in subsection (1) above, the court may also decide without holding a hearing in the following circumstances:
- if, on the basis of the action, the impugned legal act and the administrative case files, it is apparent that it is necessary to grant the complainant’s request;
- if the facts are contested by the parties, but new facts and evidence submitted by the parties in their action before the Administrative Court are inadmissible (in accordance with section 52 of the ADA) or not relevant for the decision;
- if the court has already decided on a dispute between the same parties on the same factual and legal basis.
(3) Regardless of subsection (1), the court shall decide at a hearing if:
- [it concerns] a person who should have participated in the administrative proceedings as party or a third party and it is not a case provided for in subsection (2) of section 229 of the Administrative Procedure Act or a substantially identical provision of another statute governing the procedure of issuing the administrative act;
- in the administrative proceedings a party was not able to make a statement on the facts relevant for the contested decision.
...”
Section 71 of the ADA reads:
“...
(2) The Administrative Court does not have to give reasons for a decision if it agrees with the reasoning of the contested administrative decision and finds so in its own judgment.
...”
Section 55b(2) of the Constitutional Court Act reads as follows:
“(2) A constitutional complaint shall be accepted for consideration:
- if there is a violation of human rights or fundamental freedoms which has serious consequences for the complainant;
or
- if it concerns a constitutional question the importance of which exceeds that of the particular case in issue.”