The case originated in an application (no. 4307/04) against the Republic of Azerbaijan lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by an Azerbaijani national, Mrs Sheyda Khalil qizi Nasibova (Şeyda Xəlil qızı Nəsibova – “the applicant”), on 19 December 2003.
The applicant was represented by Mr I. Aliyev and Mrs G. Guliyeva, lawyers practising in . The Azerbaijani Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr C. Asgarov.
The applicant alleged that the significant delays in the state registration of the public association of which she was a founder amounted to a violation of her right to freedom of association, that the domestic proceedings were unfair, that the domestic courts were not independent and impartial, and that the domestic remedies were not effective in lawsuits filed by public associations against the Ministry of Justice of Azerbaijan.
On 7 February 2006 the President of the Chamber decided to give notice of the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, the Court decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
The applicant was born in 1973 and lives in .
The applicant was a co-founder and director of a public association named “The Journalist Inquiry Centre” (“Jurnalist Araşdırmaları Mərkəzi” İctimai Birliyi), established on 15 July 2001. This was a non-profit organisation aimed at promoting the profession of a journalist and freedom of mass media in .
On 12 September 2001 the association's founders filed a request for its state registration with the Ministry of Justice (hereinafter also referred to as the “Ministry”), the government authority responsible for the state registration of legal entities. In accordance with the domestic law, a non-governmental organisation acquired the status of a legal entity only upon its state registration by the Ministry.
According to the Government, by a letter of 11 October 2001 the Head of the Department for State Registration of Legal Entities of the Ministry of Justice replied to the applicant that the association's charter contained a number of deficiencies and requested the founders to revise the charter accordingly (the Government submitted a copy of this letter). According to the applicant, the founders did not receive such a letter and, in fact, did not receive any formal reply from the Ministry for more than one year and four months.
In the meantime, the founders made certain amendments to the association's charter. On 12 September 2002 they re-submitted their registration request together with the new version of the association's charter. In the cover letter for this request, the applicant noted that the founders had made an original request one year earlier but, despite two follow-up letters of 25 September and 2 November 2001 and a meeting with the Ministry official, they had not received any formal reply from the Ministry.
In January 2003 the applicant filed a lawsuit against the Ministry with the Yasamal District Court, complaining of the Ministry's failure to take any action within the ten-day time-limit specified by law.
While the examination of the lawsuit was pending, on 27 January 2003 the Ministry returned the registration documents to the applicant “without taking any action”, i.e. without issuing a state registration certificate or an official refusal to register the association. In the cover letter, the Ministry noted that the association's charter did not comply with Articles 3.1 and 10.3 of the Law on Non-Governmental Organisations. Specifically, the charter did not provide for the internal procedure to challenge a decision to terminate membership in the association. Moreover, the official name of the association allegedly did not mention its organisational legal form. It appears that the Ministry's letter of 27 January 2003 referred to the deficiencies in the association's original charter, although these deficiencies had already been rectified in the revised version of the charter submitted to the Ministry on 12 September 2002.
On 10 February 2003 the Yasamal District Court dismissed the applicant's claim, finding nothing unlawful in the actions of the Ministry. The court found that the association's charter had not been drafted in accordance with the requirements of the Law on Non-Governmental Organisations and, therefore, the Ministry's refusal to register the association had been lawful.
The applicant appealed. On 24 June 2003 the Court of Appeal upheld the first instance court's judgment. On 16 October 2003 the Supreme Court upheld the Court of Appeal's decision.
Article 58.  Right to association
“I.  Everyone has a right to freedom of association with others.
Everyone has the right to form any association, including political parties, trade unions or other public associations, or join existing associations. Free functioning of all associations shall be guaranteed. ...”
Article 47.  Charter of a legal entity
“47.1.  The charter of a legal entity approved by its founders is the legal entity's foundation document. ...
2.  The charter of a legal entity shall define the name, address, procedure for management of activities and procedure for liquidation of the legal entity. The charter of a non-commercial legal entity shall define the object and purpose of its activities. ...”
Article 48.  State registration of legal entities
“48.1.  A legal entity shall be subject to state registration by the relevant executive authority. ...
2.  A violation of the procedure of a legal entity's establishment or non-compliance of its charter with Article 47 of the present Code shall be the grounds for refusal to register the legal entity. ...”
Article 9.  Review of the application [for state registration]
“Upon receipt of an application for state registration from a legal entity or a branch or representative office of a foreign legal entity, the authority responsible for state registration shall:
–  accept the documents for review;
–  within ten days, issue to the applicant a state registration certificate or a written notification of the refusal to register; or
–  review the documents resubmitted after rectification of the breaches previously existing therein and, within five days, take a decision on state registration.”
Article 3.  Name and location of a non-governmental organisation
“3.1.  The name of a non-governmental organisation must mention its organisational legal form and nature of its activity. ...”
Article 10.  Members of public associations
“10.3.  The issue of acquiring and termination of membership in a public association shall be determined by its charter. Charter of a public association shall guarantee the right to lodge a complaint, within the association and in court, regarding termination of membership. ...”
Article 16.  State registration of non-governmental organisations
“16.1.  The state registration of non-governmental organisations shall be carried out by the relevant executive authority in accordance with the laws of the  on state registration of legal entities.
2.  Non-governmental organisations shall acquire the status of a legal entity only after passing the state registration.”
Article 17.  Refusal of state registration
“17.1.  Non-governmental organisations can be refused registration only if there is another organisation existing under the same name, or if the documents submitted for registration contradict the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan, this law and other laws of the , or contain false information.
2.  Decision on refusal of state registration shall be presented in writing to the representative of the non-governmental organisation, with indication of the grounds for refusal as well as the provisions and articles of the legislation breached upon preparation of the foundation documents.
3.  Refusal of registration shall not prevent the organisation from re-submitting its registration documents after rectification of the breaches.
4.  The decision on refusal of state registration may be challenged in court.”