The case originated in an application (no. 27516/04) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Moldovan national, Ms Larisa Panzari (“the applicant”), on 15 June 2004.
The applicant was represented by Mr T. Deli, a lawyer practising in Chişinău. The Moldovan Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr V. Grosu.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that the proceedings in her case were excessively long, that the court adopted incorrect decisions and that the Supreme Court of Justice accepted a cassation request lodged by the other party to the proceedings outside the legal time-limit.
The application was allocated to the Fourth Section of the Court. On 21 May 2007 the President of that Section decided to communicate the application to the Government. Under the provisions of Article 29 § 3 of the Convention, it was decided to examine the merits of the application at the same time as its admissibility.
On 4 November 2008 the Chamber delivered a judgment in which it unanimously declared the application partly admissible and held unanimously that there had been a violation of Articles 6 § 1 and 13 of the Convention concerning the length of proceedings.
On 6 April 2009, pursuant to a request by the applicant dated 22 January 2009, a panel of the Grand Chamber decided that the above-mentioned case be re-examined by one of the Court's Sections in a different composition. Subsequently, the application was allocated to the Third Section of the Court.
Judge Poalelungi, the judge elected in respect of , withdrew from sitting in the case (Rule 28 of the Rules of Court). On 22 April 2009, the Government, pursuant to Rule 29 § 1 (a), informed the Court that they were content to appoint in his stead another elected judge and left the choice of appointee to the President of the Chamber. On 16 June 2009, the President appointed Judge Fura to sit in the case.
The applicant was born in 1968 and lives in Chişinău.
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant worked as a carpet maker for Floare-Carpet SA, a company registered in Chişinău (“the employer”). On 29 November 1999 she was declared to be a person with second degree disabilities by a specialised medical commission, which recommended that the applicant should stop working as a carpet maker as her working conditions were damaging her health.
Having submitted the relevant certificate to her employer, on 30 December 1999 the applicant was dismissed from her job on the grounds that she was no longer able to work as a result of her invalidity. She disagreed with the reason for her dismissal, claiming that this was not a valid legal reason. She asked her employer to issue her with a record of employment (carnet de muncă) giving a different reason for her dismissal, a document which she would have to produce if she applied for another job. On 31 January 2000 the employer issued her with a record of employment, which she claims was in the old format, contrary to the law.
On 7 February 2000 the applicant initiated court proceedings against the employer, asking for a modification of the reason for her dismissal, the issuing of a new record of employment and the payment of her salary and compensation for the entire period during which she had not been issued with a new record of employment.
On 11 February 2000 the Botanica District Court left her action without examination. On 10 May 2000 the  quashed that decision and ordered the examination of her action.
On 15 June 2000 the Botanica District Court found against the applicant. On 15 November 2000 the  quashed that judgment and adopted a new one, partly admitting the applicant's claims and awarding her compensation. On 31 January 2001 the Court of Appeal quashed the judgments of the lower courts and ordered a full re-trial of the case.
On 31 March 2001 the Botanica District Court found for the applicant and awarded her compensation. On 9 September 2003 the Chişinău Court of Appeal partly quashed that judgment and adopted a new one, ordering the employer to issue the applicant with a new record of employment, and in addition to pay her compensation in the amount of 26,817 Moldovan lei (MDL) (1,755 euros (EUR) at the time).
On 7 November 2003 the employer lodged an appeal in cassation, asking the court to reject the applicant's claims. It also requested the court to accept its right to lodge the appeal despite having missed the 15-day time-limit established by law, because it had not participated at the court hearing of 9 September 2003 and had only been informed of the judgment by mail on 16 October 2003.
On 4 February 2004 the Supreme Court of Justice accepted the employer's appeal and quashed the lower courts' judgments, rejecting all of the applicant's claims. The court found that there was clear evidence of the applicant's refusal to take her record of employment on the day of her dismissal (30 December 1999), as well as of the fact that on 31 January 2000 she had taken her record of employment. The employer had therefore not been responsible for any delay in issuing her record of employment.
The relevant provisions of the new Code of Civil Procedure read:
“Article 192
(1)  Court actions shall be examined by the first-instance court within a reasonable time. The criteria for determining the reasonable length of the proceedings include: the complexity of the case, the conduct of the parties to the proceedings and the conduct of the court. The observance of the reasonable time requirement in examining cases shall be ensured by the court. In examining a specific case, the observance of the reasonable time requirement shall be verified by the higher courts when examining the case in the relevant form of appeal.
(2)  Court actions regarding ... work related claims ... shall be examined urgently and on a priority basis.”
“Article 434
An appeal in cassation may be lodged within 15 days from the date when the judgment was adopted or, in case of subsequent drafting of the text, from the date when the parties have been informed in writing about the signing of the drafted judgment. An appeal in cassation lodged within 2 months from the date of adoption of the judgment or of informing the parties about it shall be considered as lodged within the time-limit. ”
Article 305 of the old Code of Civil Procedure, in force before 12 June 2003, reads as follows:
“The time-limit for lodging an appeal in cassation is 15 days from the date of the judgment, if the law does not provide otherwise”.