The case originated in an application (no. 20289/10) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Russian national, Ms Diana Mikhaylovna Barsova (formerly Udalova) (“the applicant”), on 31 March 2010.
The applicant was represented before the Court by Mr Ilya Sivoldayev, a lawyer practising in Voronezh. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented initially by Mr G. Matyushkin, the Representative of the Russian Federation to the European Court of Human Rights, and then by his successor in that office, Mr M. Galperin.
On 3 September 2015 the Government were given notice of the complaints concerning an excessively long prosecution of the assault on the applicant and the remainder of the application was declared inadmissible pursuant to Rule 54 § 3 of the Rules of Court.
The Government objected to the examination of the application by a Committee. Having considered the Government’s objection, the Court rejects it.
The applicant was born in 1968 and lives in Voronezh.
In 1997 Ms Barsova married U. The following year their daughter was born with a congenital disability. U. worked as a senior lecturer at the Voronezh police academy and provided for the family; Ms Barsova worked part-time to be able to care for their daughter.
U. frequently abused Ms Barsova when he was under the influence of alcohol. He would punch her, throw her on the floor, pin her arms in a lock behind the back, and demand excuses for imaginary transgressions. Ms Barsova did not complain to the police, fearing that a complaint might lead to his dismissal and loss of income for the family.
On 17 August 2006 U. assaulted her in the attic of their house. He hit her twice in the neck with his clenched fist. She managed to escape into the courtyard where neighbours could see her. She warned him that she would call the police if he did not stop. U. replied “You asked for the police, the police is here”, in reference to his rank of police lieutenant-colonel. Fearing a recurrence of violence, Ms Barsova dialled the police helpline. As she was about to give her address, U. attacked her again. She fell on her stomach, he pinned her down with his knees on her back, folded her arms in a lock and pulled her up by the wrists, causing severe pain to her shoulders. She begged for release and he let go of her.
Ms Barsova called the police from a street phone booth. Two hours later a police patrol arrived and took a statement from her. Police officers brought U. to the Tsentralnyi district police station but released him once he told them that his police rank was superior to theirs.
On the following day, Friday, and on Monday after that, Ms Barsova visited a general practitioner, a neurologist and a trauma surgeon. She was diagnosed with a concussion and multiple injuries to her neck, body and extremities, and placed on ten-day sick leave. The hospital also reported her injuries to the police.
On 29 August 2006 the chief of the Tsentralnyy district police station referred the matter of assault to the prosecutor’s office of the same district. He pointed out that U. was a senior police officer. On 4 September 2006 an investigator from the prosecutor’s office interviewed Ms Barsova and her husband and joined medical reports to the file. On the same day he issued a decision declining institution of criminal proceedings against U., finding that he had not committed the offence of abuse of power (Articles 285 and 286 of the Criminal Code). He advised Ms Barsova to mount a private-prosecution case before a court.
On 28 September 2006 Ms Barsova filed a private-prosecution complaint with a justice of the peace in the Tsentralnyy district in Voronezh. She accused U. of having committed “battery”, an offence under Article 116 of the Criminal Code, and submitted medical evidence.
The first hearing was fixed for 17 October 2006 but it was adjourned because the judge was not available. The case was twice reassigned to different judges. A new hearing fixed for 15 March 2007 did not take place owing to the absence of U. who had volunteered for a police peace-keeping mission abroad.
Upon U.’s return, three hearings were held between April and June 2007, but the proceedings were then adjourned to perform a one-day medical assessment. After the proceedings were resumed in September 2007, the following two hearings in October and November 2007 did not take place because U. had gone on another stint abroad.
Between January and April 2008 three hearings were held and two adjourned because the judge was on sick leave. Concerned about the impending expiry of the two-year prescription period, on 24 June 2008 Ms Barsova complained of an excessive length of proceedings and unjustified delays to the President of the Regional Court. Six weeks later she received the reply that the trial judge had not committed any breaches of procedure but that the case would be reassigned to another judge.
The newly assigned judge was required by law to examine all evidence over again. The judge fixed a hearing for 23 July 2008 but it was adjourned because U. had not been properly notified. At the following hearing on 7 August 2008 all parties were present, except U., and the judge issued the decision to suspend the proceedings. Ms Barsova appealed against the decision, and it was set aside by the Tsentralnyy District Court on 11 November 2008.
U. did not show up at four hearings in December 2008, January and February 2009. On 10 April 2009 he was heard in court. On 21 May 2009 he applied for a discontinuation of the proceedings on the grounds that the statute of limitations had expired. On the same day the trial judge granted his application and discontinued the proceedings.
On 21 August 2009 the Tsentralnyy District Court dismissed Ms Barsova’s appeal against the discontinuation decision. On 1 October 2009 the Voronezh Regional Court refused her leave to appeal to the cassation instance.
Following the enactment of the Compensation Act on 4 May 2010 (see Nagovitsyn and Nalgiyev v. Russia (dec.), nos. 27451/09 and 60650/09, §§ 15-20, 23 September 2010), Ms Barsova applied for compensation for a violation of her right to a trial within a reasonable time. By judgment of 10 May 2011, as upheld on appeal on 15 September 2011, the Voronezh Regional Court dismissed her claim. It held that, by examining witnesses and obtaining written evidence, such as the additional medical report, the trial court had “created conditions for the exercise by the private prosecutor of her rights and obligations in the criminal trial”. The resulting delays were not imputable to the parties. It further considered that multiple transfers of the case between judges had not affected the length of the proceedings because each of them had been completed within “a reasonable time”. The length of the case was accounted for by its “complexity” and “objective difficulties” relating to the defendant’s absence from Russia.
Chapter 16 of the Russian Criminal Code covers offences against the person, including murder and manslaughter (Articles 105 to 109) and three levels of assault occasioning actual bodily harm (Articles 111 to 115). Other forms of assault which may cause physical pain without resulting in actual bodily harm are treated as “battery” (побои) under Article 116 “Battery” is punishable by a fine, community work, or up to three months’ detention.
Causing grievous bodily harm is subject to public prosecution; the offences of “minor bodily harm” and “battery” are liable to private prosecution, meaning that the institution and pursuance of criminal proceedings is left to the victim, who has to collect evidence, identify the perpetrator, secure witness testimony and bring charges before a court (Article 20 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure).
A suspect, an accused or defendant in criminal proceedings may be subject to a preventive measure consisting of a written undertaking by that person not to leave their place of residence without permission from an investigator or a court and to respond to any summons issued by them and to refrain from any other conduct obstructing the proceedings (Article 102 of the Code of Criminal Procedure).