The case was referred to the Court by the European Commission of Human Rights (“the Commission”) and by the French Government (“the Government”) on 27 May and 10 July 1997 respectively, within the three-month period laid down by Article 32 § 1 and Article 47 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”). It originated in an application (no. 25201/94) against the French Republic lodged with the Commission under Article 25 by a French national, Mr Yves Guérin, on 11 July 1994.
The Commission’s request referred to Articles 44 and 48 and to the declaration whereby France recognised the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court (Article 46); the Government’s application referred to Article 48. The object of the request and of the application was to obtain a decision as to whether the facts of the case disclosed a breach by the respondent State of its obligations under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
In response to the enquiry made in accordance with Rule 33 § 3 (d) of Rules of Court A, the applicant stated that he wished to take part in the proceedings and designated the lawyer who would represent him (Rule 30).
On 2 June 1997 the President of the Court decided that, in the interests of the proper administration of justice, this case should be considered by the Chamber already constituted to hear the case of Omar v. France (Rule 21 § 7).
That Chamber included ex officio Mr L.-E. Pettiti, the elected judge of French nationality (Article 43 of the Convention), Mr R. Bernhardt, the Vice-President of the Court (Rule 21 § 4 (b)), Mr A.B. Baka, Mr M.A. Lopes Rocha, Mr G. Mifsud Bonnici, Mr K. Jungwiert, Mr P. Kūris, Mr E. Levits and Mr P. van Dijk (Article 43 in fine of the Convention and Rule 21 § 5).
As President of the Chamber (Rule 21 § 6), Mr Bernhardt, acting through the Registrar, consulted the Agent of the Government, the applicant’s lawyer and the Delegate of the Commission on the organisation of the proceedings (Rules 37 § 1 and 38). Pursuant to the orders made in consequence, the Registrar received the applicant’s memorials on 15 and 19 December 1997 and the Government’s memorial on 15 December 1997.
On 22 October 1997 the Chamber decided to relinquish jurisdiction forthwith in favour of a Grand Chamber (Rule 51). The Grand Chamber to be constituted included ex officio Mr R. Ryssdal, the President of the Court, and Mr Bernhardt, the Vice-President, together with the members and the four substitutes of the original Chamber, the latter being Sir John Freeland,
On 12 February 1998 the Commission produced certain documents from the proceedings before it, as requested by the Registrar on the President’s instructions.
In accordance with the President’s decision, the hearing in the present case and the case of Omar v. France took place in public in the Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 23 March 1998. The Court had held a preparatory meeting beforehand.
There appeared before the Court:
The Court heard addresses by Mr Loucaides, Mr Lyon-Caen, Mr Cacheux, Mr Boré and Mr Dobelle, and the latter’s reply to a question from one judge.
Mr Yves Guérin, a French national who was born in 1942, lives in Brest. At the material time, he was a deputy police sergeant.
On 28 November 1990 an airport and border police squad based in Menton stopped a vehicle on the motorway between Ventimiglia and Menton. There were six people inside, of whom five did not have valid papers for entry into French territory.
The driver, Mr Sérigné Fall, admitted that he had assisted these five to cross the border illegally.
He implicated the applicant, who was at that time serving at the Ventimiglia frontier post, alleging that he had allowed him to enter France in exchange for a payment of five hundred French francs (FRF) and the promise of an imitation Rolex watch.
On 29 November 1990 the applicant was charged with accepting a bribe and remanded in custody.
In a judgment of 6 June 1991 the Nice Criminal Court acquitted Mr Guérin, rescinded the order for his detention and ordered his immediate release.
On 11 June 1991 the prosecution appealed.
In a judgment of 14 October 1991 the Aix-en-Provence Court of Appeal, giving judgment in the applicant’s absence, set aside the judgment at first instance and sentenced the applicant to two years’ imprisonment.
On 28 June 1992 the applicant requested a retrial.
The case was heard on 12 October 1992 at a public hearing attended by Mr Guérin.

18.  In a judgment of 23 November 1992 the Aix-en-Provence Court of Appeal found the applicant guilty of accepting a bribe, sentenced him to two years’ imprisonment, six months of which were suspended, and issued a warrant for his arrest. Although the applicant had been duly informed of the date of delivery of the judgment, he was not present.
On 24 November 1992 Mr Guérin was admitted to a psychiatric institution, where he stayed until 16 December 1992, when the police enforced the warrant for his arrest.
On 26 November 1992, acting through a lawyer with the right of audience in the Aix-en-Provence Court of Appeal, the applicant lodged an appeal on points of law within the time-limit of five clear days laid down by Article 568 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (see paragraph 24 below).
In his statement of the grounds of appeal the applicant’s lawyer put forward two arguments, one procedural and one substantive, concerning the elements of the offence. He also explained that “as soon as he knew [the Court of Appeal’s decision], the appellant tried to commit suicide”.
In a supplementary pleading on the question of admissibility, he asked the Court of Cassation to declare the appeal admissible, either by departing from its case-law to the effect that a convicted person who has not complied with a warrant for his arrest is not entitled to act through a representative in order to lodge an appeal on points of law, or by making the rule more flexible and not applying it in the particular circumstances of the case.
On the first point, he referred to the report adopted by the Commission on 3 September 1992 in the case of Poitrimol v. France and pointed out that the Commission had referred to the Court the question whether the relevant case-law of the Criminal Division was contrary to Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On the second point, the lawyer stated that as the applicant lived in Brest he had not attended the hearing at which the judgment convicting him was delivered on account of the distance he would have had to travel and because he was very perturbed by the proceedings against him.
It would also have been materially impossible for him to comply with the warrant for his arrest in the three days between the reading of the judgment and the lodging of the notice of intention to appeal. Moreover, on learning that he had just been convicted, and immediately after instructing his lawyer to lodge an appeal on points of law, he had tried to commit suicide, and for that reason had been treated in a psychiatric institution from 24 November 1992 to 16 December 1992. Having stayed in that institution throughout the period allowed for an appeal on points of law, it had been absolutely 
impossible for him to comply with the warrant voluntarily before lodging the appeal. Lastly, the arrest warrant had been executed on 16 December 1992 at the clinic where the applicant remained at the disposal of the courts. The lawyer concluded in the following terms:
“There is no doubt that in such conditions applying the case-law established in 1846 in order to declare the appeal inadmissible would mean unjustly depriving Mr Guérin of the right to determination of his appeal.”
In a judgment of 19 January 1994 the Court of Cassation declared the appeal inadmissible on the following grounds:
“It is apparent from the notice of intention to appeal that the applicant lodged his appeal through an attorney at a time when he was liable to arrest under a warrant issued at the hearing on 23 November 1992, which was not executed until 16 December 1992. It follows from the general principles of criminal procedure that a convicted person who has not complied with a court order is not entitled to act through a representative in order to lodge an appeal on points of law. It could not be otherwise unless he supplied evidence of circumstances making it absolutely impossible for him to surrender to custody at the appropriate time. In the present case the appellant has not supplied evidence of any such circumstances.”
In French law an appeal on points of law, which is an exceptional remedy, may be lodged by any person who has an interest in doing so and gives notice within the time-limit, against any judicial decision given at last instance.
Article 576 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which lays down the formalities to be observed in connection with appeals on points of law, provides:
“Notice of an appeal on points of law must be given to the registrar of the court which has delivered the decision being challenged.
It must be signed by the registrar and by the appellant himself or by an attorney (avoué) of the court which has given judgment or by a specially authorised agent. In the last-mentioned case, the authority to act shall be annexed to the document drawn up by the registrar…
…”
Article 568 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides:
“The prosecution and all parties shall have five clear days after the date on which the impugned decision was given in which to lodge an appeal on points of law.”
Article 569 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides:
“During the time allowed for an appeal on points of law and, where such an appeal has been lodged, until the Court of Cassation delivers judgment, execution of the judgment of the Court of Appeal shall be stayed, except in respect of orders concerning civil matters, and unless the Court of Appeal upholds the warrant issued by the trial court pursuant to Article 464-1 or Article 465, first sub-paragraph, or unless it issues a warrant itself under the same conditions and according to the same rules.”
The suspensive effect of an appeal on points of law is derived from statute and may therefore likewise be restricted by statute, particularly in the interests of speedier and more effective punishment. That is the case where an arrest warrant has been issued by the trial court (see, to that effect, B. Bouloc, Précis de procédure pénale, Dalloz, 16th edition, 1996, § 739).
Article 583 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides:
“If a person sentenced to a term of imprisonment of more than six months has not surrendered to custody and has not obtained from the court which convicted him exemption, on or without payment of a surety, from the obligation to surrender to custody, his right to appeal on points of law shall be forfeit.
The memorandum of imprisonment or the judgment granting exemption shall be produced before the Court of Cassation not later than the time when the case is called for hearing.
For his appeal to be admissible, it is sufficient for the appellant to establish that he has surrendered to custody at a prison, either in the place where the Court of Cassation sits or in the place where sentence was passed. The governor of that prison shall admit him there on the order of the Principal Public Prosecutor at the Court of Cassation or of the head of the public prosecutor’s office at the court of trial or appeal.”
The Court of Cassation has ruled on a number of occasions that an appeal lodged by the representative of a convicted person who has not complied with a warrant for his arrest is inadmissible (Cass. crim. 10 December 1986, Dalloz 1987, p. 165). But the convicted person may give notice himself of his intention to appeal (Cass. crim. 7 November 1989, Bull. crim no. 397), subject to the provisions of Article 583, reproduced above.

29.  The Criminal Division of the Court of Cassation considers that an appeal is admissible in the following two situations:
(a)  where, instead of acting through a representative, the appellant signs the notice of intention to appeal in person (Cass. crim. 28 June 1978, Bull. crim. no. 57) by reporting to the registry before the warrant has been executed (Cass. crim. 7 November 1989, Bull. crim. no. 397) and accepting the risk of being arrested by mentioning his exact address in the notice (Cass. crim. 13 May 1985, Bull. crim. no. 180; Cass. Crim. 7 September 1993, Bull. crim., p. 263, confirmed by a decision of 15 February 1994 published in the Recueil Dalloz, 1994, Somm., p. 187);
(b)  where, when acting through a representative, in accordance with Article 576 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, he can prove that there were “circumstances that made it absolutely impossible for him to surrender to custody at the appropriate time” (Cass. crim. 21 May 1981, Bull. crim. no. 168; Cass. crim. 19 January 1984, Bull. crim. no. 27; Cass. crim. 8 March 1985; Cass. crim. 8 March 1996, Bull. crim. no. 94).
Mr Guérin applied to the Commission on 11 July 1994. He alleged that the decision to rule his appeal on points of law inadmissible had infringed his right to a court, one of the elements of the right to a fair trial guaranteed by Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
On 24 June 1996 the Commission declared the application (no. 25201/94) admissible. In its report of 11 April 1997 (Article 31), it expressed the opinion that there had been a violation of Article 6 § 1 (twenty-nine votes to one). The full text of the Commission’s opinion and of the two separate opinions contained in the report, one concurring and one dissenting, is reproduced as an annex to this judgment.
In their memorial the Government asked the Court to “dismiss the application introduced by Mr Guérin as manifestly ill-founded in so far as he complains that there has been a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention”.
The applicant asked the Court to hold that there had been a breach of that Article.