The case originated in an application (no. 62892/12) against the Russian Federation lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a national of Uzbekistan, Mr Akram Akhmadovich Karimov (“the applicant”), on 2 October 2012.
The applicant was represented by Ms N. Yermolayeva and Ms E. Ryabinina, lawyers practising in Moscow. The Russian Government (“the Government”) were represented by Mr G. Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that in the event of his administrative removal to Uzbekistan he risked being subjected to torture and ill-treatment, that his detention pending extradition and administrative removal had been unlawful, and that no effective judicial review was available to him in respect of the latter complaint.
On 4 October 2012 the President of the First Section decided to indicate to the Government, under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, that the applicant should not be deported or removed to Uzbekistan for the duration of the proceedings before the Court. The President also decided to grant the case priority under Rule 41 of the Rules of Court.
On 31 January 2013 the application was communicated to the Government.
The applicant was born in 1967 and lives in Moscow.
The applicant has a wife and three children who live in Uzbekistan. He is a practising Muslim. Since 1996 he had regularly gone to Russia for seasonal jobs. In 2010 the applicant again went to Russia and remained in the Moscow region until his arrest on 17 March 2012.
On 14 June 2011 the investigator at the Bukhara Regional Department of National Security, Uzbekistan, charged the applicant, in absentia, with incitement to national, racial, ethnic or religious hatred, and producing and disseminating documents containing threats to national security and public order (Articles 156 § 3 (d) and 244-1 § 3 (a) of the Uzbek Criminal Code). The decision stated, in particular, that Mr A., an Uzbek national, had formed an organised criminal group in 1996-1997 which a view to disseminating ideas based on Muslim religious extremism. According to the decision, the applicant had been involved in the group while working as the head of a bakery and being responsible for providing other members of the group with work and housing.
On the same date the applicant was placed on the list of wanted persons.
On 15 June 2011 the Bukhara Criminal Court ordered the applicant’s placement in detention. On the same date the Deputy Prosecutor of the Bukhara Region issued an international search warrant in respect of the applicant.
On 17 March 2012 the applicant was arrested by police in Moscow. The record of arrest, drawn up on the same date and signed by the applicant, stated that he had been arrested in accordance with Articles 91 and 92 of the Code of Criminal Procedure as a person wanted by the Uzbek authorities on suspicion of criminal offences under Articles 156 § 3 (d) and 244 § 3 (a) of the Uzbek Criminal Code.
On 18 March 2012 the applicant was questioned and stated as follows. In Uzbekistan he had worked as a builder. As it had become difficult to find a job there, in July 1996 he went to Russia for the first time to look for a job. For three months he lived in the Moscow Region unofficially, and he then returned to Uzbekistan. Between 1996 and 2010 he went to Russia every year for several months, during which he worked unofficially on construction sites in the Moscow Region. He never applied for authorisation in respect of his temporary stays in Russia. In October 2010 he went again to Russia. He went to the village of Poyarkovo, in the Moscow Region, where he found lodgings in a mobile home with three other builders. In October-November 2010 he worked at a construction site in the town of Himki. During 2011 he had occasional jobs in Poyarkovo, including some building work for its residents, and cleaning the streets. On 17 March 2012 the applicant went to the Kazanskiy railway station in Moscow as he wanted to return to Uzbekistan. He bought a ticket to Kazan, where he planned to buy tickets for the remainder of the journey. However, before he could board the train he was approached by three men in civilian clothes who told him they were police officers and presented their badges. They informed him that he was on a wanted list in Uzbekistan and asked him to go with them to the police station located near the railway station, which he did. According to the applicant, when he spoke on the telephone with his wife in spring 2011, she had said that police officers had asked her about his whereabouts, but they had not explained why they were looking for him. In Uzbekistan he had not been persecuted for political reasons or convicted of any criminal offences, and he did not apply for asylum in Russia. The applicant stated that he did not know in relation to what imputed offence he had been placed on the wanted list.
On 19 March 2012 the Russian Ministry of the Interior received from the Uzbek Ministry of the Interior a request for the applicant to be detained pending receipt of its extradition request.
Also on 19 March 2012, the prosecutor of the Meshchanskiy District of Moscow ordered the applicant’s detention on the ground of Article 61 of the Convention on Legal Assistance and Legal Relations in Civil, Family and Criminal Matters (“the Minsk Convention”). In that decision the prosecutor referred to the following elements: the applicant had been arrested in Russia on suspicion of a number of criminal offences on the basis of an international search warrant issued by the Uzbek authorities; the Bukhara Criminal Court had issued an arrest warrant in respect of him; the offences imputed to the applicant were punishable in Russia by more than one year of imprisonment; and the applicant had gone into hiding. The decision did not specify a term for the applicant’s detention. The applicant was immediately placed in SIZO no. 4 in Moscow. He was not provided with a copy of the prosecutor’s decision.
On 23 March 2012 the Moscow Region Federal Migration Service (“FMS”) informed the prosecutor of Moscow that the applicant had not applied for asylum in Russia.
On 27 March 2012 the Moscow FMS informed the prosecutor of the Meshchanskiy District of Moscow that the applicant had applied neither for Russian citizenship nor asylum. He had had residence registration in Khimki between 20 June 2008 and 13 April 2009, but he had not been registered in the Moscow Region since then.
On 29 March 2012 the Moscow Region FMS informed the prosecutor of Moscow that the applicant was not a Russian citizen and nor had he applied for asylum, and that he had had residence registration in Khimki between 20 June 2008 and 13 April 2009, but had not been registered in the Moscow Region since then.
On 12 April 2012 the applicant’s counsel appealed against the detention order of 19 March 2012. She argued, in particular, that it was unlawful as the detention had been ordered by a prosecutor and not by a court, and that Article 466 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Proceedings was inapplicable to the applicant at that stage of the proceedings.
On 19 April 2012 the FMS informed the Prosecutor General that the applicant had had residence registration in Khimki between 20 June 2008 and 13 April 2009. He had neither acquired Russian citizenship nor applied for asylum.
On 24 April 2012 the General Prosecutor’s Office of the Russian Federation received a request for the applicant’s extradition from the Deputy Prosecutor General of Uzbekistan. The request contained assurances that the applicant would not be persecuted on grounds of his political convictions, ethnic origin, religion or nationality; that he would be provided with legal assistance; and that the criminal proceedings against him would be conducted in full compliance with the laws of Uzbekistan. Furthermore, the applicant would not be extradited to a third State or be subject to criminal proceedings unrelated to the offences in respect of which his extradition was sought.
Also on 25 April 2012, the prosecutor of the Meshchanskiy District of Moscow ordered the applicant’s detention during the extradition proceedings. He referred to the extradition request received from the Uzbek authorities and relied on Article 466 § 2 of Code of Criminal Procedure. The decision did not specify a term for the applicant’s detention.
On 26 April 2012 the applicant’s counsel submitted an additional statement of appeal against the detention order of 19 March 2012. She complained, in particular, that Uzbekistan had not ratified the Protocol of 28 March 1997 to the Minsk Convention and, therefore, in relations between Russia and Uzbekistan the old version of the Minsk Convention should be applied, without the amendments made by the Protocol. Therefore, the applicant should have been released on 17 April 2012, a month after his arrest, as provided by Article 62 § 1 of the Minsk Convention.
On the same date, the Preobrazhenskiy District Court of Moscow postponed the hearing on the appeal lodged by the applicant’s counsel to 3 May 2012 in order to allow time for the applicant to receive a copy of the prosecutor’s decision of 19 March 2012.
On 27 April 2012 the applicant received a copy of the said decision.
On 3 May 2012 the Preobrazhenskiy District Court of Moscow dismissed the applicant’s counsel’s appeal against the detention order of 19 March 2012. The court found that the applicant had been arrested in accordance with Articles 91 and 92 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and that on 19 March 2012 he had been detained pending receipt of the extradition request on the basis of Article 466 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
On 12 May 2012 the applicant’s lawyer appealed against the decision of 3 May 2012 to the Moscow City Court. She maintained, inter alia, that the Preobrazhenskiy District Court of Moscow had failed to address the arguments she had raised in the appeal statement.
On 15 May 2012 the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow extended the applicant’s detention until 17 September 2012, referring to Articles 109 and 466 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, Articles 56, 58 and 60 of the Minsk Convention, and the 1957 European Convention on Extradition. The court found the prosecutor’s request for the extension of the applicant’s detention well-founded as his extradition had been requested in relation to charges concerning offences punishable under both Russian and Uzbek law; the applicant was a national of Uzbekistan with no permanent place of residence in Russia; and he had tried to abscond from the Uzbek authorities. The court also noted that the extradition check in respect of the applicant had not been completed.
On 16 May 2012 the applicant’s counsel appealed against that decision.
On 30 May 2012 the Moscow City Court upheld the decision of 15 May 2012.
On 23 July 2012 the Moscow City Court upheld the decision of 3 May 2012. It also found that the Preobrazhenskiy District Court of Moscow duly addressed the arguments raised by the applicant’s counsel on appeal.
On 17 September 2012 the prosecutor of the Meshchanskiy District of Moscow, referring to Articles 61 and 62 of the Minsk Convention, ordered the applicant’s release because the six-month maximum period of detention permitted by domestic law had expired.
Also on 17 September 2012, the General Prosecutor’s office refused to extradite the applicant to Uzbekistan, finding that the offences punishable under Article 244-1 of the Criminal Code of Uzbekistan were not regarded as criminal offences under Russian criminal law. In so far as he was charged with offences punishable under Article 156 § 3 (d) of the Criminal Code of Uzbekistan, there was no corpus delicti in the applicant’s actions for the purposes of Article 282 of the Russian Criminal Code (incitement to hatred and hostility, and degrading treatment).
On 17 September 2012 police officers escorted the applicant from the SIZO to the Krasnoselskiy District police station, where the prosecutor’s release order of 17 September 2012 was handed to him. However, the applicant was immediately re-arrested on suspicion of a breach of the residence rules under Article 18.8 of the Code of Administrative Offences, and administrative removal proceedings were initiated in respect of him.
In the records of the administrative offence and the administrative arrest, signed by the applicant, both dated 17 September 2012, he stated that he did not agree with the arrest.
By a telegram of 18 September 2012 the Prosecutor of the Russian Federation informed the prosecutor of Moscow that on 17 September 2012 the Uzbek authorities’ request for the extradition of the applicant had been refused. The telegram further stated that it was necessary to take a decision regarding the applicant’s further detention and to verify the legality of his presence on the territory of the Russian Federation.
On 18 September 2012 the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow refused to accept the case for examination because the case file contained no information about the outcome of either the extradition proceedings or the refugee-status proceedings
On 19 September 2012 the case file on the applicant’s administrative offence was submitted to the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow.
In written pleadings filed with the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow the applicant’s counsel argued that the applicant’s removal to Uzbekistan would be unlawful. She stated, in particular, that the applicant, as a person accused of participation in a banned religious activity, faced torture and other forms of ill-treatment if expelled to Uzbekistan. The applicant’s counsel also referred to the Court’s case-law concerning expulsion to Uzbekistan and recent reports by international NGOs, according to which detainees charged with banned religious activities were subjected to systematic torture and other forms of ill-treatment in Uzbekistan. She further stated that the applicant had applied for refugee status in Russia and the proceedings were still pending; in accordance with the Refugee Act of 1993 and the 1951 Geneva Convention on the Status of Refugees, the applicant could not be removed from Russia until the end of those proceedings.
On 19 September 2012 the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow found the applicant guilty of a breach of the residence rules, imposed a fine in the amount of 2,000 roubles (RUB) (approximately 50 euros) and ordered his administrative removal from the Russian Federation. It found, in particular, that the applicant had arrived in Russia on 20 October 2010 with a view to finding a job. However, he had made no attempt to regularise his stay in Russia by applying either for a temporary residence permit or for a work permit. Furthermore, he had not left Russia upon the expiry of the maximum ninety-day period for which foreign nationals who did not require a visa were authorised to stay in Russia. The applicant admitted at the hearing that he had been residing in Russia unlawfully, but stated that for a long period of time he had been unable to regularise his situation because his employer had had possession of his documents. However, he had received his passport at the end of 2011 and had still not taken any steps to regularise his residence. The court further stated that when imposing the penalty it had taken into account the applicant’s situation, including his lack of a stable income and residence in Russia, the length of his stay in Russia without a permit, and the fact that he had been aware that a permit was required.
The court found that the applicant’s allegations regarding a risk of ill-treatment in the event of his removal to Uzbekistan were “based on assumptions” and were “not corroborated by the case-file materials”. It also dismissed the applicant’s counsel’s argument that the applicant could not be subject to administrative removal because he had a pending application for refugee status. The court stated in this connection that on 28 August 2012 the Moscow FMS had dismissed his application and, as of the date of the hearing, the applicant had not appealed against that decision. The court further held that, taking into account the applicant’s financial situation and also the need to ensure his removal from the territory of the Russian Federation, the applicant was to be placed in custody until the “resolution of the matter relating to his administrative removal”. Following that decision the applicant was placed in a detention centre for foreigners in Moscow.
On 28 September 2012 the applicant’s counsel appealed against the decision of 19 September 2012 to the Moscow City Court. She reiterated the arguments she had advanced before the first-instance court and complained that the first-instance court had not made an adequate assessment of the risk of ill-treatment to which the applicant might be subjected if he was removed to Uzbekistan. She pointed out that the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow had refused to examine the reports by international NGOs relating to the human rights situation in Uzbekistan and had ignored the Court’s position on the matter.
On 2 October 2012 the applicant requested the Court to apply Rule 39 of the Rules of Court.
On 4 October 2012 the Court granted the applicant’s request for the application of interim measures under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court and indicated to the Government that the applicant should not be expelled to Uzbekistan for the duration of the proceedings before the Court.
On 8 October 2012 the Prosecutor General instructed the prosecutor of Moscow to comply with the Court’s indications regarding interim measures under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court.
On 9 October 2012 the prosecutor of Moscow instructed the prosecutor of the Meshchanskiy District of Moscow to apply to the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow for the suspension of the applicant’s removal to Uzbekistan in view of the application by the Court of Rule 39 of the Rules of Court.
On 10 October 2012 the prosecutor of the Meshchanskiy District of Moscow requested the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow to suspend the applicant’s removal to Uzbekistan following the application by the Court of Rule 39 of the Rules of Court.
On the same date, the Moscow FMS informed the Moscow City Court that the applicant was not registered in the migration register and nor had he been issued with a work permit.
Also on 10 October 2012, the Moscow City Court upheld the decision of 19 September 2012, finding it lawful and justified. It held that the first-instance court had been right in finding that the applicant’s actions had constituted an administrative offence. The appeal court further dismissed the argument that the applicant could not be subject to administrative detention in view of his application for asylum as (i) he had applied for asylum only after being arrested; and (ii) the reasons he had put forward for his reluctance to return to Uzbekistan did not constitute well-founded fears of persecution on grounds of his religion, nationality, ethnic origin, belonging to a particular social group, or political convictions.
On 25 October 2012 the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow ordered the suspension of the execution of the decision of 19 September 2012 pending the examination of the application by the prosecutor of the Meshchanskiy District of Moscow.
On 13 December 2012 the Moscow City Court returned the application by the prosecutor of the Meshchanskiy District of Moscow without examination on the ground that under Article 30.12 of the Code on Administrative Offences the prosecutor was not authorised to apply for the suspension of a final judicial decision.
On 15 December 2012 the applicant’s counsel sent an application to the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow pursuant to Article 31.8 of the Code of Administrative offences. She sought clarification regarding the execution of the decision of 19 September 2012 in the light of the application by the Court of Rule 39 of the Rules of Court. The Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow received the application on 28 December 2012. In the absence of a response, the applicant’s counsel resubmitted the application on 19 March 2013.
On 8 April 2013 the Meshchanskiy District Court of Moscow wrote to the applicant’s counsel informing him that the court found that there were no grounds to consider her application under Article 31.8 of Code on Administrative Offences. Therefore, it was to be examined as a general application. The court advised the applicant’s counsel to contact the competent executive authorities with her queries concerning the execution of the decision of 19 September 2012. The letter was sent on 18 April 2013.
On 20 April 2012 the applicant applied for refugee status in Russia.
On 28 August 2012 the Moscow FMS refused to grant him refugee status. The FMS noted that although the applicant had substantiated his application by an alleged risk of persecution on religious grounds, he stated that he had left Uzbekistan for economic reasons. However, he feared that if he returned there the Uzbek law-enforcement agencies would extract from him under torture a confession to crimes he had not committed. It further analysed at length the applicable Uzbek laws on the prohibition of torture and freedom of religion, as well as information on the co-existence of various religions in Uzbekistan. The FMS noted that the applicant had not left Uzbekistan on any of the grounds listed in section 1 § 1 (1) of the Refugees Act. Moreover, it appeared that his wish to not return to Uzbekistan was based not on a fear of being persecuted on grounds of religion, nationality, ethnic origin, belonging to a particular social group, or political convictions, but rather on his fear of being subjected to punishment for the offences he was charged with in Uzbekistan. Therefore, he did not meet the criteria set out in section 1 § 1 (1) of the Refugees Act.
On 26 September 2012 the applicant appealed against that decision to the FMS.
On 10 November 2012 the FMS dismissed the applicant’s appeal against the decision of 28 August 2012. It endorsed the reasoning of that decision and added that although, according to the applicant, since 2002 he had regularly come to Russia for seasonal jobs, he had only had a work permit for the period between 30 May 2008 and 28 September 2010.
On 17 January 2013 the applicant appealed against that decision to the Basmanniy District Court of Moscow. He argued that as criminal proceedings had been instituted against him in Uzbekistan, his fears of persecution on religious grounds were well-grounded.
On 1 April 2013 the Basmanniy District Court of Moscow dismissed the applicant’s appeal. The court noted that although the human rights situation in Uzbekistan was “ambiguous”, it was a party to numerous international treaties on the protection of human rights and regularly submitted reports to the UN on its compliance with such treaties. The court further stated that a decision concerning refugee status should be taken not on the basis of the general situation in the country, but on the basis of the applicant’s specific circumstances. The FMS had thus been right to dismiss the application as the applicant had failed to provide any evidence that in the event of his return to Uzbekistan there was a real risk of his being subjected to ill-treatment.
On 13 May 2013 the applicant appealed against that decision to the Moscow City Court. The appeal hearing was scheduled for 30 July 2013.
The Court has not been informed of the outcome of the appeal proceedings.
Chapter 54 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 2002 governs the procedure to be followed in the event of extradition.
An extradition decision made by the Prosecutor General may be challenged before a court (Article 463 § 1). In that case the extradition order must not be enforced until a final judgment is delivered (Article 462 § 6).
A court is to review the lawfulness and validity of a decision to extradite within a month of receipt of a request for review. The decision must be taken in open court by a panel of three judges in the presence of a prosecutor, the person whose extradition is sought, and the latter’s legal counsel (Article 463 § 4).
Issues of guilt or innocence are not within the scope of judicial review, which is limited to an assessment of whether the extradition order was made in accordance with the procedure set out in the applicable international and domestic law (Article 463 § 6).
Article 464 § 1 lists the conditions under which extradition cannot be authorised. Thus, the extradition of the following should be refused: a Russian citizen (Article 464 § 1 (1)) or a person who has been granted asylum in Russia (Article 464 § 1 (2)); a person in respect of whom a conviction has become effective or criminal proceedings have been terminated in Russia in connection with the same act for which he or she is being prosecuted in the requesting State (Article 464 § 1 (3)); a person in respect of whom criminal proceedings cannot be brought or a conviction cannot become effective in view of the expiry of the limitation period or on another valid ground in Russian law (Article 464 § 1 (4)); and a person in respect of whom extradition has been blocked by a Russian court in accordance with the legislation of the Russian Federation and international treaties (Article 464 § 1 (5)). Finally, extradition should be denied if the act that serves as the basis for the extradition request does not constitute a criminal offence under the Russian Criminal Code (Article 464 § 1 (6)).
Where a foreign national whose extradition is being sought is being prosecuted, or is serving a sentence for another criminal offence, in Russia, his extradition may be postponed until the prosecution is completed, the penalty is lifted on any valid ground, or the sentence has been served (Article 465 § 1).
In its ruling no. 11 of 14 June 2012, the Plenary Session of the Russian Supreme Court stated, with reference to Article 3 of the Convention, that extradition should be refused if there were compelling reasons to believe that the person might be subjected to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment in the requesting country. Extradition could also be refused if exceptional circumstances disclosed that it might entail a danger to the person’s life and health on account of, among other things, his or her age or physical condition. Russian authorities dealing with an extradition case were to examine whether there was reason to believe that the person concerned might be sentenced to the death penalty, subjected to illtreatment, or persecuted because of his or her race, religious beliefs, nationality, ethnic or social origin or political opinions. The courts should assess both the general situation in the requesting country and the personal circumstances of the person whose extradition was sought. They should take into account the testimony of the person concerned and that of any witnesses, any assurances given by the requesting country, and information about the country provided by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, competent institutions of the United Nations, and by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
In the same ruling the Supreme Court drew the court’s attention to the fact that Article 62 of the Minsk Convention provided that the term of detention prior to receipt of an extradition request should not exceed one month. It further stated that if the requesting State was a party to the Protocol of 28 March 1997 to the Minsk Convention, a term of detention prior to receipt of the extradition request should not exceed forty days.
The Constitution guarantees the right to liberty (Article 22):
“1.  Everyone has the right to liberty and personal integrity.
Arrest, placement in custody and detention are only permitted on the basis of a judicial decision. Prior to a judicial decision, an individual may not be detained for longer than forty-eight hours.”
Article 46 of the Constitution provides, among other things, that everyone should be guaranteed judicial protection of his or her rights and freedoms, and stipulates that decisions, actions or inaction on the part of State bodies, local self-government authorities, public associations and officials may be challenged before a court.
Extradition proceedings are governed by the Minsk Convention, to which both Russia and Uzbekistan are parties, as amended by the Protocol of 28 March 1997 ratified by Russia on 9 November 2001. Uzbekistan has signed the Protocol but not ratified it. The relevant provisions of the Minsk Convention read:
“1.  When responding to a request [поручение] for legal assistance, the requested agency shall apply the laws of its country. Upon the demand of the requesting agency it may apply the procedural rules of the requesting Contracting Party, unless they contradict the legislation of the requested Contracting Party.”
“1.  An extradition request must contain:
(a)  the name of the requesting authority;
(b)  a description of the factual circumstances of the action and the text of the law of the requesting Contracting Party on the basis of which the action constitutes an offence;
(c)  the surname, name and patronymic of the person subject to extradition, his/her nationality, place of abode or residence, a description of his/her appearance if possible, and other information about his/her personality;
(d)  the extent of the damage caused by the offence.
A certified copy of the decision to place the person in detention must be attached to the extradition request.”
“Upon receipt of an extradition request the requested Contracting Party shall immediately take measures to search for and arrest the person whose extradition is sought, except in cases where extradition is not possible.”
“1.  The person whose extradition is sought may be placed in detention before the receipt of an extradition request if there is a related petition. The petition must contain reference to a detention order or a judgment [приговор] that has entered into legal effect, and indicate that an extradition request will follow. A petition for detention before the receipt of an extradition request may be transmitted by post, telegraph, telex or telefax.
The person may be arrested without the petition provided for in paragraph 1 of the present Article if there are grounds prescribed by law to suspect that the person has committed a crime which may give rise to extradition in the territory of the other Contracting Party.
The other Contracting Party must be immediately informed where detention or arrest is applied out before the receipt of an extradition request.”
“1.  A person placed in detention pursuant to Article 61 § 1 and Article 61-1 must be released upon receipt of notification from the requesting Contracting Party [that] it is necessary to release the person or, if the requesting Contracting Party fails to submit an extradition request with all the requisite supporting documents provided for in Article 58, within forty days of the date of detention.
A person arrested under Article 61 § 2 must be released if the petition for detention in accordance with Article 61 § 1 is not received within the time-limit provided for by the legislation governing detention matters.”
Article 62 § 1 in its original version, unamended by the Protocol of 28 March 1997, reads as follows:
“A person remanded in custody pursuant to Article 61 § 1 must be released if an extradition request is not received within one month of the date of [his or her] detention”.
Article 1 § 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that the general principles and norms of international law and international treaties to which the Russian Federation is a party are a constituent part of its legislation concerning criminal proceedings. Should an international treaty provide for rules other than those established in the Code of Criminal Procedure, the former are to be applied.
The term “court” is defined by the Code of Criminal Procedure as “any court of general jurisdiction which examines a criminal case on the merits and delivers decisions provided for by this Code” (Article 5 § 48). The term “judge” is defined by the Code of Criminal Procedure as “an official empowered to administer justice” (Article 5 § 54).
Article 91 § 2 provides that a person suspected of having committed an offence may be detained, in particular, if he or she has tried to abscond. Under Article 92 § 1 a record of arrest must be drawn up within three hours of the arrest. Article 94 § 2 provides that a suspect may be detained for up to forty-eight hours without a court order authorising his or her detention.
Chapter 13 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“Preventive Measures”) governs the use of preventive measures (меры пресечения) while criminal proceedings are pending. Such measures include placement in detention. Detention may be ordered by a court following an application by an investigator or a prosecutor if the person is charged with an offence carrying a sentence of at least two years’ imprisonment, provided that a less restrictive preventive measure cannot be used (Article 108 §§ 1 and 3). An initial period of detention pending investigation may not exceed two months (Article 109 § 1). A judge may extend that period up to six months (Article 109 § 2). Further extensions up to twelve months, or in exceptional circumstances, up to eighteen months, may only be granted if the person is charged with serious or particularly serious criminal offences (Article 109 § 3). No extension beyond eighteen months is permissible and the detainee must then be released immediately (Article 109 § 4). If the grounds serving as the basis for a preventive measure have changed, the preventive measure must be discontinued or changed. A decision to cancel or change a preventive measure may be taken by an investigator, a prosecutor or a court (Article 110).
Chapter 16 (“Complaints about acts and decisions by courts and officials involved in criminal proceedings”) provides for the judicial review of decisions and acts or failures to act by an investigator or a prosecutor that are capable of adversely affecting the constitutional rights or freedoms of the parties to criminal proceedings (Article 125 § 1). The competent court is the court with territorial jurisdiction over the location at which the preliminary investigation is conducted (ibid.). Following the examination of the complaint, a judge can issue a decision to declare the challenged act, inaction or decision of the law-enforcement authority unlawful or unjustified and to instruct that authority to rectify the indicated shortcoming or to dismiss the complaint (Article 125 § 5).
Chapter 54 (“Extradition of a person for criminal prosecution or execution of sentence”) regulates extradition procedures. Upon receipt of a request for extradition not accompanied by an arrest warrant issued by a foreign court, a prosecutor must decide on the preventive measure to be applied to the person whose extradition is sought. The measure must be applied in accordance with established procedure (Article 466 § 1). If a request for extradition is accompanied by a detention order issued by a foreign court, a prosecutor may impose house arrest on the individual concerned or place him or her in detention “without seeking confirmation of the validity of that order from a Russian court” (Article 466 § 2).
On 4 April 2006 the Constitutional Court examined an application by a Mr N., who had submitted that the lack of any limitation in time on the detention of a person awaiting extradition was incompatible with the constitutional guarantee against arbitrary detention. The Constitutional Court declared the application inadmissible. In its view, the absence of any specific regulation of detention matters in Article 466 § 1 did not create a legal lacuna incompatible with the Constitution. Article 8 § 1 of the Minsk Convention provided that in executing a request for legal assistance, the requested party should apply its domestic law, that is, the procedure laid down in the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure. Such procedure comprised, in particular, Article 466 § 1 of the Code and the norms in Chapter 13 (“Measures of restraint”), which, by virtue of their general character and position in Part I of the Code (“General provisions”), applied to all stages and forms of criminal proceedings, including proceedings for the examination of extradition requests. Accordingly, Article 466 of the Code of Criminal Procedure did not allow the authorities to apply a custodial measure without complying with the procedure established in the Code of Criminal Procedure and the time-limits fixed in that Code.
The Prosecutor General asked the Constitutional Court for an official clarification of decision no. 101-O of 4 April 2006 (see above), for the purpose, in particular, of elucidating the procedure for extending a person’s detention with a view to extradition.
The Constitutional Court refused the request on the ground that it was not competent to indicate which specific provisions of the criminal law governed the procedure and time-limits for holding a person in detention with a view to extradition. That was a matter for the courts of general jurisdiction.
The Constitutional Court reiterated its settled case-law to the effect that the scope of the constitutional right to liberty and personal inviolability was the same for foreign nationals and stateless persons as for Russian nationals. A foreign national or stateless person could not be detained in Russia for more than forty-eight hours without a judicial decision. That constitutional requirement served as a guarantee against excessively long detention beyond forty-eight hours, and also against arbitrary detention, in that it required a court to examine whether an arrest had been lawful and justified.
The Constitutional Court held that Article 466 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, read in conjunction with the Minsk Convention, could not be construed as permitting the detention of an individual for more than forty-eight hours on the basis of a request for his or her extradition without a decision by a Russian court. A custodial measure could be applied only in accordance with the procedure established in the Russian Code of Criminal Procedure and within the time-limits fixed in that Code.
By this decision the Constitutional Court dismissed as inadmissible a request for a constitutional review of Article 466 § 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, finding as follows:
“[the provision] does not establish time-limits for detention and does not establish the reasons and procedure for choosing a preventive measure, it merely confirms a prosecutor’s power to execute a decision already delivered by a competent judicial body of a foreign state to detain an accused. Therefore the disputed norm cannot be considered to violate the constitutional rights of [the claimant] ...”
By Directive Decision No. 1, adopted by the Plenary Session of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation on 10 February 2009, several instructions were issued to the courts on the application of Article 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The Plenary reiterated that any party to criminal proceedings, or other person whose rights or freedoms were affected by the actions or inaction of the investigating or prosecuting authorities in criminal proceedings could use Article 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to challenge a refusal to institute criminal proceedings or a decision to terminate them. The Plenary stated that whilst the bulk of decisions amenable to judicial review under Article 125 also included decisions to institute criminal proceedings or refusals to admit a defence counsel or to grant victim status, and a person could not rely on Article 125 to challenge a court’s decision to apply bail or house arrest or to place a person in detention. It was further stressed that in declaring a specific action or failure to act of a law enforcement authority unlawful or unjustified, a judge was not entitled to quash the impugned decision or to order the official responsible to revoke it but could only ask him or her to rectify the shortcomings indicated. Should the authority concerned fail to comply with the court’s instructions, an interested party could complain to a court about the authority’s failure to act and the court could issue a special ruling (частное определение) drawing the authority’s attention to the situation. Lastly, the decision stated that a prosecutor’s decision to place a person under house arrest or in detention with a view to extradition could be appealed against to a court under Article 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Section 5 § 1 of Law no. 115-FZ of 25 July 2002 on the Legal Status of Foreign Nationals in the Russian Federation (“the Foreigners Act”) provides that a foreign national who does not require a visa for a temporary stay in Russia may stay in Russia for not more than ninety days, unless otherwise provided for by the Act.
Under Section 5 § 2 of the Act, a foreign national must leave Russia after the expiry of the authorised period, except if by the date of expiry he has already obtained authorisation for an extension or renewal, or if his application for an extension and the relevant documents have been accepted for processing.
Section 5 § 3 of the Act provides that the authorised period for a foreign national’s temporary stay in Russia may be either extended or shortened should the terms or circumstances on the basis of which the temporary stay was authorised change or cease to exist. Under Section 5 § 4 the competent executive authority takes the decision on the extension or shortening of the authorised period.
Under Section 34 § 5, foreign nationals subject to administrative removal who have been placed in custody pursuant to a court order are detained in special facilities until the execution of the decision on administrative removal.
Under Article 3.2 § 1 (7), administrative removal constitutes an administrative penalty. In Article 3.10 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Offences, administrative removal is defined as the forced and controlled removal of a foreign national or a stateless person across the Russian border. Under Article 3.10 § 2, administrative removal is imposed by a judge or, in cases where a foreign national or a stateless person has committed an administrative offence upon entry to the Russian Federation, by a competent public official. Under Article 3.10 § 5, for the purposes of execution of the decision on administrative removal a judge may order the detention of the foreign national or the stateless person in a special facility.
Article 18.8 provides that a foreign national who infringes the residence regulations of the Russian Federation, including by living in the territory without a valid residence permit, or by non-compliance with the established procedure for residence registration, will be liable to an administrative fine of RUB 2,000 to 5,000 and possible administrative removal. Under Article 28.3 § 2 (1), a report on the offence described in Article 18.8 is drawn up by a police officer. Article 28.8 § 2 requires the report to be transmitted immediately to a judge. Article 23.1 § 3 provides that the determination of any administrative charge that may result in removal from the Russian Federation must be made by a judge of a court of general jurisdiction. Article 30.1 § 1 guarantees the right to appeal against a decision on an administrative offence to a court or to a higher court.
Under Article 27.5 § 2, a person subject to administrative proceedings for a breach of the rules on residence within the Russian territory can be held in administrative detention for a term not exceeding forty-eight hours.
Under Article 31.1 a decision on an administrative offence takes effect on expiry of the term for bringing an appeal. Unappealable decisions take effect immediately.
Article 31.3 § 3 provides that a decision on an administrative offence is to be sent within three days of its entry into effect to the authority competent to execute it. Under Article 31.4 § 1 a decision on an administrative offence is executed by a competent authority or a competent official in accordance with the procedure provided for in the Code of Administrative Offences and the applicable laws. Under Article 31.4 § 3, should the procedure for execution of the decision be unclear, the authority responsible for its execution or the person subject to the administrative proceedings may apply to a court or the competent authority with a request for clarification of the procedure. Under Article 31.8 § 1 the court must examine the application within three days of the date on which the issues giving rise to the clarification arose and, under Article 31.8 § 3, deliver a ruling, which is to be sent to the applicant within three days.
Under Article 31.9 § 1 a decision imposing an administrative penalty ceases to be enforceable after the expiry of two years from the date on which the decision became final. Under Article 31.9 § 2, if the defendant impedes the enforcement proceedings, the limitation period specified in Article 31.9 § 1 is interrupted.
Article 3.9 provides that an administrative offender can be penalised by administrative arrest only in exceptional circumstances, and for a maximum term of thirty days.
Section 27 § 2 of Federal Law no. 114-FZ of 15 August 2006 on the Procedure for Entering and Leaving the Russian Federation (“the Entry and Leaving Procedures Act”), provides that a foreign national who has been deported or subjected to administrative removal from Russia may not re-enter the territory for five years following his deportation or administrative removal.
In decision no. 6-R of 17 February 1998 the Constitutional Court stated, with a reference to Article 22 of the Constitution, that a person subject to administrative removal could be placed in detention without a court order for a term not exceeding forty-eight hours. Detention for over forty-eight hours was permitted only on the basis of a court order and provided that the administrative removal could not be effected otherwise. The court order was necessary to guarantee protection not only from arbitrary detention of over forty-eight hours, but also from arbitrary detention as such, while the court assesses the lawfulness of and reasons for the placement of the person in custody. The Constitutional Court further noted that detention for an indefinite term would amount to an inadmissible restriction on the right to liberty as it would constitute punishment not provided for in Russian law and which was contrary to the Constitution.
Article 33 of the UN Convention on the Status of Refugees of 1951, which was ratified by Russia on 2 February 1993, provides as follows:
“1.  No Contracting State shall expel or return (‘refouler’) a refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of his race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion.
The benefit of the present provision may not, however, be claimed by a refugee whom there are reasonable grounds for regarding as a danger to the security of the country in which he is, or who, having been convicted by a final judgment of a particularly serious crime, constitutes a danger to the community of that country.”
Law no. 4258-I on Refugees of 19 February 1993 ("the Refugees Act"), as in force at the material time, incorporated the definition of the term “refugee” contained in Article 1 of the 1951 Geneva Convention, as amended by the 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees. The Act defines a refugee as a person who is not a Russian national and who, owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, ethnic origin, membership of a particular social group or political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country, or who, not having a nationality and being outside the country of his former habitual residence as a result of such circumstances, is unable or, owing to such fear, unwilling to return to it (section 1 § 1 (1)).
The Act does not apply to anyone believed on reasonable grounds to have committed a crime against peace, a war crime, a crime against humanity, or a serious non-political crime outside the country of refuge prior to his admission to that country as a person seeking refugee status (section 2 § 1 (1) and (2)).
A person who has applied for refugee status or who has been granted refugee status cannot be returned to a State where his life or freedom would be imperilled on account of his race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion (section 10 § 1).
Decisions of the law-enforcement authorities taken in connection with the Refugees Act can be appealed against to a higher-ranking authority or a court (Article 10 § 2). The decision can be challenged within one month of the receipt of written notification of it or, in the event of lack of a written reply, within one month after the complaint was lodged, and within three months after the asylum seeker became aware of the refusal to grant him or her refugee status (Article 10 § 3 (1) and (2)). An individual who has been notified of the refusal to grant him or her asylum and who has made use of his or her right of appeal against a refusal, should there be no other legal grounds for him or her to remain, must leave the territory of the Russian Federation within three working days of receipt of notification of the decision dismissing his or her complaint (Article 10 § 5). An individual failing to comply with this requirement and refusing to leave Russian territory of his or her own free will is deported (expelled) from the territory together with the members of his or her family in accordance with the provisions of the Act, the relevant legislation and the international agreements to which the Russian Federation is a party (Article 13 § 2).
Referring to the situation regarding torture in Uzbekistan, the report of the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture to the 3rd Session of the UN Human Rights Council on 18 September 2008 states as follows:
“741.  The Special Rapporteur ... stressed that he continued to receive serious allegations of torture by Uzbek law enforcement officials ...
...
In light of the foregoing, there is little evidence available, including from the Government, that would dispel or otherwise persuade the Special Rapporteur that the practice of torture has significantly improved since the visit which took place in 2002 ...”
In its 2010 report (CCPR/C/UZB/CO/3), the UN Human Rights Committee, stated, in so far as relevant:
“11.  The Committee notes with concern the continued reported occurrence of torture and ill-treatment, the limited number of convictions of those responsible, and the low sanctions generally imposed, including simple disciplinary measures, as well as indications that individuals responsible for such acts were amnestied and, in general, the inadequate or insufficient nature of investigations on torture/ill-treatment allegations. It is also concerned about reports on the use, by courts, of evidence obtained under coercion, despite the 2004 ruling of the Supreme Court on the inadmissibility of evidence obtained unlawfully ...
...
The Committee is concerned regarding the limitations and restrictions on freedom of religion and belief, including for members of non-registered religious groups. It is concerned about persistent reports on charges and imprisonment of such individuals. It is also concerned about the criminalization, under article 216-2 of the Criminal Code, of ‘conversion of believers from one religion to another (proselytism) and other missionary activities’ (CCPR/C/UZB/3, para. 707). (art. 18) ...”
The applicant referred to the World Report released by Human Rights Watch in January 2013, which, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“Uzbekistan’s human rights record remains atrocious, with no meaningful improvements in 2012. Torture is endemic in the criminal justice system. Authorities intensified their crackdown on civil society activists, opposition members, and journalists, and continued to persecute religious believers who worship outside strict state controls ...
Torture remains rampant and continues to occur with near-total impunity. Detainees’ rights are violated at each stage of investigations and trials, despite habeas corpus amendments passed in 2008. The government has failed to meaningfully implement recommendations to combat torture made by the UN special rapporteur in 2003 and other international bodies.
Suspects are not permitted access to lawyers, a critical safeguard against torture in pre-trial detention. Police coerce confessions from detainees using torture, including beatings with batons and plastic bottles, hanging by the wrists and ankles, rape, and sexual humiliation. Authorities routinely refuse to investigate allegations of abuse ...”
The applicant also referred to Amnesty International’s Annual Report for 2012, released on 23 May 2013, which, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:
“Concerns remained over the frequent use of torture and other ill-treatment to extract confessions, in particular from those suspected of links with banned religious groups ...
Torture and other ill-treatment of detainees and prisoners by security forces and prison personnel continued to be routine. Scores of reports of torture and other ill-treatment emerged during the year, especially from men and women suspected or convicted of belonging to Islamic movements and Islamist groups and parties or other religious groups, banned in Uzbekistan. As in previous years, the authorities failed to conduct prompt, thorough, and impartial investigations into such reports and into complaints lodged with the Prosecutor General’s Office ...
The authorities continued to seek the extradition of suspected members of Islamic movements and Islamist groups and parties banned in Uzbekistan in the name of security and the fight against terrorism. They also requested the extradition of political opponents, government critics and wealthy individuals out of favour with the regime. Many of these extradition requests were based on fabricated or unreliable evidence. The government offered diplomatic assurances to sending states to secure the returns, pledging free access to detention centres for independent monitors and diplomats. In practice, they did not honour these guarantees. Those forcibly returned to Uzbekistan faced incommunicado detention, torture and other ill-treatment and, after unfair trials, long prison sentences in cruel, inhuman and degrading conditions. The authorities were also accused of attempting assassinations of political opponents living abroad ...”
The applicant further referred to the report by Amnesty International published on 3 July 2013 entitled Eurasia: Return to torture: Extradition, forcible returns and removals to Central Asia. The report reads, in so far as relevant:
“Over the past two decades thousands of people across the region have alleged that they have been arbitrarily detained and tortured or ill-treated in custody in order to extract a forced confession or money from relatives. In this period, piecemeal reforms have been introduced in most Central Asia countries with the aim of strengthening the accountability of law enforcement agencies and improving the protection available in the criminal justice system. Nowhere, however, have they had any significant success in eliminating the practices of torture and other ill-treatment that are often used in relation to people suspected of ordinary crimes, and routinely used in relation to political opponents and individuals suspected of involvement in extremism and terrorism-related activities or in banned religious groups ...
In all five republics, detainees are often tortured and ill-treated while being held incommunicado for initial interrogations. Those detained in closed detention facilities run by National Security Services on charges related to national security or “religious extremism” are at particular risk of torture and other ill-treatment ...”
The report specifically addresses the applicant’s situation, as follows:
“In 2012 Akram Karimov, an Uzbekistani national, was detained for six months pending extradition in a SIZO (pre-trial detention centre) in Moscow. The Uzbekistani authorities sought his extradition on charges related to membership of a banned religious organisation, based on the fact that an acquaintance of his had allegedly set up a religious organisation in Uzbekistan.
The legal time limit for Akram Karimov’s detention expired on 17 September 2012. He ought to have been released on this date. However, the documents ordering his release were not given to him or his defence lawyer but instead passed to officers of the Krasnoselsky police who took him directly from the SIZO to Krasnoselsky police station, Moscow, where he was detained on the grounds that he was present in Russia “illegally”. However, as he had applied for refugee status while in prison he should have been protected from any forcible return to his country of origin pending full examination of his asylum claim through the refugee status determination procedure.
Despite this, the Federal Migration Services applied for an expulsion order on the basis that Akram Karimov was illegally present in the country. On 18 September the authorities’ application for administrative expulsion was heard by Meshansky regional court, where a representative of the Moscow City Prosecutor’s office informed the court that the General Prosecutor’s Office was reviewing the extradition case. The judge ruled that no decision could be made on Akram Karimov’s administrative expulsion as a decision on his extradition case had not yet been taken.
The next day, the representative of the Moscow City Prosecutor’s Office showed the court a telex from the General Prosecutor’s office addressed to the Moscow City Prosecutor’s office stating that a decision had been taken to refuse the extradition request on 17 September.
NGO observers believe that this telex was backdated in order to allow the court to take a decision on the case for his administrative expulsion.
Indeed, when the administrative court hearing resumed on 19 September, the Meshansky regional court ruled that Akram Karimov should be expelled. The court refused to take into account materials submitted by the defence lawyer about the real risk of torture he would face should he be returned to Uzbekistan, and the fact that he was an asylum-seeker still awaiting final determination of his claim. The court also refused to hear from a representative of the UNHCR who was invited by the defence lawyer to attend the hearing as an expert witness. Akram Karimov appealed against the decision to expel him but on 10 October 2012 the Moscow City Court turned down his appeal and upheld the decision to expel him from Russia.
Akram Karimov lodged a complaint with the European Court of Human Rights. On 4 October, the Court ordered interim measures instructing Russia not to return him pending its substantive determination of the case.
Akram Karimov applied for refugee status in 2012 but his application was refused by the Federal Migration Service. On 17 January 2013 he attempted to lodge an appeal against this decision, as required, with an official at the detention centre, but the latter reportedly refused to accept it. After intervention by his lawyer, the same official purported to agree to send the appeal to court before the expiry of the deadline for appeals on 19 January. However, two days later on 21 January Akram Karimov’s lawyer discovered that his appeal had not been sent to the court. The detention centre official denied having received the appeal, despite the fact that Akram Karimov had handed this document to her in the presence of his lawyer. After the lawyer complained to the head of the detention centre, the official was instructed to deliver the appeal to the court directly. The Court turned down the appeal, and at the time of writing, Akram Karimov’s lawyer is appealing to the court of final instance. He is being held in “Severny” detention centre for foreigners awaiting deportation in the Moscow region. Amnesty International is concerned that he faces a real risk of torture or other ill-treatment if returned to Uzbekistan.”