The case originated in an application (no. 6282/06) against the  lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Serbian national, Ms Milja Bjelajac (“the applicant”), on 2 February 2006.
The Serbian Government (“the Government”) were represented by their Agent, Mr S. Carić.
The applicant alleged, in particular, that because of the failure of the State to enforce final domestic decisions, her property rights had been violated.
On 9 June 2009 the President of the Second Section decided to give notice of the application to the Government. It was also decided to rule on the admissibility and merits of the application at the same time (Article 29 § 1).
The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
The applicant was born in 1935 and lives in .
The applicant is the owner of a loft in an apartment building in . For some time she experienced problems with a leaking roof, which made her living conditions difficult. In addition, some neighbours had occupied the common premises of the building, including the basement, the waste disposal room and the roof terrace.
On 7 May 1999 the Secretariat for Inspection Affairs of the City of Novi Sad (Sekretarijat za inspekcijske poslove Grada Novog Sada – “the Secretariat”) issued a decision ordering JKP Stan, a State-run public corporation (“the company”), to undertake all the necessary work to the roof above the applicant’s flat.
When the decision of 7 May 1999 became final, the applicant sought its enforcement. The Secretariat failed to respond to her enforcement request, as did the second-instance administrative authority – the Executive Board of the City Assembly of Novi Sad (Izvršni odbor Skupštine grada Novog Sada – “the Executive Board”). Therefore the applicant filed an administrative complaint requesting the Municipal Court in  (“the Municipal Court”) to order the administrative authorities to enforce the decision of 7 May 1999.
The applicant also lodged a civil claim with the Municipal Court, requesting the company to perform the necessary repairs.
On 20 June 2002 the Municipal Court, in the civil proceedings, granted the applicant’s request, ordering the company to carry out the necessary repairs. The court also ordered the company to pay to the applicant the amount of 11,447 Serbian dinars (RSD), with statutory interest, for the cost of painting the walls of her flat, and the amount of RSD 15,120 for the costs of the civil proceedings. That decision became final on a later, unspecified, date.
On 9 July 2003 the Municipal Court, in the proceedings following the administrative complaint, ordered the competent municipal authority to decide on the enforcement of the decision of 7 May 1999.
On 27 October 2003 the Secretariat issued an order (zaključak) for the enforcement of the decision of 7 May 1999, at the same time stating that the repairs should be paid for by the tenants’ assembly (skupština stanara) of the applicant’s building. It would appear, however, that no further steps have been taken to enforce the Secretariat’s decision.
On 20 January 2004 the applicant filed a request with the Municipal Court requesting enforcement of the judgment of 20 June 2002.
On 8 February 2005 the Municipal Court partly granted the applicant’s enforcement request. In the enforcement order, the court defined the repairs to be done, at the same time providing that should the company fail to carry out the repairs in a timely manner, the applicant was authorised to engage a third person to perform the repairs, at the company’s expense. The court also awarded the applicant the amount of RSD 1,458 for the costs of the enforcement proceedings.
However, it transpired that with her request for enforcement the applicant had supplied an incorrect bank account number, and therefore the transfer of the sums awarded could not be made. Hence, on 4 March 2005 the Municipal Court issued a request to the applicant for her correct bank details. On at least three occasions the court attempted to serve this request on the applicant, but to no avail.
Ultimately, the applicant provided her correct bank account number on 23 November 2005.
On 7 July 2006 the Municipal Court issued an order (zaključak) requesting the applicant to supply a specification of costs for the repairs to be done. On five occasions the court tried to serve this order on the applicant via bailiffs and the regular postal service. To this end the court requested the police to intervene and serve the applicant with the said order.
On 15 January 2007 the police found the applicant at her home and served her with the order of 7 July 2006.
On 30 January 2007 the applicant supplied a cost specification, and on 2 February 2007 the Municipal Court supplemented the decision of 8 February 2005 (see paragraph 15 above), ordering the company to deposit the amount specified by the applicant to enable her to hire a third person to perform the repairs.
By 12 June 2007 the company had, however, performed the necessary repairs itself.
On 23 October 2007 the company paid the applicant the amount of RSD 24,000 (approximately EUR 300 at the relevant time), by way of “reimbursement” (naknada). However, it is not clear what were the exact legal grounds for this reimbursement.
On 29 October 2007 an expert appointed by the Municipal Court confirmed that the enforcement had been performed as ordered by the judgment of 20 June 2002.
On 16 January 2008 the court decided to discontinue the enforcement proceedings, as the judgment of 20 July 2002 had been enforced. It would appear that the applicant did not file an appeal against that decision.
On 16 and 18 June 1999 the Secretariat issued several decisions whereby the applicant’s neighbours S.M, M.P., M.Š., B.O., A.V., Đ.S. and M.S. were ordered to vacate the common premises of the building.
On 14 July 1999 the tenants’ assembly decided, inter alia, to authorise S.M., M.P., B.O., A.V. and Đ.S. to use the former garbage shaft access rooms (“bivši slivnici za đubre”), Đ.S. and M.S. to use small compartments in the common basement (“boksovi u skloništu”), while S.M and M.Š. were authorised to use niches at the common terrace, adjacent to their respective bathrooms (“deo prostora na zajedničkoj terasi-krovu u udubljenju ispred njihovih kupatila”). The right to use the premises was not transferable, while the authorisation was given against the obligation of the persons concerned to pay a certain fee.
However, regardless of that authorisation, on 17 January 2000 the Executive Board upheld the Secretariat’s decisions of 16 and 18 June 1999.
On 26 August 1999 and 3 September 1999 the applicant filed separate administrative requests seeking enforcement of the decisions of 16 and 18 June 1999.
As the Secretariat and the Executive Board failed to respond to the applicant’s requests, on 9 July 2003 the Municipal Court in  issued a judgment ordering the competent municipal authority to rule on the applicant’s enforcement requests. At the same time the Municipal Court refused the applicant’s claim in respect of damage suffered due to the non-enforcement, and instructed her to lodge a separate civil claim in that regard.
As it appeared that the municipal authority had still not decided on the applicant’s request for enforcement, on 6 August 2004 the Municipal Court issued an enforcement order regarding the judgment of 9 July 2003, that is, ordering the municipal authority to rule on the applicant’s enforcement requests.
Subsequently it transpired that the Secretariat had decided on the applicant’s request and ordered the said enforcements on 27 October 2003. Therefore, on 13 September 2004 the Municipal Court discontinued the proceedings for the enforcement of the judgment of 9 July 2003, as the necessary decisions had been adopted.
It would appear that no further action has been taken in order to evict the tenants from the common premises of the building, which they continue to occupy.
On 21 October 2005, 25 May 2006 and 21 November 2008 the Municipal Court in  issued decisions whereby part of the applicant’s pension was to be withheld on account of her failure to pay monthly common charges for the maintenance of the building in question.
The decisions of 21 October 2005 and 25 May 2006 have become final, as the applicant did not appeal against them. The decision of 21 November 2008, according to the information in the case file, is yet to become final, as it appears that it could not be served on the applicant.
The relevant provisions of domestic legislation regarding the enforcement of judgments are cited in EVT Company v. Serbia (no. 3102/05, 21 June 2007) and Ilić v. Serbia (no. 30132/04, 9 October 2007).
According to Article 19 of the Property Act (Zakon o osnovama svojinskopravnih odnosa, published in the Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia nos. 6/80 and 36/90, as well as in the Official Gazette of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia – OG FRY – no. 29/96 and the Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia – OG RS – no. 115/05), the common parts of a building are owned mutually and indivisibly by the owners of the flats in the building.
Article 14 of the Buildings Maintenance Act (Zakon o održavanju stambenih zgrada, published in OG RS nos. 44/95, 46/98, 1/01 and 101/05), provides that the tenants’ assembly decides, inter alia, on the use of common premises in a building. Article 17 § 1 of the Act provides that the tenants’ assembly may pass decisions if more than half of its members are present. Decisions concerning regular maintenance of the building are adopted by a simple majority of members present. Article 17 § 3 provides that decisions concerning investments in the building must be adopted by a majority of the tenants who own more than half of the total surface area of the flats and other separate parts of the building. Article 18 § 1 of the Act provides that the tenants owning the majority of the surface area of the building can decide to undertake repairs to the flat roof, while Article 21 states that such a majority may decide that the common premises may be transformed for purposes other than those they were originally planned for.
In a decision of 17 March 2011 the  found the provisions of Articles 18 § 1, 21 § 3 and 22 § 2 of the Buildings Maintenance Act not to be in conformity with the protection of property guaranteed by the Constitution. The court found that decisions regarding issues which concern changes in the use of common premises could only be adopted by a unanimous vote of all the owners of the flats in the building, and found that allowing the owners of the majority of the surface area to make such decisions was not in conformity with the Serbian Constitution, or with the provisions of Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the European Convention on Human Rights.
Article 208 § 1 of the General Administrative Proceedings Act (Zakon o opštem upravnom postupku, published in OG FRY nos. 33/97 and 31/01) provides, inter alia, that in simple matters an administrative body is obliged to issue a decision within one month of the date the claimant lodged his or her request. In all other cases, the administrative body must render a decision within two months thereof.
Article 208 § 2 enables a claimant whose request has not been decided within the periods established in the previous paragraph to lodge an appeal as if his or her request had been refused. Where an appeal is not allowed, the claimant has the right to directly lodge an administrative complaint with the competent court of law.
Article 274 states that enforcement of non-monetary obligations, should the debtor refuse to comply with a decision him- or herself, is conducted by compulsion – by means of engaging, at the debtor’s expense, a third person to undertake the necessary measures for enforcement. Article 267 § 1 states that enforcement is to be conducted before the firstinstance administrative body, unless otherwise provided by law, while Article 267 § 3 provides that the police must assist the enforcement, if required. Article 271 provides that an administrative enforcement must be discontinued should it be established: that the obligation has been fully complied with; that the enforcement has not been allowed; that it was ordered against a person who was not under any obligation to comply; that the claimant has withdrawn his or her request; or that the administrative enactment which is being enforced has been annulled or quashed.
In addition, the Supreme Court has held that, pursuant to Article 264 § 3 of the General Administrative Proceedings Act, enforcement of eviction orders is to be carried out of the court’s own motion in view of the compelling public interest in this regard, even in the absence of a formal enforcement request filed by the claimant personally (see, for example, Vrhovni sud Srbije, Ubr. 6613/95).